



Part 7




The next day she come to my governess and tells her that 

Sir ---- was at home, but that he had met with a disaster and 

was very ill, and there was no speaking with him.  'What 

disaster?' says my governess hastily, as if she was surprised 

at it.  'Why,' says her friend, 'he had been at Hampstead to 

visit a gentleman of his acquaintance, and as he came back 

again he was set upon and robbed; and having got a little drink 

too, as they suppose, the rogues abused him, and he is very ill.'  

'Robbed!' says my governess, 'and what did they take from 

him?'  'Why,' says her friend, 'they took his gold watch and 

his gold snuff-box, his fine periwig, and what money he had 

in his pocket, which was considerable, to be sure, for Sir ---- 

never goes without a purse of guineas about him.'



'Pshaw!' says my old governess, jeering, 'I warrant you he 

has got drunk now and got a whore, and she has picked his 

pocket, and so he comes home to his wife and tells her he has 

been robbed.  That's an old sham; a thousand such tricks are 

put upon the poor women every day.'



'Fie!' says her friend, 'I find you don't know Sir ----; why he 

is a civil a gentleman, there is not a finer man, nor a soberer, 

graver, modester person in the whole city; he abhors such things; 

there's nobody that knows him will think such a thing of him.'  

'Well, well,' says my governess, 'that's none of my business; 

if it was, I warrant I should find there was something of that 

kind in it; your modest men in common opinion are sometimes 

no better than other people, only they keep a better character, 

or, if you please, are the better hypocrites.'



'No, no,' says her friend, 'I can assure you Sir ---- is no 

hypocrite, he is really an honest, sober gentleman, and he has 

certainly been robbed.'  'Nay,' says my governess, 'it may be 

he has; it is no business of mine, I tell you; I only want to 

speak with him; my business is of another nature.'  'But,' says 

her friend, 'let your business be of what nature it will, you 

cannot see him yet, for he is not fit to be seen, for he is very 

ill, and bruised very much,'  'Ay,' says my governess, 'nay, 

then he has fallen into bad hands, to be sure,'  And then she 

asked gravely, 'Pray, where is he bruised?'  'Why, in the head,' 

says her friend, 'and one of his hands, and his face, for they 

used him barbarously.'  'Poor gentleman,' says my governess, 

'I must wait, then, till he recovers'; and adds, 'I hope it will 

not be long, for I want very much to speak with him.'



Away she comes to me and tells me this story.  'I have found 

out your fine gentleman, and a fine gentleman he was,' says 

she; 'but, mercy on him, he is in a sad pickle now.  I wonder 

what the d--l you have done to him; why, you have almost 

killed him.'  I looked at her with disorder enough.  'I killed 

him!' says I; 'you must mistake the person; I am sure I did 

nothing to him; he was very well when I left him,' said I, 'only 

drunk and fast asleep.'  'I know nothing of that,' says she, 

'but he is in a sad pickle now'; and so she told me all that her 

friend had said to her.  'Well, then,' says I, 'he fell into bad 

hands after I left him,for I am sure I left him safe enough.'



About ten days after, or a little more, my governess goes again 

to her friend, to introduce her to this gentleman; she had 

inquired other ways in the meantime, and found that he was 

about again, if not abroad again, so she got leave to speak 

with him. 



She was a woman of a admirable address, and wanted nobody 

to introduce her; she told her tale much better than I shall be 

able to tell it for her, for she was a mistress of her tongue, as 

I have said already.  She told him that she came, though a 

stranger, with a single design of doing him a service and he 

should find she had no other end in it; that as she came purely 

on so friendly an account, she begged promise from him, that 

if he did not accept what she should officiously propose he 

would not take it ill that she meddled with what was not her 

business.  She assured him that as what she had to say was a 

secret that belonged to him only, so whether he accepted her 

offer or not, it should remain a secret to all the world, unless 

he exposed it himself; nor should his refusing her service in it 

make her so little show her respect as to do him the least injury, 

so that he should be entirely at liberty to act as he thought fit.



He looked very shy at first, and said he knew nothing that 

related to him that required much secrecy; that he had never 

done any man any wrong, and cared not what anybody might 

say of him; that it was no part of his character to be unjust to 

anybody, nor could he imagine in what any man could render 

him any service; but that if it was so disinterested a service as 

she said, he could not take it ill from any one that they should 

endeavour to serve him; and so, as it were, left her a liberty 

either to tell him or not to tell, as she thought fit.



She found him so perfectly indifferent, that she was almost 

afraid to enter into the point with him; but, however, after 

some other circumlocutions she told him that by a strange and 

unaccountable accident she came to have a particular knowledge 

of the late unhappy adventure he had fallen into, and that in such 

a manner, that there was nobody in the world but herself and 

him that were acquainted with it, no, not the very person that 

was with him.



He looked a little angrily at first.  'What adventure?' said he.  

'Why,' said she, 'of your being robbed coming from Knightbr----; 

Hampstead, sir, I should say,' says she.  'Be not surprised, sir,' 

says she, 'that I am able to tell you every step you took that 

day from the cloister in Smithfield to the Spring Garden at 

Knightsbridge, and thence to the ---- in the Strand, and how 

you were left asleep in the coach afterwards.  I say, let not 

this surprise you, for, sir, I do not come to make a booty of 

you, I ask nothing of you, and I assure you the woman that 

was with you knows nothing who you are, and never shall; 

and yet perhaps I may serve you further still, for I did not come 

barely to let you know that I was informed of these things, as 

if I wanted a bride to conceal them; assure yourself, sir,' said 

she, 'that whatever you think fit to do or say to me, it shall be 

all a secret as it is, as much as if I were in my grave.'



He was astonished at her discourse, and said gravely to her, 

'Madam, you are a stranger to me, but it is very unfortunate 

that you should be let into the secret of the worst action of 

my life, and a thing that I am so justly ashamed of, that the 

only satisfaction of it to me was, that I thought it was known 

only to God any my own conscience.'  'Pray, sir,' says she, 

'do not reckon the discovery of it to me to be any part of your 

misfortune.  It was a thing, I believe, you were surprised into, 

and perhaps the woman used some art to prompt you to it; 

however, you will never find any just cause,' said she, 'to 

repent that I came to hear of it; nor can your own mouth be 

more silent in it that I have been, and ever shall be.'



'Well,' says he, 'but let me do some justice to the woman too; 

whoever she is, I do assure you she prompted me to nothing, 

she rather declined me.  It was my own folly and madness that 

brought me into it all, ay, and brought her into it too; I must 

give her her due so far.  As to what she took from me, I could 

expect no less from her in the condition I was in, and to this 

hour I know not whether she robbed me or the coachman; if 

she did it, I forgive her, and I think all gentlemen that do so 

should be used in the same manner; but I am more concerned 

for some other things that I am for all that she took from me.'



My governess now began to come into the whole matter, and 

he opened himself freely to her.  First she said to him, in answer 

to what he had said about me, 'I am glad, sir, you are so just 

to the person that you were with; I assure you she is a 

gentlewoman, and no woman of the town; and however you 

prevailed with her so far as you did, I am sure 'tis not her 

practice.  You ran a great venture indeed, sir; but if that be 

any part of your care, I am persuaded you may be perfectly 

easy, for I dare assure you no man has touched her, before 

you, since her husband, and he has been dead now almost 

eight years.'



It appeared that this was his grievance, and that he was in a 

very great fright about it; however, when my governess said 

this to him, he appeared very well pleased, and said, 'Well, 

madam, to be plain with you, if I was satisfied of that, I should 

not so much value what I lost; for, as to that, the temptation 

was great, and perhaps she was poor and wanted it.'  'If she 

had not been poor, sir ----,' says my governess, 'I assure you 

she would never have yielded to you; and as her poverty first 

prevailed with her to let you do as you did, so the same poverty 

prevailed with her to pay herself at last, when she saw you 

was in such a condition, that if she had not done it, perhaps 

the next coachman might have done it.'



'Well,' says he, 'much good may it do her.  I say again, all the 

gentlemen that do so ought to be used in the same manner, 

and then they would be cautious of themselves.  I have no 

more concern about it, but on the score which you hinted at 

before, madam.'  Here he entered into some freedoms with 

her on the subject of what passed between us, which are not 

so proper for a woman to write, and the great terror that was 

upon his mind with relation to his wife, for fear he should have 

received any injury from me, and should communicate if farther; 

and asked her at last if she could not procure him an opportunity 

to speak with me.  My governess gave him further assurances 

of my being a woman clear from any such thing, and that he 

was as entirely save in that respect as he was with his own 

lady; but as for seeing me, she said it might be of dangerous 

consequence; but, however, that she would talk with me, and 

let him know my answer, using at the same time some arguments 

to persuade him not to desire it, and that it could be of no 

service to him, seeing she hoped he had no desire to renew a 

correspondence with me, and that on my account it was a kind 

of putting my life in his hands.



He told her he had a great desire to see me, that he would 

give her any assurances that were in his power, not to take 

any advantages of me, and that in the first place he would give 

me a general release from all demands of any kind.  She insisted 

how it might tend to a further divulging the secret, and might 

in the end be injurious to him, entreating him not to press for 

it; so at length  he desisted.



They had some discourse upon the subject of the things he had 

lost, and he seemed to be very desirous of his gold watch, and 

told her if she could procure that for him, he would willingly 

give as much for it as it was worth.  She told him she would 

endeavour to procure it for him, and leave the valuing it to 

himself.



Accordingly the next day she carried the watch, and he gave 

her thirty guineas for it, which was more than I should have 

been able to make of it, though it seems it cost much more.  

He spoke something of his periwig, which it seems cost him 

threescore guineas, and his snuff-box, and in a few days more 

she carried them too; which obliged him very much, and he 

gave her thirty more.  The next day I sent him his fine sword 

and cane gratis, and demanded nothing of him, but I had no 

mind to see him, unless it had been so that he might be satisfied 

I knew who he was, which he was not willing to.



Then he entered into a long talk with her of the manner how 

she came to know all this matter.  She formed a long tale of 

that part; how she had it from one that I had told the whole 

story to, and that was to help me dispose of the goods; and 

this confidante brought the things to her, she being by profession 

a pawnbroker; and she hearing of his worship's disaster, guessed 

at the thing in general; that having gotten the things into her 

hands, she had resolved to come and try as she had done.  She 

then gave him repeated assurances that it should never go out 

of her mouth, and though she knew the woman very well, yet 

she had not let her know, meaning me, anything of it; that is 

to say, who the person was, which, by the way, was false; but, 

however, it was not to his damage, for I never opened my 

mouth of it to anybody.



I had a great many thoughts in my head about my seeing him 

again, and was often sorry that I had refused it.  I was persuaded 

that if I had seen him, and let him know that I knew him, I 

should have made some advantage of him, and perhaps have 

had some maintenance from him; and though it was a life 

wicked enough, yet it was not so full of danger as this I was 

engaged in.  However, those thoughts wore off, and I declined 

seeing him again, for that time; but my governess saw him 

often, and he was very kind to her, giving her something almost 

every time he saw her.  One time in particular she found him 

very merry, and as she thought he had some wine in his head, 

and he pressed her again very earnestly to let him see that 

woman that, as he said, had bewitched him so that night, my 

governess, who was from the beginning for my seeing him, 

told him he was so desirous of it that she could almost yield 

of it, if she could prevail upon me; adding that if he would 

please to come to her house in the evening, she would 

endeavour it, upon his repeated assurances of forgetting what 

was past.



Accordingly she came to me, and told me all the discourse; 

in short, she soon biassed me to consent, in a case which I had 

some regret in my mind for declining before; so I prepared to 

see him.  I dressed me to all the advantage possible, I assure 

you, and for the first time used a little art; I say for the first 

time, for I had never yielded to the baseness of paint before, 

having always had vanity enough to believe I had no need of it.



At the hour appointed he came; and as she observed before, 

so it was plain still, that he had been drinking, though very far 

from what we call being in drink.  He appeared exceeding 

pleased to see me, and entered into a long discourse with me 

upon the old affair.  I begged his pardon very often for my 

share of it, protested I had not any such design when first I 

met him, that I had not gone out with him but that I took him 

for a very civil gentleman, and that he made me so many 

promises of offering no uncivility to me.



He alleged the wine he drank, and that he scarce knew what 

he did, and that if it had not been so, I should never have let 

him take the freedom with me that he had done.  He protested 

to me that he never touched any woman but me since he was 

married to his wife, and it was a surprise upon him; complimented 

me upon being so particularly agreeable to him, and the like; 

and talked so much of that kind, till I found he had talked 

himself almost into a temper to do the same thing over again.  

But I took him up short.  I protested I had never suffered any 

man to touch me since my husband died, which was near eight 

years.  He said he believed it to be so truly; and added that 

madam had intimated as much to him, and that it was his 

opinion of that part which made hi desire to see me again; and 

that since he had once broke in upon his virtue with me, and 

found no ill consequences, he could be safe in venturing there 

again; and so, in short, it went on to what I expected, and to 

what will not bear relating.



My old governess had foreseen it, as well as I, and therefore 

led him into a room which had not a bed in it, and yet had a 

chamber within it which had a bed, whither we withdrew for 

the rest of the night; and, in short, after some time being 

together, he went to bed, and lay there all night.  I withdrew, 

but came again undressed in the morning, before it was day, 

and lay with him the rest of the time.



Thus, you see, having committed a crime once is a sad handle 

to the committing of it again; whereas all the regret and 

reflections wear off when the temptation renews itself.  Had 

I not yielded to see him again, the corrupt desire in him had 

worn off, and 'tis very probable he had never fallen into it 

with anybody else, as I really believe he had not done before.



When he went away, I told him I hoped he was satisfied he 

had not been robbed again.  He told me he was satisfied in 

that point, and could trust me again, and putting his hand in 

his pocket, gave me five guineas, which was the first money 

I had gained that way for many years.



I had several visits of the like kind from him, but he never 

came into a settled way of maintenance, which was what I 

would have best pleased with.  Once, indeed, he asked me 

how I did to live.  I answered him pretty quick, that I assured 

him I had never taken that course that I took with him, but 

that indeed I worked at my needle, and could just maintain 

myself; that sometime it was as much as I was able to do, and 

I shifted hard enough.



He seemed to reflect upon himself that he should be the first 

person to lead me into that, which he assured me he never 

intended to do himself; and it touched him a little, he said, 

that he should be the cause of his own sin and mine too.  He 

would often make just reflections also upon the crime itself, 

and upon the particular circumstances of it with respect to 

himself; how wine introduced the inclinations how the devil 

led him to the place, and found out an object to tempt him, 

and he made the moral always himself.



When these thoughts were upon him he would go away, and 

perhaps not come again in a month's time or longer; but then 

as the serious part wore off, the lewd part would wear in, and 

then he came prepared for the wicked part.  Thus we lived for 

some time; thought he did not keep, as they call it, yet he 

never failed doing things that were handsome, and sufficient 

to maintain me without working, and, which was better, 

without following my old trade.



But this affair had its end too; for after about a year, I found 

that he did not come so often as usual, and at last he left if 

off altogether without any dislike to bidding adieu; and so 

there was an end of that short scene of life, which added no 

great store to me, only to make more work for repentance.



However, during this interval I confined myself pretty much 

at home; at least, being thus provided for, I made no adventures, 

no, not for a quarter of a year after he left me; but then finding 

the fund fail, and being loth to spend upon the main stock, I 

began to think of my old trade, and to look abroad into the 

street again; and my first step was lucky enough.



I had dressed myself up in a very mean habit, for as I had 

several shapes to appear in, I was now in an ordinary stuff-gown, 

a blue apron, and a straw hat and I placed myself at the door 

of the Three Cups Inn in St. John Street.  There were several 

carriers used the inn, and the stage-coaches for Barnet, for 

Totteridge, and other towns that way stood always in the street 

in the evening, when they prepared to set out, so that I was 

ready for anything that offered, for either one or other.  The 

meaning was this; people come frequently with bundles and 

small parcels to those inns, and call for such carriers or coaches 

as they want, to carry them into the country; and there generally 

attend women, porters' wives or daughters, ready to take in 

such things for their respective people that employ them.



It happened very oddly that I was standing at the inn gate, and 

a woman that had stood there before, and which was the 

porter's wife belonging to the Barnet stage-coach, having 

observed me, asked if I waited for any of the coaches.  I told 

her Yes, I waited for my mistress, that was coming to go to 

Barnet.  She asked me who was my mistress, and I told her 

any madam's name that came next me; but as it seemed, I 

happened upon a name, a family of which name lived at 

Hadley, just beyond Barnet.



I said no more to her, or she to me, a good while; but by and 

by, somebody calling her at a door a little way off, she desired 

me that if anybody called for the Barnet coach, I would step 

and call her at the house, which it seems was an alehouse.  I 

said Yes, very readily, and away she went.



She was no sooner gone but comes a wench and a child, puffing 

and sweating, and asks for the Barnet coach.  I answered 

presently, 'Here.'  'Do you belong to the Barnet coach?' says 

she.  'Yes, sweetheart,' said I; 'what do ye want?'  'I want 

room for two passengers,' says she.  'Where are they, sweetheart?' 

said I.  'Here's this girl, pray let her go into the coach,' says 

she, 'and I'll go and fetch my mistress.'  'Make haste, then, 

sweetheart,' says I, 'for we may be full else.'  The maid had 

a great bundle under her arm; so she put the child into the 

coach, and I said, 'You had best put your bundle into the coach 

too.'  'No,' says she, 'I am afraid somebody should slip it away 

from the child.'  'Give to me, then,' said I, 'and I'll take care 

of it.'  'Do, then,' says she, 'and be sure you take of it.'  'I'll 

answer for it,' said I, 'if it were for #20 value.'  "There, take 

it, then,' says she, and away she goes.



As soon as I had got the bundle, and the maid was out of sight, 

I goes on towards the alehouse, where the porter's wife was, 

so that if I had met her, I had then only been going to give her 

the bundle, and to call her to her business, as if I was going 

away, and could stay no longer; but as I did not meet her, I 

walked away, and turning into Charterhouse Lane, then 

crossed into Batholomew Close, so into Little Britain, and 

through the Bluecoat Hospital, into Newgate Street.



To prevent my being known, I pulled off my blue apron, and 

wrapped the bundle in it, which before was made up in a piece 

of painted calico, and very remarkable; I also wrapped up my 

straw hat in it, and so put the bundle upon my head; and it was 

very well that I did thus, for coming through the Bluecoat 

Hospital, who should I meet but the wench that had given me 

the bundle to hold.  It seems she was going with her mistress, 

whom she had been gone to fetch, to the Barnet coaches.



I saw she was in haste, and I had no business to stop her; so 

away she went, and I brought my bundle safe home to my  

governess.  There was no money, nor plate, or jewels in the 

bundle, but a very good suit of Indian damask, a gown and a 

petticoat, a laced-head and ruffles of very good Flanders lace, 

and some linen and other things, such as I knew very well the 

value of.



This was not indeed my own invention, but was given me by 

one that had practised it with success, and my governess liked 

it extremely; and indeed I tried it again several times, though 

never twice near the same place; for the next time I tried it in 

White Chapel, just by the corner of Petticoat Lane, where the 

coaches stand that go out to Stratford and Bow, and that side 

of the country, and another time at the Flying Horse, without 

Bishopgate, where the Cheston coaches then lay; and I had 

always the good luck to come off with some booty.



Another time I placed myself at a warehouse by the waterside, 

where the coasting vessels from the north come, such as from 

Newcastle-upon-Tyne, Sunderland, and other places.  Here, 

the warehouses being shut, comes a young fellow with a letter; 

and he wanted a box and a hamper that was come from 

Newcastle-upon-Tyne.  I asked him if he had the marks of it; 

so he shows me the letter, by virtue of which he was to ask 

for it, and which gave an account of the contents, the box 

being full of linen, and the hamper full of glass ware.  I read 

the letter, and took care to see the name, and the marks, the 

name of the person that sent the goods, the name of the person 

that they were sent to; then I bade the messenger come in the 

morning, for that the warehouse-keeper would not be there 

any more that night.



Away went I, and getting materials in a public house, I wrote 

a letter from Mr. John Richardson of Newcastle to his dear 

cousin Jemmy Cole, in London, with an account that he sent 

by such a vessel (for I remembered all the particulars to a title), 

so many pieces of huckaback linen, so many ells of Dutch 

holland and the like, in a box, and a hamper of flint glasses 

from Mr. Henzill's glasshouse; and that the box was marked 

I. C. No. 1, and the hamper was directed by a label on the 

cording.



About an hour after, I came to the warehouse, found the 

warehouse-keeper, and had the goods delivered me without 

any scruple; the value of the linen being about #22.



I could fill up this whole discourse with the variety of such 

adventures, which daily invention directed to, and which I 

managed with the utmost dexterity, and always with success.



At length-as when does the pitcher come safe home that goes 

so very often to the well?-I fell into some small broils, which 

though they could not affect me fatally, yet made me known, 

which was the worst thing next to being found guilty that 

could befall me.



I had taken up the disguise of a widow's dress; it was without 

any real design in view, but only waiting for anything that 

might offer, as I often did.  It happened that while I was going 

along the street in Covent Garden, there was a great cry of 

'Stop thief!  Stop thief!'  some artists had, it seems, put a trick 

upon a shopkeeper, and being pursued, some of them fled 

one way, and some another; and one of them was, they said, 

dressed up in widow's weeds, upon which the mob gathered 

about me, and some said I was the person, others said no.  

Immediately came the mercer's journeyman, and he swore 

aloud I was the person, and so seized on me.  However, when 

I was brought back by the mob to the mercer's shop, the 

master of the house said freely that I was not the woman that 

was in his shop, and would have let me go immediately; but 

another fellow said gravely, 'Pray stay till Mr. ----' (meaning 

the journeyman) 'comes back, for he knows her.'  So they 

kept me by force near half an hour.  They had called a constable, 

and he stood in the shop as my jailer; and in talking with the 

constable I inquired where he lived, and what trade he was; 

the man not apprehending in the least what happened afterwards, 

readily told me his name, and trade, and where he lived; and 

told me as a jest, that I might be sure to hear of his name when 

I came to the Old Bailey.



Some of the servants likewise used me saucily, and had much 

ado to keep their hands off me; the master indeed was civiller 

to me than they, but he would not yet let me go, though he 

owned he could not say I was in his shop before.



I began to be a little surly with him, and told him I hoped he 

would not take it ill if I made myself amends upon him in a 

more legal way another time; and desired I might send for 

friends to see me have right done me.  No, he said, he could 

give no such liberty; I might ask it when I came before the 

justice of peace; and seeing I threatened him, he would take 

care of me in the meantime, and would lodge me safe in 

Newgate.  I told him it was his time now, but it would be 

mine by and by, and governed my passion as well as I was able.  

However, I spoke to the constable to call me a porter, which 

he did, and then I called for pen, ink, and paper, but they 

would let me have none.  I asked the porter his name, and 

where he lived, and the poor man told it me very willingly.  

I bade him observe and remember how I was treated there; 

that he saw I was detained there by force.  I told him I should 

want his evidence in another place, and it should not be the 

worse for him to speak.  The porter said he would serve me 

with all his heart.  'But, madam,' says he, 'let me hear them 

refuse to let you go, then I may be able to speak the plainer.'



With that I spoke aloud to the master of the shop, and said, 

'Sir, you know in your own conscience that I am not the 

person you look for, and that I was not in your shop before, 

therefore I demand that you detain me here no longer, or tell 

me the reason of your stopping me.'  The fellow grew surlier 

upon this than before, and said he would do neither till he 

thought fit.  'Very well,' said I to the constable and to the 

porter; 'you will be pleased to remember this, gentlemen, 

another time.'  The porter said, 'Yes, madam'; and the 

constable began not to like it, and would have persuaded the 

mercer to dismiss him, and let me go, since, as he said, he 

owned I was not the person.  'Good, sir,' says the mercer to 

him tauntingly, 'are you a justice of peace or a constable?  I 

charged you with her; pray do you do your duty.'  The constable 

told him, a little moved, but very handsomely, 'I know my 

duty, and what I am, sir; I doubt you hardly know what you 

are doing.'  They had some other hard words, and in the 

meantime the journeyman, impudent and unmanly to the last 

degree, used me barbarously, and one of them, the same that 

first seized upon me, pretended he would search me, and began 

to lay hands on me.  I spit in his face, called out to the constable, 

and bade him to take notice of my usage.  'And pray, Mr. 

Constable,' said I, 'ask that villain's name,' pointing to the 

man.  The constable reproved him decently, told him that he 

did not know what he did, for he knew that his master 

acknowledged I was not the person that was in his shop; 'and,' 

says the constable, 'I am afraid your master is bringing himself, 

and me too, into trouble, if this gentlewoman comes to prove 

who she is, and where she was, and it appears that she is not 

the woman you pretend to.'  'Damn her,' says the fellow again, 

with a impudent, hardened face, 'she is the lady, you may depend 

upon it; I'll swear she is the same body that was in the shop, 

and that I gave the pieces of satin that is lost into her own hand.  

You shall hear more of it when Mr. William and Mr. Anthony 

(those  were other journeymen) come back; they will know her 

again as well as I.'



Just as the insolent rogue was talking thus to the constable, 

comes back Mr. William and Mr. Anthony, as he called them, 

and a great rabble with them, bringing along with them the 

true widow that I was pretended to be; and they came sweating 

and blowing into the shop, and with a great deal of triumph, 

dragging the poor creature in the most butcherly manner up 

towards their master, who was in the back shop, and cried 

out aloud, 'Here's the widow, sir; we have catcher her at last.'  

'What do ye mean by that?' says the master.  'Why, we have 

her already; there she sits,' says he, 'and Mr.----,' says he, 

'can swear this is she.'  The other man, whom they called Mr. 

Anthony, replied, 'Mr. ---- may say what he will, and swear 

what he will, but this is the woman, and there's the remnant 

of satin she stole; I took it out of her clothes with my own hand.'



I sat still now, and began to take a better heart, but smiled and 

said nothing; the master looked pale; the constable turned 

about and looked at me.  'Let 'em alone, Mr. Constable,' said 

I; 'let 'em go on.'  The case was plain and could not be denied, 

so the constable was charged with the right thief, and the 

mercer told me very civilly he was sorry for the mistake, and 

hoped I would not take it ill; that they had so many things of 

this nature put upon them every day, that they could not be 

blamed for being very sharp in doing themselves justice.  'Not 

take it ill, sir!' said I; 'how can I take it well!  If you had 

dismissed me when your insolent fellow seized on me it the 

street, and brought me to you, and when you yourself 

acknowledged I was not the person, I would have put it by, 

and not taken it ill, because of the many ill things I believe 

you have put upon you daily; but your treatment of me since 

has been insufferable, and especially that of your servant; I 

must and will have reparation for that.'



Then be began to parley with me, said he would make me any 

reasonable satisfaction, and would fain have had me tell him 

what it was I expected.  I told him that I should not be my 

own judge, the law should decide it for me; and as I was to be 

carried before a magistrate, I should let him hear there what 

I had to say.  He told me there was no occasion to go before 

the justice now, I was at liberty to go where I pleased; and so, 

calling to the constable, told him he might let me go, for I 

was discharge.  The constable said calmly to him, 'sir, you 

asked me just now if I knew whether I was a constable or 

justice, and bade me do my duty, and charged me with this 

gentlewoman as a prisoner.  Now, sir, I find you do not 

understand what is my duty, for you would make me a justice 

indeed; but I must tell you it is not in my power.  I may keep 

a prisoner when I am charged with him, but 'tis the law and 

the magistrate alone that can discharge that prisoner; therefore 

'tis a mistake, sir; I must carry her before a justice now, 

whether you think well of it or not.'  The mercer was very 

high with the constable at first; but the constable happening 

to be not a hired officer, but a good, substantial kind of man 

(I think he was a corn-handler), and a man of good sense, 

stood to his business, would not discharge me without going 

to a justice of the peace; and I insisted upon it too.  When the 

mercer saw that, 'Well,' says he to the constable, 'you may 

carry her where you please; I have nothing to say to her.'  

'But, sir,' says the constable, 'you will go with us, I hope, for 

'tis you that charged me with her.'  'No, not I,' says the 

mercer; 'I tell you I have nothing to say to her.'  'But pray, sir, 

do,' says the constable; 'I desire it of you for your own sake, 

for the justice  can do nothing without you.'  'Prithee, fellow,' 

says the mercer, 'go about your business; I tell you I have 

nothing to say to the gentlewoman.  I charge you in the king's 

name to dismiss her.'  'Sir,' says the constable, 'I find you 

don't know what it is to be constable; I beg of you don't oblige 

me to be rude to you.'  'I think I need not; you are rude enough 

already,' says the mercer.  'No, sir,' says the constable, 'I am 

not rude; you have broken the peace in bringing an honest 

woman out of the street, when she was about her lawful 

occasion, confining her in your shop, and ill-using her here 

by your servants; and now can you say I am rude to you?  I 

think I am civil to you in not commanding or charging you in 

the king's name to go with me, and charging every man I see 

that passes your door to aid and assist me in carrying you by 

force; this you cannot but know I have power to do, and yet I 

forbear it, and once more entreat you to go with me.'  Well, he 

would not for all this, and gave the constable ill language.  

However, the constable kept his temper, and would not be 

provoked; and then I put in and said, 'Come, Mr. Constable, 

let him alone; I shall find ways enough to fetch him before a 

magistrate, I don't fear that; but there's the fellow,' says I, 

'he was the man that seized on me as I was innocently going 

along the street, and you are a witness of the violence with 

me since; give me leave to charge you with him, and carry 

him before the justice.'  'Yes, madam,' says the constable; 

and turning to the fellow 'Come, young gentleman,' says he 

to the journeyman, 'you must go along with us; I hope you 

are not above the constable's power, though your master is.'



The fellow looked like a condemned thief, and hung back, 

then looked at his master, as if he could help him; and he, like 

a fool, encourage the fellow to be rude, and he truly resisted 

the constable, and pushed him back with a good force when 

he went to lay hold on him, at which the constable knocked 

him down, and called out for help; and immediately the shop 

was filled with people, and the constable seized the master 

and man, and all his servants.



This first ill consequence of this fray was, that the woman 

they had taken, who was really the thief, made off, and got 

clear away in the crowd; and two other that they had stopped 

also; whether they were really guilty or not, that I can say 

nothing to.



By this time some of his neighbours having come in, and, 

upon inquiry, seeing how things went, had endeavoured to 

bring the hot-brained mercer to his senses, and he began to 

be convinced that he was in the wrong; and so at length we 

went all very quietly before the justice, with a mob of about 

five hundred people at our heels; and all the way I went I 

could hear the people ask what was the matter, and other reply 

and say, a mercer had stopped a gentlewoman instead of a 

thief, and had afterwards taken the thief, and now the 

gentlewoman had taken the mercer, and was carrying him 

before the justice.  This pleased the people strangely, and 

made the crowd increase, and they cried out as they went, 

'Which is the rogue?  which is the mercer?'  and  especially 

the women.  Then when they saw him they cried out, 'That's 

he, that's he'; and every now and then came a good dab of 

dirt at him; and thus we marched a good while, till the mercer 

thought fit to desire the constable to call a coach to protect 

himself from the rabble; so we rode the rest of the way, the 

constable and I, and the mercer and his man.



When we came to the justice, which was an ancient gentleman 

in Bloomsbury, the constable giving first a summary account 

of the matter, the justice bade me speak, and tell what I had 

to say.  And first he asked my name, which I was very loth to 

give, but there was no remedy, so I told him my name was 

Mary Flanders, that I was a widow, my husband being a sea 

captain, died on a voyage to Virginia; and some other 

circumstances I told which he could never contradict, and 

that I lodged at present in town with such a person, naming 

my governess; but that I was preparing to go over to America, 

where my husband's effects lay, and that I was going that day 

to buy some clothes to put myself into second mourning, but 

had not yet been in any shop, when that fellow, pointing to 

the mercer's journeyman, came rushing upon me with such 

fury as very much frighted me, and carried me back to his 

master's shop, where, though his master acknowledged I was 

not the person, yet he would not dismiss me, but charged a 

constable with me.



Then I proceeded to tell how the journeyman treated me; how 

they would not suffer me to send for any of my friends; how 

afterwards they found the real thief, and took the very goods 

they had lost upon her, and all the particulars as before.



Then the constable related his case:  his dialogue with the 

mercer about discharging me, and at last his servant's refusing 

to go with him, when he had charged him with him, and his 

master encouraging him to do so, and at last his striking the 

constable, and the like, all as I have told it already.



The justice then heard the mercer and his man.  The mercer 

indeed made a long harangue of the great loss they have daily 

by lifters and thieves; that it was easy for them to mistake, 

and that when he found it he would have dismissed me, etc., 

as above.  As to the journeyman, he had very little to say, but 

that he pretended other of the servants told him that I was 

really the person.



Upon the whole, the just first of all told me very courteously 

I was discharged; that he was very sorry that the mercer's man 

should in his eager pursuit have so little discretion as to take 

up an innocent person for a guilty person; that if he had not 

been so unjust as to detain me afterward, he believed I would 

have forgiven the first affront; that, however, it was not in his 

power to award me any reparation for anything, other than by 

openly reproving them, which he should do; but he supposed 

I would apply to such methods as the law directed; in the 

meantime he would bind him over.



But as to the breach of the peace committed by the journeyman, 

he told me he should give me some satisfaction for that, for he 

should commit him to Newgate for assaulting the constable, 

and for assaulting me also.



Accordingly he sent the fellow to Newgate for that assault, 

and his master gave bail, and so we came away; but I had the  

satisfaction of seeing the mob wait upon them both, as they 

came out, hallooing and throwing stones and dirt at the coaches 

they rode in; and so I came home to my governess.



After this hustle, coming home and telling my governess the 

story, she falls a-laughing at me.  'Why are you merry?' says 

I; 'the story has not so much laughing room in it as you imagine; 

I am sure I have had a great deal of hurry and fright too, with 

a pack of ugly rogues.'  'Laugh!' says my governess; 'I laugh, 

child, to see what a lucky creature you are; why, this job will 

be the best bargain to you that ever you made in your life, if 

you manage it well.  I warrant you,' says she, 'you shall make 

the mercer pay you #500 for damages, besides what you shall 

get out of the journeyman.'



I had other thoughts of the matter than she had; and especially, 

because I had given in my name to the justice of peace; and 

I knew that my name was so well known among the people 

at Hick's Hall, the Old Bailey, and such places, that if this 

cause came to be tried openly, and my name came to be inquired 

into, no court would give much damages, for the reputation 

of a person of such a character.  However, I was obliged to 

begin a prosecution in form, and accordingly my governess 

found me out a very creditable sort of a man to manage it, 

being an attorney of very good business, and of a good 

reputation, and she was certainly in the right of this; for had 

she employed a pettifogging hedge solicitor, or a man not 

known, and not in good reputation, I should have brought it 

to but little.



I met this attorney, and gave him all the particulars at large, 

as they are recited above; and he assured me it was a case, as 

he said, that would very well support itself, and that he did 

not question but that a jury would give very considerable 

damages on such an occasion; so taking his full instructions 

he began the prosecution, and the mercer being arrested, gave 

bail.  A few days after his giving bail, he comes with his 

attorney to my attorney, to let him know that he desired to 

accommodate the matter; that it was all carried on I the heat 

of an unhappy passion; that his client, meaning me, had a 

sharp provoking tongue, that I used them ill, gibing at them, 

and jeering them, even while they believed me to be the very 

person, and that I had provoked them, and the like.



My attorney managed as well on my side; made them believe

 I was a widow of fortune, that I was able to do myself justice, 

and had great friends to stand by me too, who had all made me 

promise to sue to the utmost, and that if it cost me a thousand 

pounds I would be sure to have satisfaction, for that the affronts 

I had received were insufferable.



However, they brought my attorney to this, that he promised 

he would not blow the coals, that if I inclined to accommodation, 

he would not hinder me, and that he would rather persuade 

me to peace than to war; for which they told him he should 

be no loser; all which he told me very honestly, and told me 

that if they offered him any bribe, I should certainly know it; 

but upon the whole he told me very honestly that if I would 

take his opinion, he would advise me to make it up with them, 

for that as they were in a great fright, and were desirous above 

all things to make it up, and knew that, let it be what it would, 

they would be allotted to bear all the costs of the suit; he believed 

they would give me freely more than any jury or court of justice 

would give upon a trial.  I asked him what he thought they 

would be brought to.  He told me he could not tell as to that, 

but he would tell me more when I saw him again.  Some time 

after this, they came again to know if he had talked with me.  

He told them he had; that he found me not so averse to an 

accommodation as some of my friends were, who resented the 

disgrace offered me, and set me on; that they blowed the coals 

in secret, prompting me to revenge, or do myself justice, as 

they called it; so that he could not tell what to say to it; he told 

them he would do his endeavour to persuade me, but he ought 

to be able to tell me what proposal they made.  They pretended 

they could not make any proposal, because it might be made 

use of against them; and he told them, that by the same rule 

he could not make any offers, for that might be pleaded in 

abatement of what damages a jury might be inclined to give.  

However, after some discourse and mutual promises that no 

advantage should be taken on either side, by what was 

transacted then or at any other of those meetings, they came 

to a kind of a treaty; but so remote, and so wide from one 

another, that nothing could be expected from it; for my 

attorney demanded #500 and charges, and they offered #50 

without charges; so they broke off, and the mercer proposed 

to have a meeting with me myself; and my attorney agreed to 

that very readily.



My attorney gave me notice to come to this meeting in good 

clothes, and with some state, that the mercer might see I was 

something more than I seemed to be that time they had me.  

Accordingly I came in a new suit of second mourning, according 

to what I had said at the justice's.  I set myself out, too, as well 

as a widow's dress in second mourning would admit; my 

governess also furnished me with a good pearl necklace, that 

shut in behind with a locket of diamonds, which she had in 

pawn; and I had a very good figure; and as I stayed till I was 

sure they were come, I came in a coach to the door, with my 

maid with me.



When I came into the room the mercer was surprised.  He 

stood up and made his bow, which I took a little notice of, 

and but a little, and went and sat down where my own attorney 

had pointed to me to sit, for it was his house.  After a little 

while the mercer said, he did not know me again, and began 

to make some compliments his way.  I told him, I believed he 

did not know me at first, and that if he had, I believed he 

would not have treated me as he did.



He told me he was very sorry for what had happened, and that 

it was to testify the willingness he had to make all possible 

reparation that he had appointed this meeting; that he hoped 

I would not carry things to extremity, which might be not only 

too great a loss to him, but might be the ruin of his business 

and shop, in which case I might have the satisfaction of 

repaying an injury with an injury ten times greater; but that I 

would then get nothing, whereas he was willing to do me any 

justice that was in his power, without putting himself or me 

to the trouble or charge of a suit at law.



I told him I was glad to hear him talk so much more like a man 

of sense than he did before; that it was true, acknowledgment 

in most cases of  affronts was counted reparation sufficient; 

but this had gone too far to be made up so; that I was not 

revengeful, nor did I seek his ruin, or any man's else, but that 

all my friends were unanimous not to let me so far neglect my 

character as to adjust a thing of this kind without a sufficient 

reparation of honour; that to be taken up for a thief was such 

an indignity as could not be put up; that my character was 

above being treated so by any that knew me, but because in 

my condition of a widow I had been for some time careless 

of  myself, and negligent of myself, I might be taken for such 

a creature, but that for the particular usage I had from him 

afterwards, --and then I repeated all as before; it was so 

provoking I had scarce patience to repeat it.



Well, he acknowledged all, and was might humble indeed; 

he made proposals very handsome; he came up to #100 and 

to pay all the law charges, and added that he would make me 

a present of a very good suit of clothes.  I came down to #300, 

and I demanded that I should publish an advertisement of the 

particulars in the common newspapers.



This was a clause he never could comply with.  However, at 

last he came up, by good management of my attorney, to 

#150 and a suit of black silk clothes; and there I agree, and as 

it were, at my attorney's request, complied with it, he paying 

my attorney's bill and charges, and gave us a good supper into 

the bargain.





When I came to receive the money, I brought my governess  

with me, dressed like an old duchess, and a gentleman very 

well dressed, who we pretended courted me, but I called him 

cousin, and the lawyer was only to hint privately to him that 

his gentleman courted the widow.



He treated us handsomely indeed, and paid the money 

cheerfully enough; so that it cost him #200 in all, or rather 

more.  At our last meeting, when all was agreed, the case of  

the journeyman came up, and the mercer begged very hard 

for him; told me he was a man that had kept a shop of his 

own, and been in good business, had a wife, and several 

children, and was very poor; that he had nothing to make 

satisfaction with, but he should come to beg my pardon on 

his knees, if I desired it, as openly as I pleased.  I had no 

spleen at the saucy rogue, nor were his submissions anything 

to me, since there was nothing to be got by him, so I thought 

it was as good to throw that in generously as not; so I told 

him I did not desire the ruin of any man, and therefore at his 

request I would forgive the wretch; it was below me to seek 

any revenge.



When we were at supper he brought the poor fellow in to 

make acknowledgment, which he would have done with as 

much mean humility as his offence was with insulting 

haughtiness and pride, in which he was an instance of a 

complete baseness of spirit, impious, cruel, and relentless 

when uppermost and in prosperity, abject and low-spirited 

when down in affliction.  However, I abated his cringes, told 

him I forgave him, and desired he might withdraw, as if I did 

not care for the sight of him, though I had forgiven him.



I was now in good circumstances indeed, if I could have 

known my time for leaving off, and my governess often said 

I was the richest of the trade in England; and so I believe I 

was, for I had #700 by me in money, besides clothes, rings, 

some plate, and two gold watches, and all of them stolen, for 

I had innumerable jobs besides these I have mentioned.  Oh! 

had I even now had the grace of  repentance, I had still leisure 

to have looked back upon my follies, and have made some 

reparation; but the satisfaction I was to make for the public 

mischiefs I had done was yet left behind; and I could not forbear 

going abroad again, as I called it now, than any more I could 

when my extremity really drove me out for bread.



It was not long after the affair with the mercer was made up, 

that I went out in an equipage quite different from any I had 

ever appeared in before.  I dressed myself like a beggar woman, 

in the coarsest and most despicable rags I could get, and I 

walked about peering and peeping into every door and window 

I came near; and indeed I was in such a plight now that I knew 

as ill how to behave in as ever I did in any.  I naturally abhorred 

dirt and rags; I had been bred up tight and cleanly, and could 

be no other, whatever condition I was in; so that this was the 

most uneasy disguise to me that ever I put on.  I said presently 

to myself that this would not do, for this was a dress that 

everybody was shy and afraid of; and I thought everybody 

looked at me, as if they were afraid I should come near them, 

lest I should take something from them, or afraid to come near 

me, lest they should get something from me.  I wandered about 

all the evening the first time I went out, and made nothing of 

it, but came home again wet, draggled, and tired.  However, 

I went out again the next night, and then I met with a little 

adventure, which had like to have cost me dear.  As I was 

standing near a tavern door, there comes a gentleman on 

horseback, and lights at the door, and wanting to go into the 

tavern, he calls one of the drawers to hold his horse.  He stayed 

pretty long in the tavern, and the drawer heard his master call, 

and thought he would be angry with him.  Seeing me stand by 

him, he called to me, 'Here, woman,' says he, 'hold this horse 

a while, till I go in; if the gentleman comes, he'll give you 

something.'  'Yes,' says I, and takes the horse, and walks off 

with him very soberly, and carried him to my governess.



This had been a booty to those that had understood it; but 

never was poor thief more at a loss to know what to do with 

anything that was stolen; for when I came home, my governess 

was quite confounded, and what to do with the creature, we 

neither of us knew.  To send him to a sable was doing nothing, 

for it was certain that public notice would be given in the 

Gazette, and the horse described, so that we durst not go to 

fetch it again.



All the remedy we had for this unlucky adventure was to go 

and set up the horse at an inn, and send a note by a porter to 

the tavern, that the gentleman's horse that was lost such a time 

was left at such an inn, and that he might be had there; that 

the poor woman that held him, having led him about the street, 

not being able to lead him back again, had left him there.  We 

might have waited till the owner had published and offered a 

reward, but we did not care to venture the receiving the reward.



So this was a robbery and no robbery, for little was lost by it, 

and nothing was got by it, and I was quite sick of going out in 

a beggar's dress; it did not answer at all, and besides, I thought 

it was ominous and threatening.



While I was in this disguise, I fell in with a parcel of folks of 

a worse kind than any I ever sorted with, and I saw a little into 

their ways too.  These were coiners of money, and they made 

some very good offers to me, as to profit; but the part they 

would have had me have embarked in was the most dangerous 

part.  I mean that of the very working the die, as they call it, 

which, had I been taken, had been certain death, and that at a 

stake--I say, to be burnt to death at a stake; so that though I 

was to appearance but a beggar, and they promised mountains 

of gold and silver to me to engage, yet it would not do.  It is 

true, if I had been really a beggar, or had been desperate as 

when I began, I might perhaps have closed with it; for what 

care they to die that can't tell how to live?  But at present 

this was not my condition, at least I was for no such terrible 

risks as those; besides, the very thoughts of being burnt at a 

stake struck terror into my very soul, chilled my blood, and 

gave me the vapours to such a degree, as I could not think 

of it without trembling.



This put an end to my disguise too, for as I did not like the 

proposal, so I did not tell them so, but seemed to relish it, and 

promised to meet again.  But I durst see them no more; for if I 

had seen them, and not complied, though I had declined it with 

the greatest assurance of secrecy in the world, they would have 

gone near to have murdered me, to make sure work, and make 

themselves easy, as they call it.  What kind of easiness that is, 

they may best judge that understand how easy men are that 

can murder people to prevent danger.



This and horse-stealing were things quite out of my way, and 

I might easily resolve I would have to more to say to them; my 

business seemed to lie another way, and though it had hazard 

enough in it too, yet it was more suitable to me, and what had 

more of art in it, and more room to escape, and more chances 

for a-coming off if a surprise should happen.



I had several proposals made also to me about that time, to 

come into a gang of house-breakers; but that was a thing I had 

no mind to venture at neither, any more than I had at the 

coining trade.  I offered to go along with two men and a 

woman, that made it their business to get into houses by 

stratagem, and with them I was willing enough to venture.  

But there were three of them already, and they did not care 

to part, nor I to have too many in a gang, so I did not close 

with them, but declined them, and they paid dear for their 

next attempt.



But at length I met with a woman that had often told me what 

adventures she had made, and with success, at the waterside, 

and I closed with her, and we drove on our business pretty 

well.  One day we came among some Dutch people at St. 

Catherine's, where we went on pretence to buy goods that 

were privately got on shore.  I was two or three times in a 

house where we saw a good quantity of prohibited goods, 

and my companion once brought away three pieces of Dutch 

black silk that turned to good account, and I had my share of 

it; but in all the journeys I made by myself, I could not get an 

opportunity to do anything, so I laid it aside, for I had been so 

often, that they began to suspect something, and were so shy, 

that I saw nothing was to be done.



This baulked me a little, and I resolved to push at something 

or other, for I was not used to come back so often without 

purchase; so the next day I dressed myself up fine, and took 

a walk to the other end of the town.  I passed through the 

Exchange in the Strand, but had no notion of finding anything 

to do there, when on a sudden I saw a great cluttering in the 

place, and all the people, shopkeepers as well as others, 

standing up and staring; and what should it be but some great 

duchess come into the Exchange, and they said the queen was 

coming.  I set myself close up to a shop-side with my back to 

the counter, as if to let the crowd pass by, when keeping my 

eye upon a parcel of lace which the shopkeeper was showing 

to some ladies that stood by me, the shopkeeper and her maid 

were so taken up with looking to see who was coming, and 

what shop they would go to, that I found means to slip a paper 

of lace into my pocket and come clear off with it; so the 

lady-milliner paid dear enough for her gaping after the queen.



I went off from the shop, as if driven along by the throng, and 

mingling myself with the crowd, went out at the other door 

of the Exchange, and so got away before they missed their 

lace; and because I would not be followed, I called a coach 

and shut myself up in it.  I had scarce shut the coach doors up, 

but I saw the milliner's maid and five or six more come 

running out into the street, and crying out as if they were 

frightened.  They did not cry 'Stop thief!' because nobody ran 

away, but I could hear the word 'robbed,' and 'lace,' two or 

three times, and saw the wench wringing her hands, and run 

staring to and again, like one scared.  The coachman that had 

taken me up was getting up into the box, but was not quite up, 

so that the horse had not begun to move; so that I was terrible 

uneasy, and I took the packet of lace and laid it ready to have 

dropped it out at the flap of the coach, which opens before, 

just behind the coachman; but to my great satisfaction, in less 

than a minute the coach began to move, that is to say, as soon 

as the coachman had got up and spoken to his horses; so he 

drove away without any interruption, and I brought off my 

purchase, which was work near #20.



The next day I dressed up again, but in quite different clothes, 

and walked the same way again, but nothing offered till I 

came into St. James's Park, where I saw abundance of fine 

ladies in the Park, walking in the Mall, and among the rest 

there was a little miss, a young lady of about twelve or thirteen 

years old, and she had a sister, as I suppose it was, with her, 

that might be about nine years old.  I observed the biggest 

had a fine gold watch on, and a good necklace of pearl, and 

they had a footman in livery with them; but as it is not usual 

for the footman to go behind the ladies in the Mall, so I 

observed the footman stopped at their going into the Mall, 

and the biggest of the sisters spoke to him, which I perceived 

was to bid him be just there when they came back.



When I heard her dismiss the footman, I stepped up to him 

and asked him, what little lady that was? and held a little chat 

with him about what a pretty child it was with her, and how 

genteel and well-carriaged the lady, the eldest, would be:  how 

womanish, and how grave; and the fool of a fellow told me 

presently who she was; that she was Sir Thomas----'s eldest 

daughter, of Essex, and that she was a great fortune; that her 

mother was not come to town yet; but she was with Sir 

William----'s lady, of Suffolk, at her lodging in Suffolk 

Street, and a great deal more; that they had a maid and a 

woman to wait on them, besides Sir Thomas's coach, the 

coachman, and himself; and that young lady was governess 

to the whole family, as well here as at home too; and, in short, 

told me abundance of things enough for my business.



I was very well dressed, and had my gold watch as well as 

she; so I left the footman, and I puts myself in a rank with 

this young lady, having stayed till she had taken one double 

turn in the Mall, and was going forward again; by and by I 

saluted her by her name, with the title of Lady Betty.  I asked 

her when she heard from her father; when my lady her mother 

would be in town, and how she did.



I talked so familiarly to her of her whole family that she could 

not suspect but that I knew them all intimately.  I asked her 

why she would come abroad without Mrs. Chime with her 

(that was the name of her woman) to take of Mrs. Judith, that 

was her sister.  Then I entered into a long chat with her about 

her sister, what a fine little lady she was, and asked her if she 

had learned French, and a thousand such little things to entertain 

her, when on a sudden we saw the guards come, and the crowd 

ran to see the king go by to the Parliament House.



The ladies ran all to the side of the Mall, and I helped my 

lady to stand upon the edge of the boards on the side of the 

Mall, that she might be high enough to see; and took the little 

one and lifter her quite up; during which, I took care to convey 

the gold watch so clean away from the Lady Betty, that she 

never felt it, nor missed it, till all the crowd was gone, and she 

was gotten into the middle of the Mall among the other ladies.



I took my leave of her in the very crowd, and said to her, as 

if in haste, 'Dear Lady Betty, take care of your little sister.'  

And so the crowd did as it were thrust me away from her, and 

that I was obliged unwillingly to take my leave.



The hurry in such cases is immediately over, and the place 

clear as soon as the king is gone by; but as there is always a 

great running and clutter just as the king passes, so having 

dropped the two little ladies, and done my business with them 

without any miscarriage, I kept hurrying on among the crowd, 

as if I ran to see the king, and so I got before the crowd and 

kept so till I came to the end of the Mall, when the king going 

on towards the Horse Guards, I went forward to the passage, 

which went then through against the lower end of the Haymarket, 

and there I bestowed a coach upon myself, and made off, and I 

confess I have not yet been so good as my word, viz. to go and 

visit my Lady Betty.



I was once of the mind to venture staying with Lady Betty till 

she missed the watch, and so have made a great outcry about 

it with her, and have got her into the coach, and put myself in 

the coach with her, and have gone home with her; for she 

appeared so fond of me, and so perfectly deceived by my so 

readily talking to her of all her relations and family, that I 

thought it was very easy to push the thing farther, and to have 

got at least the necklace of pearl; but when I considered that 

though the child would not perhaps have suspected me, other 

people might, and that if I was searched I should be discovered, 

I thought it was best to go off with what I had got, and be 

satisfied.



I came accidentally afterwards to hear, that when the young 

lady missed her watch, she made a great outcry in the Park, 

and sent her footman up and down to see if he could find me 

out, she having described me so perfectly that he knew presently 

that it was the same person that had stood and talked so long 

with him, and asked him so many questions about them; but I 

gone far enough out of their reach before she could come at 

her footman to tell him the story.



I made another adventure after this, of a nature different from 

all I had been concerned in yet, and this was at a gaming-house 

near Covent Garden.



I saw several people go in and out; and I stood in the passage 

a good while with another woman with me, and seeing a  

gentleman go up that seemed to be of more than ordinary 

fashion, I said to him, 'Sir, pray don't they give women leave 

to go up?' 'Yes, madam,' says he, 'and to play too, if they 

please.'  'I mean so, sir,' said I.  And with that he said he 

would introduce me if I had a mind; so I followed him to the 

door, and he looking in, 'There, madam,' says he, 'are the 

gamesters, if you have a mind to venture.'  I looked in and 

said to my comrade aloud, 'Here's nothing but men; I won't 

venture among them.'  At which one of the gentlemen cried 

out, 'You need not be afraid, madam, here's none but fair 

gamesters; you are very welcome to come and set what you 

please.'  so I went a little nearer and looked on, and some of 

them brought me a chair, and I sat down and saw the box and 

dice go round apace; then I said to my comrade, 'The gentlemen 

play too high for us; come, let us go.'



The people were all very civil, and one gentleman in particular 

encouraged me, and said, 'Come, madam, if you please to 

venture, if you dare trust me, I'll answer for it you shall have 

nothing put upon you here.'  'No, sir,' said I, smiling, 'I hope 

the gentlemen would not cheat a woman.'  But still I declined 

venturing, though I pulled out a purse with money in it, that 

they might see I did not want money.



After I had sat a while, one gentleman said to me, jeering, 

'Come, madam, I see you are afraid to venture for yourself; 

I always had good luck with the ladies, you shall set for me, 

if you won't set for yourself.'  I told him, 'sir, I should be very 

loth to lose your money,' though I added, 'I am pretty lucky 

too; but the gentlemen play so high, that I dare not indeed 

venture my own.'



'Well, well,' says he, 'there's ten guineas, madam; set them 

for me.'  so I took his money and set, himself looking on.  I 

ran out nine of the guineas by one and two at a time, and then 

the box coming to the next man to me, my gentleman gave 

me ten guineas more, and made me set five of them at once, 

and the gentleman who had the box threw out, so there was 

five guineas of his money again.  He was encouraged at this, 

and made me take the box, which was a bold venture.  However, 

I held the box so long that I had gained him his whole money, 

and had a good handful of guineas in my lap, and which was 

the better luck, when I threw out, I threw but at one or two of 

those that had set me, and so went off easy.



When I was come this length, I offered the gentleman all the 

gold, for it was his own; and so would have had him play for 

himself, pretending I did not understand the game well enough.  

He laughed, and said if I had but good luck, it was no matter 

whether I understood the game or no; but I should not leave 

off.  However, he took out the fifteen guineas that he had put 

in at first, and bade me play with the rest.  I would have told 

them to see how much I had got, but he said, 'No, no, don't 

tell them, I believe you are very honest, and 'tis bad luck to 

tell them'; so I played on.



I understood the game well enough, though I pretended I did 

not, and played cautiously.  It was to keep a good stock in my 

lap, out of which I every now and then conveyed some into 

my pocket, but in such a manner, and at such convenient times, 

as I was sure he could not see it.



I played a great while, and had very good luck for him; but 

the last time I held the box, they set me high, and I threw 

boldly at all; I held the box till I gained near fourscore guineas, 

but lost above half of it back in the last throw; so I got up, for 

I was afraid I should lose it all back again, and said to him, 

'Pray come, sir, now, and take it and play for yourself; I think 

I have done pretty well for you.'  He would have had me play 

on, but it grew late, and I desired to be excused.  When I gave 

it up to him, I told him I hoped he would give me leave to tell 

it now, that I might see what I had gained, and how lucky I 

had been for him; when I told them, there were threescore 

and three guineas.  'Ay,' says I, 'if it had not been for that 

unlucky throw, I had got you a hundred guineas.'  So I gave 

him all the money, but he would not take it till I had put my 

hand into it, and taken some for myself, and bid me please 

myself.  I refused it, and was positive I would not take it 

myself; if he had a mind to anything of that kind, it should 

be all his own doings.



The rest of the gentlemen seeing us striving cried, 'Give it 

her all'; but I absolutely refused that.  Then one of them said, 

'D----n ye, jack, halve it with her; don't you know you should 

be always upon even terms with the ladies.'  So, in short, he 

divided it with me, and I brought away thirty guineas, besides 

about forty-three which I had stole privately, which I was 

sorry for afterward, because he was so generous.



Thus I brought home seventy-three guineas, and let my old 

governess see what good luck I had at play.  However, it was 

her advice that I should not venture again, and I took her 

counsel, for I never went there any more; for I knew as well 

as she, if the itch of play came in, I might soon lose that, and 

all the rest of what I had got.



Fortune had smiled upon me to that degree, and I had thriven 

so much, and my governess too, for she always had a share 

with me, that really the old gentlewoman began to talk of 

leaving off while we were well, and being satisfied with what 

we had got; but, I know not what fate guided me, I was as 

backward to it now as she was when I proposed it to her 

before, and so in an ill hour we gave over the thoughts of it 

for the present, and, in a word, I grew more hardened and 

audacious than ever, and the success I had made my name as 

famous as any thief of my sort ever had been at Newgate, and 

in the Old Bailey.



I had sometime taken the liberty to play the same gave over 

again, which is not according to practice, which however 

succeeded not amiss; but generally I took up new figures, and 

contrived to appear in new shapes every time I went abroad.



It was not a rumbling time of the year, and the gentlemen 

being most of them gone out of town, Tunbridge, and Epsom, 

and such places were full of people.  But the city was thin, 

and I thought our trade felt it a little, as well as other; so that 

at the latter end of the year I joined myself with a gang who 

usually go every year to Stourbridge Fair, and from thence to 

Bury Fair, in Suffolk.  We promised ourselves great things 

there, but when I came to see how things were, I was weary 

of it presently; for except mere picking of pockets, there was 

little worth meddling with; neither, if a booty had been made, 

was it so easy carrying it off, nor was there such a variety of 

occasion for business in our way, as in London; all that I made 

of the whole journey was a gold watch at Bury Fair, and a 

small parcel of linen at Cambridge, which gave me an occasion 

to take leave of the place.  It was on old bite, and I though 

might do with a country shopkeeper, though in London it 

would not.



I bought at a linen-draper's shop, not in the fair, but in the 

town of Cambridge, as much fine holland and other things as 

came to about seven pounds; when I had done, I bade them 

be sent to such an inn, where I had purposely taken up my 

being the same morning, as if I was to lodge there that night.



I ordered the draper to send them home to me, about such an 

hour, to the inn where I lay, and I would pay him his money.  

At the time appointed the draper sends the goods, and I placed 

one of our gang at the chamber door, and when the innkeeper's 

maid brought the messenger to the door, who was a young 

fellow, an apprentice, almost a man, she tells him her mistress 

was asleep, but if he would leave the things and call in about 

an hour, I should be awake, and he might have the money.  He 

left the parcel very readily, and goes his way, and in about 

half an hour my maid and I walked off, and that very evening 

I hired a horse, and a man to ride before me, and went to 

Newmarket, and from thence got my passage in a coach that 

was not quite full to St. Edmund's Bury, where, as I told you, 

I could make but little of my trade, only at a little country 

opera-house made a shift to carry off a gold watch from a 

lady's side, who was not only intolerably merry, but, as I 

thought, a little fuddled, which made my work much easier.



I made off with this little booty to Ipswich, and from thence 

to Harwich, where I went into an inn, as if I had newly arrived 

from Holland, not doubting but I should make some purchase 

among the foreigners that came on shore there; but I found 

them generally empty of things of value, except what was in 

their portmanteaux and Dutch hampers, which were generally 

guarded by footmen; however, I fairly got one of their 

portmanteaux one evening out of the chamber where the 

gentleman lay, the footman being fast asleep on the bed, and 

I suppose very drunk.



The room in which I lodged lay next to the Dutchman's, and 

having dragged the heavy thing with much ado out of the 

chamber into mine, I went out into the street, to see if I could 

find any possibility of carrying it off.  I walked about a great 

while, but could see no probability either of getting out the 

thing, or of conveying away the goods that were in it if I had 

opened it, the town being so small, and I a perfect stranger in 

it; so I was returning with a resolution to carry it back again, 

and leave it where I found it.  Just in that very moment I heard 

a man make a noise to some people to make haste, for the boat 

was going to put off, and the tide would be spent.  I called to 

the fellow, 'What boat is it, friend,' says I, 'that you belong to?'  

'The Ipswich wherry, madam,' says he.  'When do you go off?' 

says I.  'This moment, madam,' says he; 'do you want to go 

thither?'  'Yes,' said I, 'if you can stay till I fetch my things.'  

'Where are your  things, madam?' says he.  'At such an inn,' 

said I.  'Well, I'll go with you, madam,' says he, very civilly, 

'and bring them for you.' 'Come away, then,' says I, and takes 

him with me.



The people of the inn were in a great hurry, the packet-boat 

from Holland being just come in, and two coaches just come 

also with passengers from London, for another packet-boat 

that was going off for Holland, which coaches were to go back 

next day with the passengers that were just landed.  In this 

hurry it was not much minded that I came to the bar and paid 

my reckoning, telling my landlady I had gotten my passage by 

sea in a wherry.



These wherries are large vessels, with good accommodation 

for carrying passengers from Harwich to London; and though 

they are called wherries, which is a word used in the Thames 

for a small boat rowed with one or two men, yet these are 

vessels able to carry twenty passengers, and ten or fifteen tons 

of goods, and fitted to bear the sea.  All this I had found out 

by inquiring the night before into the several ways of going 

to London.



My landlady was very courteous, took my money for my 

reckoning, but was called away, all the house being in a hurry.  

So I left her, took the fellow up to my chamber, gave him the 

trunk, or portmanteau, for it was like a trunk, and wrapped it 

about with an old apron, and he went directly to his boat with 

it, and I after him, nobody asking us the least question about 

it; as for the drunken Dutch footman he was still asleep, and 

his master with other foreign gentlemen at supper, and very 

merry below, so I went clean off with it to Ipswich; and going 

in the night, the people of the house knew nothing but that I 

was gone to London by the Harwich wherry, as I had told my 

landlady.



I was plagued at Ipswich with the custom-house officers, who 

stopped my trunk, as I called it, and would open and search it.  

I was willing, I told them, they should search it, but husband 

had the key, and he was not yet come from Harwich; this I 

said, that if upon searching it they should find all the things 

be such as properly belonged to a man rather than a woman, 

it should not seem strange to them.  However, they being 

positive to open the trunk I consented to have it be broken 

open, that is to say, to have the lock taken off, which was not 

difficult.



They found nothing for their turn, for the trunk had been 

searched before, but they discovered several things very much 

to my satisfaction, as particularly a parcel of money in French 

pistols, and some Dutch ducatoons or rix-dollars, and the rest 

was chiefly two periwigs, wearing-linen, and razors, wash-balls, 

perfumes, and other useful things necessary for a gentleman, 

which all passed for my husband's, and so I was quit to them.



It was now very early in the morning, and not light, and I 

knew not well what course to take; for I made no doubt but I 

should be pursued in the morning, and perhaps be taken with 

the things about me; so I resolved upon taking new measures.  

I went publicly to an inn in the town with my trunk, as I called 

it, and having taken the substance out, I did not think the 

lumber of it worth my concern; however, I gave it the landlady 

of the house with a charge to take great care of it, and lay it 

up safe till I should come again, and away I walked in to the 

street.



When I was got into the town a great way from the inn, I met 

with an ancient woman who had just opened her door, and I 

fell into chat with her, and asked her a great many wild 

questions of things all remote to my purpose and design; but 

in my discourse I found by her how the town was situated, 

that I was in a street that went out towards Hadley, but that 

such a street went towards the water-side, such a street towards 

Colchester, and so the London road lay there.



I had soon my ends of this old woman, for I only wanted to 

know which was the London road, and away I walked as fast 

as I could; not that I intended to go on foot, either to London 

or to Colchester, but I wanted to get quietly away from Ipswich.



I walked about two or three miles, and then I met a plain 

countryman, who was busy about some husbandry work, I did 

not know what, and I asked him a great many questions first, 

not much to the purpose, but at last told him I was going for 

London, and the coach was full, and I could not get a passage, 

and asked him if he could tell me where to hire a horse that 

would carry double, and an honest man to ride before me to 

Colchester, that so I might get a place there in the coaches.  

The honest clown looked earnestly at me, and said nothing 

for above half a minute, when, scratching his poll, 'A horse, 

say you and to Colchester, to carry double?  why yes, mistress, 

alack-a-day, you may have horses enough for money.'  'Well, 

friend,' says I, 'that I take for granted; I don't expect it without 

money.'  'Why, but, mistress,' says he, 'how much are you 

willing to give?'  'Nay,' says I again, 'friend, I don't know 

what your rates are in the country here, for I am a stranger; 

but if you can get one for me, get it as cheap as you can, and 

I'll give you somewhat for your pains.'



'Why, that's honestly said too,' says the countryman.  'Not 

so honest, neither,' said I to myself, 'if thou knewest all.'  

'Why, mistress,' says he, 'I have a horse that will carry double, 

and I don't much care if I go myself with you,' and the like.  

'Will you?' says I; 'well, I believe you are an honest man; if 

you will, I shall be glad of it; I'll pay you in reason.'  'Why, 

look ye, mistress,' says he, 'I won't be out of reason with you, 

then; if I carry you to Colchester, it will be worth five shillings 

for myself and my horse, for I shall hardly come back to-night.'



In short, I hired the honest man and his horse; but when we 

came to a town upon the road (I do not remember the name 

of it, but it stands upon a river), I pretended myself very ill, 

and I could go no farther that night but if he would stay there 

with me, because I was a stranger, I would pay him for himself 

and his horse with all my heart.



This I did because I knew the Dutch gentlemen and their 

servants would be upon the road that day, either in the 

stagecoaches or riding post, and I did not know but the drunken 

fellow, or somebody else that might have seen me at Harwich, 

might see me again, and so I thought that in one day's stop 

they would be all gone by.



We lay all that night there, and the next morning it was not 

very early when I set out, so that it was near ten o'clock by 

the time I got to Colchester.  It was no little pleasure that I 

saw the town where I had so many pleasant days, and I made 

many inquiries after the good old friends I had once had there, 

but could make little out; they were all dead or removed.  The 

young ladies had been all married or gone to London; the old 

gentleman and the old lady that had been my early benefacress 

all dead; and which troubled me most, the young gentleman 

my first lover, and afterwards my brother-in-law, was dead; 

but two sons, men grown, were left of him, but they too were 

transplanted to London.



I dismissed my old man here, and stayed incognito for three 

or four days in Colchester, and then took a passage in a waggon, 

because I would not venture being seen in the Harwich coaches.  

But I needed not have used so much caution, for there was 

nobody in Harwich but the woman of the house could have 

known me; nor was it rational to think that she, considering 

the hurry she was in, and that she never saw me but once, and 

that by candlelight, should have ever discovered me.



I was now returned to London, and though by the accident of 

the last adventure I got something considerable, yet I was not 

fond of any more country rambles, nor should I have ventured 

abroad again if I had carried the trade on to the end of my 

days. I gave my governess a history of my travels; she liked 

the Harwich journey well enough, and in discoursing of these 

things between ourselves she observed, that a thief being a 

creature that watches the advantages of other people's mistakes, 

'tis impossible but that to one that is vigilant and industrious 

many opportunities must happen, and therefore she thought 

that one so exquisitely keen in the trade as I was, would scarce 

fail of something extraordinary wherever I went.



On the other hand, every branch of my story, if duly considered, 

may be useful to honest people, and afford a due caution to 

people of some sort or other to guard against the like surprises, 

and to have their eyes about them when they have to do with 

strangers of any kind, for 'tis very seldom that some snare or 

other is not in their way.  The moral, indeed, of all my history 

is left to be gathered by the senses and judgment of the reader; 

I am not qualified to preach to them.  Let the experience of 

one creature completely wicked, and completely miserable, 

be a storehouse of useful warning to those that read.



I am drawing now towards a new variety of the scenes of life.  

Upon my return, being hardened by along race of crime, and 

success unparalleled, at least in the reach of my own knowledge, 

I had, as I have said, no thoughts of laying down a trade which, 

if I was to judge by the example of other, must, however, end 

at last in misery and sorrow.



It was on the Christmas day following, in the evening, that, 

to finish a long train of wickedness, I went abroad to see what 

might offer in my way; when going by a working silversmith's 

in Foster Lane, I saw a tempting bait indeed, and not be 

resisted by one of my occupation, for the shop had nobody in 

it, as I could see, and a great deal of loose plate lay in the 

window, and at the seat of the man, who usually, as I suppose, 

worked at one side of the shop.



I went boldly in, and was just going to lay my hand upon a 

piece of plate, and might have done it, and carried it clear off, 

for any care that the men who belonged to the shop had taken 

of it; but an officious fellow in a house, not a shop, on the 

other side of the way, seeing me go in, and observing that 

there was nobody in the shop, comes running over the street, 

and into the shop, and without asking me what I was, or who, 

seizes upon me, an cries out for the people of the house.



I had not, as I said above, touched anything in the shop, and 

seeing a glimpse of somebody running over to the shop, I had 

so much presence of mind as to knock very  hard with my 

foot on the floor of the house, and was just calling out too, 

when the fellow laid hands on me.



However, as I had always most courage when I was in most 

danger, so when the fellow laid hands on me, I stood very 

high upon it, that I came in to buy half a dozen of silver spoons; 

and to my good fortune, it was a silversmith's that sold plate, 

as well as worked plate for other shops.  The fellow laughed 

at that part, and put such a value upon the service that he had 

done his neighbour, that he would have it be that I came not 

to buy, but to steal; and raising a great crowd.  I said to the 

master of the shop, who by this time was fetched home from 

some neighbouring place, that it was in vain to make noise, 

and enter into talk there of the case; the fellow had insisted 

that I came to steal, and he must prove it, and I desired we 

might go before a magistrate without any more words; for I 

began to see I should be too hard for the man that had seized me.



The master and mistress of the shop were really not so violent 

as the man from t'other side of the way; and the man said, 

'Mistress, you might come into the shop with a good design 

for aught I know, but it seemed a dangerous thing for you to 

come into such a shop as mine is, when you see nobody there; 

and I cannot do justice to my neighbour, who was so kind to 

me, as not to acknowledge he had reason on his side; though, 

upon the whole, I do not find you attempted to take anything, 

and I really know not what to do in it.'  I pressed him to go 

before a magistrate with me, and if anything could be proved 

on me that was like a design of robbery, I should willingly 

submit, but if not, I expected reparation.



Just while we were in this debate, and a crowd of people 

gathered about the door, came by Sir T. B., an alderman of 

the city, and justice of the peace, and the goldsmith hearing 

of it, goes out, and entreated his worship to come in and 

decide the case.



Give the goldsmith his due, he told his story with a great deal 

of justice and moderation, and the fellow that had come over, 

and seized upon me, told his with as much heat and foolish 

passion, which did me good still, rather than harm.  It came 

then to my turn to speak, and I told his worship that I was a 

stranger in London, being newly come out of the north; that I 

lodged in such a place, that I was passing this street, and went 

into the goldsmith's shop to buy half a dozen of spoons.  By 

great luck I had an old silver spoon in my pocket, which I 

pulled out, and told him I had carried that spoon to match it 

with half a dozen of new ones,that it might match some I had 

in the country.



That seeing nobody I the shop, I knocked with my foot very 

hard to make the people hear, and had also called aloud with 

my voice; 'tis true, there was loose plate in the shop, but that 

nobody could say I had touched any of it, or gone near it; that 

a fellow came running into the shop out of the street, and laid 

hands on me in a furious manner, in the very moments while 

I was calling for the people of the house; that if he had really 

had a mind to have done his neighbour any service, he should 

have stood at a distance, and silently watched to see whether 

I had touched anything or no, and then have clapped in upon 

me, and taken me in the fact.  'That is very true,' says Mr. 

Alderman, and turning to the fellow that stopped me, he asked 

him if it was true that I knocked with my foot?  He said, yes, 

I had knocked, but that might be because of his coming.  'Nay,' 

says the alderman, taking him short, 'now you contradict 

yourself, for just now you said she was in the shop with her 

back to you, and did not see you till you came upon her.'  Now 

it was true that my back was partly to the street, but yet as my 

business was of a kind that required me to have my eyes every 

way, so I really had a glance of him running over, as I said 

before, though he did not perceive it.



After a full hearing, the alderman gave it as his opinion that 

his neighbour was under a mistake, and that I was innocent, 

and the goldsmith acquiesced in it too, and his wife, and so 

I was dismissed; but as I was going to depart, Mr. Alderman 

said, 'But hold, madam, if you were designing to buy spoons, 

I hope you will not let my friend here lose his customer by 

the mistake.'  I readily answered, 'No, sir, I'll buy the spoons 

still, if he can match my odd spoon, which I brought for a 

pattern'; and the goldsmith showed me some of the very same 

fashion.  So he weighed the spoons, and they came to five-and-thirty 

shillings, so I pulls out my purse to pay him, in which I had 

near twenty guineas, for I never went without such a sum 

about me, whatever might happen, and I found it of use at 

other times as well as now.



When Mr. Alderman saw my money, he said, 'Well, madam, 

now I am satisfied you were wronged, and it was for this 

reason that I moved you should buy the spoons, and stayed 

till you had bought them, for if you had not had money to pay 

for them, I should have suspected that you did not come into 

the shop with an intent to buy, for indeed the sort of people 

who come upon these designs that you have been charged 

with, are seldom troubled with much gold in their pockets, 

as I see you are.'



I smiled, and told his worship, that then I owed something of 

his favour to my money, but I hoped he saw reason also in 

the justice he had done me before.  He said, yes, he had, but 

this had confirmed his opinion, and he was fully satisfied now 

of my having been injured.  So I came off with flying colours, 

though from an affair in which I was at the very brink of 

destruction.



It was but three days after this, that not at all made cautious 

by my former danger, as I used to be, and still pursuing the 

art which I had so long been employed in, I ventured into a 

house where I saw the doors open, and furnished myself, as 

I though verily without being perceived, with two pieces of 

flowered silks, such as they call brocaded silk, very rich.  It 

was not a mercer's shop, nor a warehouse of a mercer, but 

looked like a private dwelling-house, and was, it seems, 

inhabited by a man that sold goods for the weavers to the 

mercers, like a broker or factor.



That I may make short of this black part of this story, I was 

attacked by two wenches that came open-mouthed at me just 

as I was going out at the door, and one of them pulled me 

back into the room, while the other shut the door upon me.  

I would have given them good words, but there was no room 

for it, two fiery dragons could not have been more furious 

than they were; they tore my clothes, bullied and roared as if 

they would have murdered me; the mistress of the house came 

next, and then the master, and all outrageous, for a while especially.



I gave the master very good words, told him the door was 

open, and things were a temptation to me, that I was poor and  

distressed, and poverty was when many could not resist, and 

begged him with tears to have pity on me.  The mistress of 

the house was moved with compassion, and inclined to have 

let me go, and had almost persuaded her husband to it also, 

but the saucy wenches were run, even before they were sent, 

and had fetched a constable, and then the master said he could 

not go back, I must go before a justice, and answered his wife 

that he might come into trouble himself if he should let me go.



The sight of the constable, indeed, struck me with terror, and 

I thought I should have sunk into the ground.  I fell into 

faintings, and indeed the people themselves thought I would 

have died, when the woman argued again for me, and entreated 

her husband, seeing they had lost nothing, to let me go.  I 

offered him to pay for the two pieces, whatever the value was, 

though I had not got them, and argued that as he had his goods, 

and had really lost nothing, it would be cruel to pursue me to 

death, and have my blood for the bare attempt of taking them.  

I put the constable in mind that I had broke no doors, nor 

carried anything away; and when I came to the justice, and 

pleaded there that I had neither broken anything to get in, nor 

carried anything out, the justice was inclined to have released 

me; but the first saucy jade that stopped me, affirming that I 

was going out with the goods, but that she stopped me and 

pulled me back as I was upon the threshold, the justice upon 

that point committed me, and I was carried to Newgate.  That 

horrid place! my very blood chills at the mention of its name; 

the place where so many of my comrades had been locked up, 

and from whence they went to the fatal tree; the place where 

my mother suffered so deeply, where I was brought into the 

world, and from whence I expected no redemption but by an 

infamous death:  to conclude, the place that had so long 

expected me, and which with so much art and success I had 

so long avoided.



I was not fixed indeed; 'tis impossible to describe the terror 

of my mind, when I was first brought in, and when I looked 

around upon all the horrors of that dismal place.  I looked on 

myself as lost, and that I had nothing to think of but of going 

out of the world, and that with the utmost infamy:  the hellish 

noise, the roaring, swearing, and clamour, the stench and 

nastiness, and all the dreadful crowd of afflicting things that 

I saw there, joined together to make the place seem an emblem 

of hell itself, and a kind of an entrance into it.



Now I reproached myself with the many hints I had had, as I 

have mentioned above, from my own reason, from the sense 

of my good circumstances, and of the many dangers I had 

escaped, to leave off while I was well, and how I had withstood 

them all, and hardened my thoughts against all fear.  It seemed 

to me that I was hurried on by an inevitable and unseen fate 

to this day of misery, and that now I was to expiate all my 

offences at the gallows; that I was now to give satisfaction to 

justice with my blood, and that I was come to the last hour of 

my life and of my wickedness together.  These things poured 

themselves in upon my thoughts in a confused manner, and 

left me overwhelmed with melancholy and despair. 



Them I repented heartily of all my life past, but that repentance 

yielded me no satisfaction, no peace, no, not in the least, 

because, as I said to myself, it was repenting after the power 

of further sinning was taken away.  I seemed not to mourn that 

I had committed such crimes, and for the fact as it was an 

offence against God and my neighbour, but I mourned that I 

was to be punished for it.  I was a penitent, as I thought, not 

that I had sinned, but that I was to suffer, and this took away 

all the comfort, and even the hope of my repentance in my 

own thoughts.



I got no sleep for several nights or days after I came into that 

wretched place, and glad I would have been for some time to 

have died there, though I did not consider dying as it ought to 

be considered neither; indeed, nothing could be filled with 

more horror to my imagination than the very place, nothing 

was more odious to me than the company that was there.  Oh! 

if I had but been sent to any place in the world, and not to 

Newgate, I should have thought myself happy.



In the next place, how did the hardened wretches that were 

there before me triumph over me!  What! Mrs. Flanders come 

to Newgate at last?  What! Mrs. Mary, Mrs. Molly, and after 

that plain Moll Flanders? They thought the devil had helped 

me, they said, that I had reigned so long; they expected me 

there many years ago, and was I come at last?  Then they 

flouted me with my dejections, welcomed me to the place, 

wished me joy, bid me have a good heart, not to be cast down, 

things might not be so bad as I feared, and the like; then called 

for brandy, and drank to me, but put it all up to my score, for 

they told me I was but just come to the college, as they called 

it, and sure I had money in my pocket, though they had none.



I asked one of this crew how long she had been there.  She 

said four months. I asked her how the place looked to her 

when she first came into it.  'Just as it did now to you,' says 

she, dreadful and frightful'; that she thought she was in hell; 

'and I believe so still,' adds she, 'but it is natural to me now, I 

don't disturb myself about it.'  'I suppose,' says I, 'you are in 

no danger of what is to follow?'  'Nay,' says she, 'for you are 

mistaken there, I assure you, for I am under sentence, only I 

pleaded my belly, but I am no more with child than the judge 

that tried me, and I expect to be called down next sessions.'  

This 'calling down' is calling down to their former judgment, 

when a woman has been respited for her belly, but proves not 

to be with child, or if she has been with child, and has been 

brought to bed.  'Well,' says I, 'are you thus easy?'  'Ay,' says 

she, 'I can't help myself; what signifies being sad?  If I am 

hanged, there's an end of me,' says she; and away she turns 

dancing, and sings as she goes the following piece of Newgate 

wit ----



	'If I swing by the string

	I shall hear the bell ring1
	And then there's an end of poor Jenny.'

I mention this because it would be worth the observation of 
any prisoner, who shall hereafter fall into the same misfortune, 
and come to that dreadful place of Newgate, how time, 
necessity, and conversing with the wretches that are there 
familiarizes the place to them; how at last they become 
reconciled to that which at first was the greatest dread upon 
their spirits in the world, and are as impudently cheerful and 

merry in their misery as they were when out of it.



I cannot say, as some do, this devil is not so black as he is 

painted; for indeed no colours can represent the place to the 

life, not any soul conceive aright of it but those who have 

been suffers there.  But how hell should become by degree so 

natural, and not only tolerable, but even agreeable, is a thing  

unintelligible but by those who have experienced it, as I have.



The same night that I was sent to Newgate, I sent the news of 

it to my old governess, who was surprised at it, you may be 

sure, and spent the night almost as ill out of Newgate, as I did 

in it.



The next morning she came to see me; she did what she could 

to comfort me, but she saw that was to no purpose; however, 

as she said, to sink under the weight was but to increase the 

weight; she immediately applied herself to all the proper 

methods to prevent the effects of it, which we feared, and 

first she found out the two fiery jades that had surprised me.  

She tampered with them, offered them money, and, in a word, 

tried all imaginable ways to prevent a prosecution; she offered 

one of the wenches #100 to go away from her mistress, and 

not to appear against me, but she was so resolute, that though 

she was but a servant maid at #3 a year wages or thereabouts, 

she refused it, and would have refused it, as my governess 

said she believed, if she had offered her #500.  Then she 

attacked the other maid; she was not so hard-hearted in 

appearance as the other, and sometimes seemed inclined to 

be merciful; but the first wench kept her up, and changed her 

mind, and would not so much as let my governess talk with 

her, but threatened to have her up for tampering with the 

evidence.



Then she applied to the master, that is to say, the man whose 

goods had been stolen, and particularly to his wife, who, as 

I told you, was inclined at first to have some compassion for 

me; she found the woman the same still, but the man alleged 

he was bound by the justice that committed me, to prosecute, 

and that he should forfeit his recognisance.



My governess offered to find friends that should get his 

recognisances off of the file, as they call it, and that he 

should not suffer; but it was not possible to convince him that 

could be done, or that he could be safe any way in the world 

but by appearing against me; so I was to have three witnesses 

of fact against me, the master and his two maids; that is to say, 

I was as certain to be cast for my life as I was certain that I 

was alive, and I had nothing to do but to think of dying, and 

prepare for it.  I had but a sad foundation to build upon, as I 

said before, for all my repentance appeared to me to be only 

the effect of my fear of death, not a sincere regret for the 

wicked life that I had lived, and which had brought this misery 

upon me, for the offending my Creator, who was now suddenly 

to be my judge.



I lived many days here under the utmost horror of soul; I had 

death, as it were, in view, and thought of nothing night and 

day, but of gibbets and halters, evil spirits and devils; it is not 

to be expressed by words how I was harassed, between the 

dreadful apprehensions of death and the terror of my conscience 

reproaching me with my past horrible life.



The ordinary Of Newgate came to me, and talked a little in 

his way, but all his divinity ran upon confessing my crime, as 

he called it (though he knew not what I was in for), making a 

full discovery, and the like, without which he told me God 

would never forgive me; and he said so little to the purpose, 

that I had no manner of consolation from him; and then to 

observe the poor creature preaching confession and repentance 

to me in the morning, and find him drunk with brandy and 

spirits by noon, this had something in it so shocking, that I 

began to nauseate the man more than his work, and his work 

too by degrees, for the sake of the man; so that I desired him 

to trouble me no more.



I know not how it was, but by the indefatigable application 

of my diligent governess I had no bill preferred against me 

the first sessions, I mean to the grand jury, at Guildhall; so I 

had another month or five weeks before me, and without doubt 

this ought to have been accepted by me, as so much time given 

me for reflection upon what was past, and preparation for what 

was to come; or, in a word, I ought to have esteemed it as a 

space given me for repentance, and have employed it as such, 

but it was not in me.  I was sorry (as before) for being in 

Newgate, but had very few signs of repentance about me.



On the contrary, like the waters in the cavities and hollows 

of mountains, which petrify and turn into stone whatever they 

are suffered to drop on, so the continual conversing with such 

a crew of hell-hounds as I was, had the same common operation 

upon me as upon other people.  I degenerated into stone; I 

turned first stupid and senseless, then brutish and thoughtless, 

and at last raving mad as any of them were; and, in short, I 

became as naturally pleased and easy with the place, as if 

indeed I had been born there.



It is scarce possible to imagine that our natures should be 

capable of so much degeneracy, as to make that pleasant and 

agreeable that in itself is the most complete misery.  Here 

was a circumstance that I think it is scarce possible to mention 

a worse:  I was as exquisitely miserable as, speaking of 

common cases, it was possible for any one to be that had life 

and health, and money to help them, as I had.



I had weight of guilt upon me enough to sink any creature 

who had the least power of reflection left, and had any sense 

upon them of the happiness of this life, of the misery of  

another; then I had at first remorse indeed, but no repentance; 

I had now neither remorse nor repentance.  I had a crime 

charged on me, the punishment of which was death by our 

law; the proof so evident, that there was no room for me so 

much as to plead not guilty.  I had the name of an old offender, 

so that I had nothing to expect but death in a few weeks' time, 

neither had I myself any thoughts of escaping; and yet a certain 

strange lethargy of soul possessed me.  I had no trouble, no 

apprehensions, no sorrow about me, the first surprise was 

gone; I was, I may well say, I know not how; my senses, my 

reason, nay, my conscience, were all asleep; my course of life 

for forty years had been a horrid complication of wickedness, 

whoredom, adultery, incest, lying, theft; and, in a word, 

everything but murder and treason had been my practice from 

the age of eighteen, or thereabouts, to three-score; and now I 

was engulfed in the misery of punishment, and had an infamous 

death just at the door, and yet I had no sense of my condition, 

no thought of heaven or hell at least, that went any farther than 

a bare flying touch, like the stitch or pain that gives a hint and 

goes off.  I neither had a heart to ask God's mercy, nor indeed 

to think of it.  And in this, I think, I have given a brief 

description of the completest misery on earth.



All my terrifying thoughts were past, the horrors of the place 

were become familiar, and I felt no more uneasiness at the 

noise and clamours of the prison, than they did who made 

that noise; in a word, I was become a mere Newgate-bird, as 

wicked and as outrageous as any of them; nay, I scarce 

retained the habit and custom of good breeding and manners, 

which all along till now ran through my conversation; so 

thorough a degeneracy had possessed me, that I was no more 

the same thing that I had been, than if I had never been 

otherwise than what I was now.



In the middle of this hardened part of my life I had another 

sudden surprise, which called me back a little to that thing 

called sorrow, which indeed I began to be past the sense of 

before.  They told me one night that there was brought into 

the prison late the night before three highwaymen, who had 

committed robbery somewhere on the road to Windsor, 

Hounslow Heath, I think it was, and were pursued to Uxbridge 

by the country, and were taken there after a gallant resistance, 

in which I know not how many of the country people were 

wounded, and some killed.



It is not to be wondered that we prisoners were all desirous 

enough to see these brave, topping gentlemen, that were 

talked up to be such as their fellows had not been known, and 

especially because it was said they would in the morning be 

removed into the press-yard, having given money to the head 

master of the prison, to be allowed the liberty of that better 

part of the prison.  So we that were women placed ourselves 

in the way, that we would be sure to see them; but nothing 

could express the amazement and surprise I was in, when the 

very first man that came out I knew to be my Lancashire husband, 

the same who lived so well at Dunstable, and the same who I 

afterwards saw at Brickhill, when I was married to my last 

husband, as has been related.



I was struck dumb at the sight, and knew neither what to say 

nor what to do; he did not know me, and that was all the 

present relief I had.  I quitted my company, and retired as 

much as that dreadful place suffers anybody to retire, and I 

cried vehemently for a great while.  'Dreadful creature that I 

am,' said I, 'how may poor people have I made miserable?  

How many desperate wretches have I sent to the devil?'  He 

had told me at Chester he was ruined by that match, and that 

his fortunes were made desperate on my account; for that 

thinking I had been a fortune, he was run into debt more than 

he was able to pay, and that he knew not what course to take; 

that he would go into the army and carry a musket, or buy a 

horse and take a tour, as he called it; and though I never told 

him that I was a fortune, and so did not actually deceive him 

myself, yet I did encourage the having it thought that I was so, 

and by that means I was the occasion originally of his mischief.



The surprise of the thing only struck deeper into my thoughts, 

any gave me stronger reflections than all that had befallen me 

before.  I grieved day and night for him, and the more for that 

they told me he was the captain of the gang, and that he had 

committed so many robberies, that Hind, or Whitney, or the 

Golden Farmer were fools to him; that he would surely be 

hanged if there were no more men left in the country he was 

born in; and that there would abundance of people come in 

against him.



I was overwhelmed with grief for him; my own case gave me 

no disturbance compared to this, and I loaded myself with 

reproaches on his account.  I bewailed his misfortunes, and 

the ruin he was now come to, at such a rate, that I relished 

nothing now as I did before, and the first reflections I made 

upon the horrid, detestable life I had lived began to return upon 

me, and as these things returned, my abhorrence of the place 

I was in, and of the way of living in it, returned also; in a word, 

I was perfectly changed, and become another body.



While I was under these influences of sorrow for him, came 

notice to me that the next sessions approaching there would 

be a bill preferred to the grand jury against me, and that I 

should be certainly tried for my life at the Old Bailey.  My 

temper was touched before, the hardened, wretched boldness 

of spirit which I had acquired abated, and conscious in the 

prison, guilt began to flow in upon my mind.  In short, I began 

to think, and to think is one real advance from hell to heaven.  

All that hellish, hardened state and temper of soul, which I 

have said so much of before, is but a deprivation of thought; 

he that is restored to his power of thinking, is restored to himself.



As soon as I began, I say, to think, the first think that occurred 

to me broke out thus:  'Lord! what will become of me?  I shall 

certainly die!  I shall be cast, to be sure, and there is nothing 

beyond that but death!  I have no friends; what shall I do?  I 

shall be certainly cast!  Lord, have mercy upon me!  What 

will become of me?'  This was a sad thought, you will say, to 

be the first, after so long a time, that had started into my soul 

of that kind, and yet even this was nothing but fright at what 

was to come; there was not a word of sincere repentance in it 

all.  However, I was indeed dreadfully dejected, and disconsolate 

to the last degree; and as I had no friend in the world to 

communicate my distressed thoughts to, it lay so heavy upon 

me, that it threw me into fits and swoonings several times a 

day.  I sent for my old governess, and she, give her her due, 

acted the part of a true friend.  She left no stone unturned to 

prevent the grand jury finding the bill.  She sought out one or 

two of the jurymen, talked with them, and endeavoured to 

possess them with favourable dispositions, on account that 

nothing was taken away, and no house broken, etc.; but all 

would not do, they were over-ruled by the rest; the two wenches 

swore home to the fact, and the jury found the bill against me 

for robbery and house-breaking, that is, for felony and burglary.



I sunk down when they brought me news of it, and after I came 

to myself again, I thought I should have died with the weight 

of it.  My governess acted a true mother to me; she pitied me, 

she cried with me, and for me, but she could not help me; 

and to add to the terror of it, 'twas the discourse all over the 

house that I should die for it.  I could hear them talk it among 

themselves very often, and see them shake their heads and say 

they were sorry for it, and the like, as is usual in the place.  

But still nobody came to tell me their thoughts, till at last one 

of the keepers came to me privately, and said with a sigh, 

'Well, Mrs. Flanders, you will be tried on Friday' (this was 

but a Wednesday); 'what do you intend to do?'  I turned as 

white as a clout, and said, 'God knows what I shall do; for my 

part, I know not what to do.'  'Why,' says he, 'I won't flatter 

you, I would have you prepare for death, for I doubt you will 

be cast; and as they say you are an old offender, I doubt you 

will find but little mercy.  They say,' added he, 'your case is 

very plain, and that the witnesses swear so home against you, 

there will be no standing it.'



This was a stab into the very vitals of one under such a burthen 

as I was oppressed with before, and I could not speak to him a 

word, good or bad, for a great while; but at last I burst out into 

tears, and said to him, 'Lord! Mr.----, what must I do?'  'Do!' 

says he, 'send for the ordinary; send for a minister and talk 

with him; for, indeed, Mrs. Flanders, unless you have very 

good friends, you are no woman for this world.'



This was plain dealing indeed, but it was very harsh to me, 

at least I thought it so.  He left me in the greatest confusion 

imaginable, and all that night I lay awake.  And now I began 

to say my prayers, which I had scarce done before since my 

last husband's death, or from a little while after.  And truly I 

may well call it saying my prayers, for I was in such a confusion, 

and had such horror upon my mind, that though I cried, and 

repeated several times the ordinary expression of 'Lord, have 

mercy upon me!' I never brought myself to any sense of my 

being a miserable sinner, as indeed I was, and of confessing 

my sins to God, and begging pardon for the sake of Jesus 

Christ.  I was overwhelmed with the sense of my condition, 

being tried for my life, and being sure to be condemned, and 

then I was as sure to be executed, and on this account I cried 

out all night, 'Lord, what will become of me?  Lord! what 

shall I do?  Lord! I shall be hanged!  Lord, have mercy upon 

me!' and the like.





End of Part 7
