



Part 6



Then it occurred to me, 'What an abominable creature am I! 

and how is this innocent gentleman going to be abused by me!  

How little does he think, that having divorced a whore, he is 

throwing himself into the arms of another! that he is going to 

marry one that has lain with two brothers, and has had three 

children by her own brother! one that was born in Newgate, 

whose mother was a whore, and is now a transported thief! 

one that has lain with thirteen men, and has had a child since 

he saw me!  Poor gentleman!' said I, 'what is he going to do?'  

After this reproaching myself was over, it following thus:  

'Well, if I must be his wife, if it please God to give me grace, 

I'll be a true wife to him, and love him suitably to the strange 

excess of his passion for me; I will make him amends if possible,

 by what he shall see, for the cheats and abuses I put upon him, 

which he does not see.'



He was impatient for my coming out of my chamber, but 

finding me long, he went downstairs and talked with my 

landlord about the parson.



My landlord, an officious though well-meaning fellow, had sent 

away for the neighbouring clergyman; and when my gentleman 

began to speak of it to him, and talk of sending for him, 'Sir,' 

says he to him, 'my friend is in the house'; so without any more 

words he brought them together.  When he came to the minister, 

he asked him if he would venture to marry a couple of strangers 

that were both willing.  The parson said that Mr.---- had said 

something to him of it; that he hoped it was no clandestine 

business; that he seemed to be a grave gentleman, and he 

supposed madam was not a girl, so that the consent of friends 

should be wanted.  'To put you out of doubt of that,' says my 

gentleman, 'read this paper'; and out he pulls the license.  'I 

am satisfied,' says the minister; 'where is the lady?'  'You 

shall see her presently,' says my gentleman.



When he had said thus he comes upstairs, and I was by that 

time come out of my room; so he tells me the minister was 

below, and that he had talked with him, and that upon showing 

him the license, he was free to marry us with all his heart, 'but 

he asks to see you'; so he asked if I would let him come up.



''Tis time enough,' said I, 'in the morning, is it not?'  'Why,' 

said he, 'my dear, he seemed to scruple whether it was not 

some young girl stolen from her parents, and I assured him we 

were both of age to command our own consent; and that made 

him ask to see you.'  'Well,' said I, 'do as you please'; so up 

they brings the parson, and a merry, good sort of gentleman 

he was.  He had been told, it seems, that we had met there by 

accident, that I came in the Chester coach, and my gentleman 

in his own coach to meet me; that we were to have met last 

night at Stony-Stratford, but that he could not reach so far.  

'Well, sir,' says the parson, 'every ill turn has some good in it.  

The disappointment, sir,' says he to my gentleman, 'was yours, 

and the good turn is mine, for if you had met at Stony-Stratford 

I had not had the honour to marry you.  Landlord, have you a 

Common Prayer Book?'



I started as if I had been frightened.  'Lord, sir,' says I, 'what 

do you mean?  What, to marry in an inn, and at night too?'  

'Madam,' says the minister, 'if you will have it be in the church, 

you shall; but I assure you your marriage will be as firm here 

as in the church; we are not tied by the canons to marry nowhere 

but in the church; and if you will have it in the church, it 

will be a public as a county fair; and as for the time of day, it 

does not at all weigh in this case; our princes are married in 

their chambers, and at eight or ten o'clock at night.'



I was a great while before I could be persuaded, and pretended 

not to be willing at all to be married but in the church.  But 

it was all grimace; so I seemed at last to be prevailed on, and 

my landlord and his wife and daughter were called up.  My 

landlord was father and clerk and all together, and we were 

married, and very merry we were; though I confess the  

self-reproaches which I had upon me before lay close to me, 

and extorted every now and then a deep sigh from me, which 

my bridegroom took notice of, and endeavoured to encourage 

me, thinking, poor man, that I had some little hesitations at 

the step I had taken so hastily.



We enjoyed ourselves that evening completely, and yet all was 

kept so private in the inn that not a servant in the house knew 

of it, for my landlady and her daughter waited on me, and 

would not let any of the maids come upstairs, except while we 

were at supper.  My landlady's daughter I called my bridesmaid; 

and sending for a shopkeeper the next morning, I gave the young 

woman a good suit of knots, as good as the town would afford, 

and finding it was a lace-making town, I gave her mother a 

piece of bone-lace for a head.



One reason that my landlord was so close was, that he was 

unwilling the minister of the parish should hear of it; but for 

all that somebody heard of it, so at that we had the bells set 

a-ringing the next morning early, and the music, such as the 

town would afford, under our window; but my landlord 

brazened it out, that we were married before we came thither, 

only that, being his former guests, we would have our 

wedding-supper at his house.



We could not find in our hearts to stir the next day; for, in 

short, having been disturbed by the bells in the morning, and 

having perhaps not slept overmuch before, we were so sleepy 

afterwards that we lay in bed till almost twelve o'clock.



I begged my landlady that we might not have any more music 

in the town, nor ringing of bells, and she managed it so well 

that we were very quiet; but an odd passage interrupted all my 

mirth for a good while.  The great room of the house looked 

into the street, and my new spouse being belowstairs, I had 

walked to the end of the room; and it being a pleasant, warm 

day, I had opened the window, and was standing at it for some 

air, when I saw three gentlemen come by on horseback and go 

into an inn just against us.



It was not to be concealed, nor was it so doubtful as to leave 

me any room to question it, but the second of the three was 

my Lancashire husband.  I was frightened to death; I never 

was in such a consternation in my life; I though I should have 

sunk into the ground; my blood ran chill in my veins, and I 

trembled as if I had been in a cold fit of ague.  I say, there 

was no room to question the truth of it; I knew his clothes, I 

knew his horse, and I knew his face.



The first sensible reflect I made was, that my husband was 

not by to see my disorder, and that I was very glad of it.  The 

gentlemen had not been long in the house but they came to 

the window of their room, as is usual; but my window was 

shut, you may be sure.  However, I could not keep from 

peeping at them, and there I saw him again, heard him call out 

to one of the servants of the house for something he wanted, 

and received all the terrifying confirmations of its being the 

same person that were possible to be had.



My next concern was to know, if possible, what was his business 

there; but that was impossible.  Sometimes my imagination 

formed an idea of one frightful thing, sometimes of another; 

sometime I thought he had discovered me, and was come to 

upbraid me with ingratitude and breach of honour; and every 

moment I fancied he was coming up the stairs to insult me; and 

innumerable fancies came into my head of what was never in 

his head, nor ever could be, unless the devil had revealed it to 

him.



I remained in this fright nearly two hours, and scarce ever kept 

my eye from the window or door of the inn where they were.  

At last, hearing a great clatter in the passage of their inn, I ran 

to the window, and, to my great satisfaction, saw them all three 

go out again and travel on westward.  Had they gone towards 

London, I should have been still in a fright, lest I should meet 

him on the road again, and that he should know me; but he 

went the contrary way, and so I was eased of that disorder.



We resolved to be going the next day, but about six o'clock 

at night we were alarmed with a great uproar in the street, and 

people riding as if they had been out of their wits; and what 

was it but a hue-and-cry after three highwaymen that had 

robbed two coaches and some other travellers near Dunstable 

Hill, and notice had, it seems, been given that they had been 

seen at Brickhill at such a house, meaning the house where 

those gentlemen had been.



The house was immediately beset and searched, but there were 

witnesses enough that the gentlemen had been gone over three 

hours.  The crowd having gathered about, we had the news 

presently; and I was heartily concerned now another way.  I 

presently told the people of the house, that I durst to say those 

were not the persons, for that I knew one of the gentlemen to 

be a very honest person, and of a good estate in Lancashire.



The constable who came with the hue-and-cry was immediately 

informed of this, and came over to me to be satisfied from my 

own mouth, and I assured him that I saw the three gentlemen 

as I was at the window; that I saw them afterwards at the 

windows of the room they dined in; that I saw them afterwards 

take horse, and I could assure him I knew one of them to be 

such a man, that he was a gentleman of a very good estate, and 

an undoubted character in Lancashire, from whence I was just 

now upon my journey.



The assurance with which I delivered this gave the mob gentry 

a check, and gave the constable such satisfaction, that he  

immediately sounded a retreat, told his people these were not 

the men, but that he had an account they were very honest 

gentlemen; and so they went all back again.  What the truth of 

the matter was I knew not, but certain it was that the coaches 

were robbed at Dunstable Hill, and #560 in money taken; 

besides, some of the lace merchants that always travel that way 

had been visited too.  As to the three gentlemen, that remains 

to be explained hereafter.



Well, this alarm stopped us another day, though my spouse 

was for travelling, and told me that it was always safest travelling 

after a robbery, for that the thieves were sure to be gone far 

enough off when they had alarmed the country; but I was afraid 

and uneasy, and indeed principally lest my old acquaintance 

should be upon the road still, and should chance to see me.



I never lived four pleasanter days together in my life.  I was a 

mere bride all this while, and my new spouse strove to make 

me entirely easy in everything.  Oh could this state of life have 

continued, how had all my past troubles been forgot, and my 

future sorrows avoided!  But I had a past life of a most wretched 

kind to account for, some if it in this world as well as in another. 



We came away the fifth day; and my landlord, because he saw 

me uneasy, mounted himself, his son, and three honest country 

fellows with good firearms, and, without telling us of it, 

followed the coach, and would see us safe into Dunstable.  We 

could do no less than treat them very handsomely at Dunstable, 

which cost my spouse about ten or twelve shillings, and 

something he gave the men for their time too, but my landlord 

would take nothing for himself.



This was the most happy contrivance for me that could have 

fallen out; for had I come to London unmarried, I must either 

have come to him for the first night's entertainment, or have 

discovered to him that I had not one acquaintance in the whole 

city of London that could receive a poor bridge for the first 

night's lodging with her spouse.  But now, being an old married 

woman, I made no scruple of going directly home with him, 

and there I took possession at once of a house well furnished, 

and a husband in very good circumstances, so that I had a  

prospect of a very happy life, if I knew how to manage it; and 

I had leisure to consider of the real value of the life I was likely 

to live.  How different it was to be from the loose ungoverned 

part I had acted before, and how much happier a life of virtue 

and sobriety is, than that which we call a life of pleasure.



Oh had this particular scene of life lasted, or had I learned 

from that time I enjoyed it, to have tasted the true sweetness 

of it, and had I not fallen into that poverty which is the sure 

bane of virtue, how happy had I been, not only here, but perhaps 

for ever!  for while I lived thus, I was really a penitent for all 

my life past.  I looked back on it with abhorrence, and might 

truly be said to hate myself for it.  I often reflected how my 

lover at the Bath, struck at the hand of God, repented and 

abandoned me, and refused to see me any more, though he 

loved me to an extreme; but I, prompted by that worst of 

devils, poverty, returned to the vile practice, and made the 

advantage of what they call a handsome face to be the relief 

to my necessities, and beauty be a pimp to vice.



Now I seemed landed in a safe harbour, after the stormy voyage 

of life past was at an end, and I began to be thankful for my 

deliverance.  I sat many an hour by myself, and wept over the 

remembrance of past follies, and the dreadful extravagances 

of a wicked life, and sometimes I flattered myself that I had 

sincerely repented.



But there are temptations which it is not in the power of human 

nature to resist, and few know what would be their case if 

driven to the same exigencies.  As covetousness is the root of 

all evil, so poverty is, I believe, the worst of all snares.  But I 

waive that discourse till I come to an experiment.



I live with this husband with the utmost tranquillity; he was a 

quiet, sensible, sober man; virtuous, modest, sincere, and in 

his business diligent and just.  His business was in a narrow 

compass, and his income sufficient to a plentiful way of living 

in the ordinary way.  I do not say to keep an equipage, and 

make a figure, as the world calls it, nor did I expect it, or desire 

it; for as I abhorred the levity and extravagance of my former 

life, so I chose now to live retired, frugal, and within ourselves.  

I kept no company, made no visits; minded my family, and 

obliged my husband; and this kind of life became a pleasure to me.



We lived in an uninterrupted course of ease and content for 

five years, when a sudden blow from an almost invisible hand 

blasted all my happiness, and turned me out into the world in 

a condition the reverse of all that had been before it.



My husband having trusted one of his fellow-clerks with a sum 

of money, too much for our fortunes to bear the loss of, the 

clerk failed, and the loss fell very heavy on my husband, yet it 

was not so great neither but that, if he had had spirit and courage 

to have looked his misfortunes in the face, his credit was so 

good that, as I told him, he would easily recover it; for to sink 

under trouble is to double the weight, and he that will die in it, 

shall die in it.



It was in vain to speak comfortably to him; the wound had 

sunk too deep; it was a stab that touched the vitals; he grew 

melancholy and disconsolate, and from thence lethargic, and 

died.  I foresaw the blow, and was extremely oppressed in my 

mind, for I saw evidently that if he died I was undone.



I had had two children by him and no more, for, to tell the 

truth, it began to be time for me to leave bearing children, for 

I was now eight-and-forty, and I suppose if he had lived I 

should have had no more.



I was now left in a dismal and disconsolate case indeed, and 

in several things worse than ever.  First, it was past the 

flourishing time with me when I might expect to be courted 

for a mistress; that agreeable part had declined some time, and 

the ruins only appeared of what had been; and that which was 

worse than all this, that I was the most dejected, disconsolate 

creature alive.  I that had encouraged my husband, and 

endeavoured to support his spirits under his trouble, could not 

support my own; I wanted that spirit in trouble which I told 

him was so necessary to him for bearing the burthen.



But my case was indeed deplorable, for I was left perfectly 

friendless and helpless, and the loss my husband had sustained 

had reduced his circumstances so low, that though indeed I 

was not in debt, yet I could easily foresee that what was left 

would not support me long; that while it wasted daily for 

subsistence, I had not way to increase it one shilling, so that 

it would be soon all spent, and then I saw nothing before me 

but the utmost distress; and this represented itself so lively to 

my thoughts, that it seemed as if it was come, before it was 

really very near; also my very apprehensions doubled the misery, 

for I fancied every sixpence that I paid for a loaf of bread was 

the last that I had in the world, and that to-morrow I was to 

fast, and be starved to death.



In this distress I had no assistant, no friend to comfort or 

advise me; I sat and cried and tormented myself night and day, 

wringing my hands, and sometimes raving like a distracted 

woman; and indeed I have often wondered it had not affected 

my reason, for I had the vapours to such a degree, that my 

understanding was sometimes quite lost in fancies and 

imaginations.



I lived two years in this dismal condition, wasting that little I 

had, weeping continually over my dismal circumstances, and, 

as it were, only bleeding to death, without the least hope or 

prospect of help from God or man; and now I had cried too 

long, and so often, that tears were, as I might say, exhausted, 

and I began to be desperate, for I grew poor apace.



For a little relief I had put off my house and took lodgings; 

and as I was reducing my living, so I sold off most of my goods, 

which put a little money in my pocket, and I lived near a year 

upon that, spending very sparingly, an eking things out to the 

utmost; but still when I looked before me, my very heart would 

sink within me at the inevitable approach of misery and want.  

Oh let none read this part without seriously reflecting on the 

circumstances of a desolate state, and how they would grapple 

with mere want of friends and want of bread; it will certainly 

make them think not of sparing what they have only, but of 

looking up to heaven for support, and of the wise man's prayer, 

'Give me not poverty, lest I steal.'



Let them remember that a time of distress is a time of dreadful 

temptation, and all the strength to resist is taken away;  poverty 

presses, the soul is made desperate by distress, and what can 

be done?  It was one evening, when being brought, as I may 

say, to the last gasp, I think I may truly say I was distracted 

and raving, when prompted by I know not what spirit, and, as 

it were, doing I did not know what or why, I dressed me (for 

I had still pretty good clothes) and went out.  I am very sure 

I had no manner of design in my head when I went out; I neither 

knew nor considered where to go, or on what business; but as 

the devil carried me out and laid his bait for me, so he brought 

me, to be sure, to the place, for I knew not whither I was going 

or what I did.



Wandering thus about, I knew not whither, I passed by an 

apothecary's shop in Leadenhall Street, when I saw lie on a 

stool just before the counter a little bundle wrapped in a white 

cloth; beyond it stood a maid-servant with her back to it, 

looking towards the top of the shop, where the apothecary's 

apprentice, as I suppose, was standing upon the counter, with 

his back also to the door, and a candle in his hand, looking 

and reaching up to the upper shelf for something he wanted, 

so that both were engaged mighty earnestly, and nobody else 

in the shop.



This was the bait; and the devil, who I said laid the snare, as 

readily prompted me as if he had spoke, for I remember, and 

shall never forget it, 'twas like a voice spoken to me over my 

shoulder, 'Take the bundle; be quick; do it this moment.'  It 

was no sooner said but I stepped into the shop, and with my 

back to the wench, as if I had stood up for a cart that was 

going by, I put my hand behind me and took the bundle, and 

went off with it, the maid or the fellow not perceiving me, or 

any one else.



It is impossible to express the horror of my soul al the while 

I did it.  When I went away I had no heart to run, or scarce to 

mend my pace.  I crossed the street indeed, and went down 

the first turning I came to, and I think it was a street that went 

through into Fenchurch Street.  From thence I crossed and 

turned through so many ways an turnings, that I could never 

tell which way it was, not where I went; for I felt not the 

ground I stepped on, and the farther I was out of danger, the 

faster I went, till, tired and out of breath, I was forced to sit 

down on a little bench at a door, and then I began to recover, 

and found I was got into Thames Street, near Billingsgate.  I 

rested me a little and went on; my blood was all in a fire; my 

heart beat as if I was in a sudden fright.  In short, I was under 

such a surprise that I still knew not wither I was going, or 

what to do.



After I had tired myself thus with walking a long way about, 

and so eagerly, I began to consider and make home to my 

lodging, where I came about nine o'clock at night. 



When the bundle was made up for, or on what occasion laid 

where I found it, I knew not, but when I came to open it I 

found there was a suit of childbed-linen in it, very good and 

almost new, the lace very fine; there was a silver porringer of 

a pint, a small silver mug and six spoons, with some other 

linen, a good smock, and three silk handkerchiefs, and in the 

mug, wrapped up in a paper, 18s. 6d. in money.



All the while I was opening these things I was under such 

dreadful impressions of fear, and I such terror of mind, though 

I was perfectly safe, that I cannot express the manner of it.  I 

sat me down, and cried most vehemently.  'Lord,' said I, 'what 

am I now? a thief!  Why, I shall be take next time, and be 

carried to Newgate and be tried for my life!'  And with that I 

cried again a long time, and I am sure, as poor as I was, if I 

had durst for fear, I would certainly have carried the things 

back again; but that went off after a while.  Well, I went to 

bed for that night, but slept little; the horror of the fact was 

upon my mind, and I knew not what I said or did all night, 

and all the next day.  Then I was impatient to hear some news 

of the loss; and would fain know how it was, whether they 

were a poor body's goods, or a rich.  'Perhaps,' said I, 'it 

may be some poor widow like me, that had packed up these 

goods to go and sell them for a little bread for herself and a 

poor child, and are now starving and breaking their hearts for 

want of that little they would have fetched.'  And this thought 

tormented me worse than all the rest, for three or four days' 

time.



But my own distresses silenced all these reflections, and the 

prospect of my own starving, which grew every day more 

frightful to me, hardened my heart by degrees.  It was then 

particularly heavy upon my mind, that I had been reformed, 

and had, as I hoped, repented of all my past wickedness; that 

I had lived a sober, grave, retired life for several years, but now 

I should be driven by the dreadful necessity of my circumstances 

to the gates of destruction, soul and body; and two or three 

times I fell upon my knees, praying to God, as well as I could, 

for deliverance; but I cannot but say, my prayers had no hope 

in them.  I knew not what to do; it was all fear without, and 

dark within; and I reflected on my past life as not sincerely 

repented of, that Heaven was now beginning to punish me on 

this side the grave, and would make me as miserable as I had 

been wicked.



Had I gone on here I had perhaps been a true penitent; but I 

had an evil counsellor within, and he was continually prompting 

me to relieve myself by the worst means; so one evening he 

tempted me again, by the same wicked impulse that had said 

'Take that bundle,' to go out again and seek for what might 

happen.



I went out now by daylight, and wandered about I knew not 

whither, and in search of I knew not what, when the devil put 

a snare in my way of a dreadful nature indeed, and such a one 

as I have never had before or since.  Going through Aldersgate 

Street, there was a pretty little child who had been at a dancing-

school, and was going home, all alone; and my prompter, like 

a true devil, set me upon this innocent creature.  I talked to it, 

and it prattled to me again, and I took it by the hand and led 

it along till I came to a paved alley that goes into Bartholomew 

Close, and I led it in there.  The child said that was not its way 

home.  I said, 'Yes, my dear, it is; I'll show you the way home.'  

The child had a little necklace on of gold beads, and I had my 

eye upon that, and in the dark of the alley I stooped, pretending 

to mend the child's clog that was loose, and took off her 

necklace, and the child never felt it, and so led the child on 

again.  Here, I say, the devil put me upon killing the child in 

the dark alley, that it might not cry, but the very thought 

frighted me so that I was ready to drop down; but I turned the 

child about and bade it go back again, for that was not its way 

home.  The child said, so she would, and I went through into 

Bartholomew Close, and then turned round to another passage 

that goes into St. John Street; then, crossing into Smithfield, 

went down Chick Lane and into Field Lane to Holborn Bridge, 

when, mixing with the crowd of people usually passing there, 

it was not possible to have been found out; and thus I 

enterprised my second sally into the world.  



The thoughts of this booty put out all the thoughts of the first, 

and the reflections I had made wore quickly off; poverty, as I 

have said, hardened my heart, and my own necessities made 

me regardless of anything.  The last affair left no great concern 

upon me, for as I did the poor child no harm, I only said to 

myself, I had given the parents a just reproof for their negligence 

in leaving the poor little lamb to come home by itself, and it 

would teach them to take more care of it another time.



This string of beads was worth about twelve or fourteen pounds.  

I suppose it might have been formerly the mother's, for it was 

too big for the child's wear, but that perhaps the vanity of the 

mother, to have her child look fine at the dancing-school, had 

made her let the child wear it; and no doubt the child had a 

maid sent to take care of it, but she, careless jade, was taken 

up perhaps with some fellow that had met her by the way, 

and so the poor baby wandered till it fell into my hands.



However, I did the child no harm; I did not so much as fright 

it, for I had a great many tender thoughts about me yet, and 

did nothing but what, as I may say, mere necessity drove me to.



I had a great many adventures after this, but I was young in 

the business, and did not know how to manage, otherwise than 

as the devil put things into my head; and indeed he was seldom 

backward to me.  One adventure I had which was very lucky 

to me.  I was going through Lombard Street in the duck of the  

evening, just by the end of Three King court, when on a sudden 

comes a fellow running by me as swift as lightning, and throws 

a bundle that was in his hand, just behind me, as I stood up 

against the corner of the house at the turning into the alley.  

Just as he threw it in he said, 'God bless you, mistress, let it 

lie there a little,' and away he runs swift as the wind.  After 

him comes two more, and immediately a young fellow without 

his hat, crying 'Stop thief!' and after him two or three more.  

They pursued the two last fellows so close, that they were 

forced to drop what they had got, and one of them was taken 

into the bargain, and other got off free.



I stood stock-still all this while, till they came back, dragging 

the poor fellow they had taken, and lugging the things they 

had found, extremely well satisfied that they had recovered 

the booty and taken the thief; and thus they passed by me, for 

I looked only like one who stood up while the crowd was gone.



Once or twice I asked what was the matter, but the people 

neglected answering me, and I was not very importunate; but 

after the crowd was wholly past, I took my opportunity to turn 

about and take up what was behind me and walk away.  This, 

indeed, I did with less disturbance than I had done formerly, 

for these things I did not steal, but they were stolen to my hand.  

I got safe to my lodgings with this cargo, which was a piece of 

fine black lustring silk, and a piece of velvet; the latter was but 

part of a piece of about eleven yards; the former was a whole 

piece of near fifty yards.  It seems it was a mercer's shop that 

they had rifled.  I say rifled, because the goods were so 

considerable that they had lost; for the goods that they 

recovered were pretty many, and I believe came to about six 

or seven several pieces of silk.  How they came to get so many 

I could not tell; but as I had only robbed the thief, I made no 

scruple at taking these goods, and being very glad of them too.



I had pretty good luck thus far, and I made several adventures 

more, though with but small purchase, yet with good success, 

but I went in daily dread that some mischief would befall me, 

and that I should certainly come to be hanged at last.  The 

impression this made on me was too strong to be slighted, and 

it kept me from making attempts that, for ought I knew, might 

have been very safely performed; but one thing I cannot omit, 

which was a bait to me many a day.  I walked frequently out 

into the villages round the town, to see if nothing would fall 

in my way there; and going by a house near Stepney, I saw on 

the window-board two rings, one a small diamond ring, and 

the other a gold ring, to be sure laid there by some thoughtless 

lady, that had more money then forecast, perhaps only till 

she washed her hands.



I walked several times by the window to observe if I could 

see whether there was anybody in the room or no, and I could 

see nobody, but still I was not sure.  It came presently into my 

thoughts to rap at the glass, as if I wanted to speak with 

somebody, and if anybody was there they would be sure to 

come to the window, and then I would tell them to remove 

those rings, for that I had seen two suspicious fellows take 

notice of them.  This was a ready thought.  I rapped once or 

twice and nobody came, when, seeing the coast clear, I thrust 

hard against the square of the glass, and broke it with very 

little noise, and took  out the two rings, and walked away with 

them very safe.  The diamond ring was worth about #3, and 

the other about 9s.



I was now at a loss for a market for my goods, and especially 

for my two pieces of silk.  I was very loth to dispose of them 

for a trifle, as the poor unhappy thieves in general do, who, 

after they have ventured their lives for perhaps a thing of value, 

are fain to sell it for a song when they have done; but I was 

resolved I would not do thus, whatever shift I made, unless I 

was driven to the last extremity.  However, I did not well know 

what course to take.  At last I resolved to go to my old governess, 

and acquaint myself with her again.  I had punctually supplied 

the #5 a year to her for my little boy as long as I was able, but 

at last was obliged to put a stop to it.  However, I had written 

a letter to her, wherein I had told her that my circumstances 

were reduced very low; that I had lost my husband, and that I 

was not able to do it any longer, and so begged that the poor 

child might not suffer too much for its mother's misfortunes.



I now made her a visit, and I found that she drove something 

of the old trade still, but that she was not in such flourishing 

circumstances as before; for she had been sued by a certain 

gentleman who had had his daughter stolen from him, and who, 

it seems, she had helped to convey away; and it was very 

narrowly that she escaped the gallows.  The expense also had 

ravaged her, and she was become very poor; her house was 

but meanly furnished, and she was not in such repute for her 

practice as before; however, she stood upon her legs, as they 

say, and a she was a stirring, bustling woman, and had some 

stock left, she was turned pawnbroker, and lived pretty well.



She received me very civilly, and with her usual obliging 

manner told me she would not have the less respect for me for 

my being reduced; that she had taken care my boy was very 

well looked after, though I could not pay for him, and that the 

woman that had him was easy, so that I needed not to trouble 

myself about him till I might be better able to do it effectually.



I told her that I had not much money left, but that I had some 

things that were money's worth, if she could tell me how I 

might turn them into money.  She asked me what it was I had.  

I pulled out the string of gold beads, and told her it was one 

of my husband's presents to me; then I showed her the two 

parcels of silk, which I told her I had from Ireland, and brought 

up to town with me; and the little diamond ring.  As to the 

small parcel of plate and spoons, I had found means to dispose 

of them myself before; and as for the childbed-linen I had, she 

offered me to take it herself, believing it to have been my own.  

She told me that she was turned pawnbroker, and that she 

would sell those things for me as pawn to her; and so she sent 

presently for proper agents that bought them, being in her 

hands, without any scruple, and gave good prices too.



I now began to think this necessary woman might help me a 

little in my low condition to some business, for I would gladly 

have turned my hand to any honest employment if I could have 

got it.  But here she was deficient; honest business did not 

come within her reach.  If I had been younger, perhaps she 

might have helped me to a spark, but my thoughts were off 

that kind of livelihood, as being quite out of the way after fifty, 

which was my case, and so I told her.



She invited me at last to come, and be at her house till I could 

find something to do, and it should cost me very little, and this 

I gladly accepted of.  And now living a little easier, I entered 

into some measures to have my little son by my last husband 

taken off; and this she made easy too, reserving a payment 

only of #5 a year, if I could pay it.  This was such a help to me, 

that for a good while I left off the wicked trade that I had so 

newlytaken up; and gladly I would have got my bread by the 

help of my needle if I could have got work, but that was very 

hard to do for one that had no manner of acquaintance in the 

world.



However, at last I got some quilting work for ladies' beds, 

petticoats, and the like; and this I liked very well, and worked 

very hard, and with this I began to live; but the diligent devil, 

who resolved I should continue in his service, continually 

prompted me to go out and take a walk, that is to say, to see 

if anything would offer in the old way.



One evening I blindly obeyed his summons, and fetched a long 

circuit through the streets, but met with no purchase, and came 

home very weary and empty; but not content with that, I went 

out the next evening too, when going by an alehouse I saw the 

door of a little room open, next the very street, and on the table 

a silver tankard, things much in use in public-houses at that 

time.  It seems some company had been drinking there, and the 

careless boys had forgot to take it away.



I went into the box frankly, and setting the silver tankard on 

the corner of the bench, I sat down before it, and knocked with 

my foot; a boy came presently, and I bade him fetch me a pint 

of warm ale, for it was cold weather; the boy ran, and I heard 

him go down the cellar to draw the ale.  While the boy was 

gone, another boy came into the room, and cried, 'D' ye call?'  

I spoke with a melancholy air, and said, 'No, child; the boy is 

gone for a pint of ale for me.'



While I sat here, I heard the woman in the bar say, 'Are they 

all gone in the five?' which was the box I sat in, and the boy 

said, 'Yes.'  'Who fetched the tankard away?' says the woman.  

'I did,' says another boy; 'that's it,' pointing, it seems, to 

another tankard, which he had fetched from another box by 

mistake; or else it must be, that the rogue forgot that he had 

not brought it in, which certainly he had not.



I heard all this, much to my satisfaction, for I found plainly 

that the tankard was not missed, and yet they concluded it was 

fetched away; so I drank my ale, called to pay, and as I went 

away I said, 'Take care of your plate, child,' meaning a silver 

pint mug, which he brought me drink in.  The boy said, 'Yes, 

madam, very welcome,' and away I came.



I came home to my governess, and now I thought it was a 

time to try her, that if I might be put to the necessity of being 

exposed, she might offer me some assistance.  When I had 

been at home some time, and had an opportunity of talking to 

her, I told her I had a secret of the greatest consequence in the 

world to commit to her, if she had respect enough for me to 

keep it a secret.  She told me she had kept one of my secrets 

faithfully; why should I doubt her keeping another?  I told her 

the strangest thing in the world had befallen me, and that it 

had made a thief of me, even without any design, and so told 

her the whole story of the tankard.  'And have you brought it 

away with you, my dear?' says she.  'To be sure I have,' says 

I, and showed it her.  'But what shall I do now,' says I; 'must 

not carry it again?'



'Carry it again!' says she.  'Ay, if you are minded to be sent 

to Newgate for stealing it.'  'Why,' says I, 'they can't be so 

base to stop me, when I carry it to them again?'  'You don't 

know those sort of people, child,' says she; 'they'll not only 

carry you to Newgate, but hang you too, without any regard 

to the honesty of returning it; or bring in an account of all the 

other tankards they have lost, for you to pay for.'  'What must 

I do, then?' says I.  'Nay,' says she, 'as you have played the 

cunning part and stole it, you must e'en keep it; there's no 

going back now.  Besides, child,' says she, 'don't you want it 

more than they do?  I wish you could light of such a bargain 

once a week.'



This gave me a new notion of my governess, and that since 

she was turned pawnbroker, she had a sort of people about 

her that were none of the honest ones that I had met with 

there before.



I had not been long there but I discovered it more plainly than 

before, for every now and then I saw hilts of swords, spoons, 

forks, tankards, and all such kind of ware brought in, not to be 

pawned, but to be sold downright; and she bought everything 

that came without asking any questions, but had very good 

bargains, as I found by her discourse.



I found also that in following this trade she always melted 

down the plate she bought, that it might not be challenged; 

and she came to me and told me one morning that she was 

going to melt, and if I would, she would put my tankard in, 

that it might not be seen by anybody.  I told her, with all my 

heart; so she weighed it, and allowed me the full value in silver 

again; but I found she did not do the same to the rest of her 

customers.



Some time after this, as I was at work, and very melancholy, 

she begins to ask me what the matter was, as she was used to 

do.  I told her my heart was heavy; I had little work, and 

nothing to live on, and knew not what course to take.  She 

laughed, and told me I must go out again and try my fortune; 

it might be that I might meet with another piece of plate.  

'O mother!' says I, 'that is a trade I have no skill in, and if I 

should be taken I am undone at once.'  Says she, 'I could help 

you to a schoolmistress that shall make you as dexterous as 

herself.'  I trembled at  that proposal, for hitherto I had had 

no confederates, nor any acquaintance among that tribe.  But 

she conquered all my modesty, and all my fears; and in a little 

time, by the help of this confederate, I grew as impudent a 

thief, and as dexterous as ever Moll Cutpurse was, though, 

if fame does not belie her, not half so handsome.



The comrade she helped me to dealt in three sorts of craft, viz. 

shoplifting, stealing of shop-books and pocket-books, and 

taking off gold watches from the ladies' sides; and this last she 

did so dexterously that no woman ever arrived to the performance 

of that art so as to do it like her.  I liked the first and the last 

of these things very well, and I attended her some time in the 

practice, just as a deputy attends a midwife, without any pay.



At length she put me to practice.  She had shown me her art, 

and I had several times unhooked a watch from her own side 

with great dexterity.  At last she showed me a prize, and this 

was a young lady big with child, who had a charming watch.  

The thing was to be done as she came out of church.  She goes 

on one side of the lady, and pretends, just as she came to the 

steps, to fall, and fell against the lady with so much violence 

as put her into a great fright, and both cried out terribly.  In 

the very moment that she jostled the lady, I had hold of the 

watch, and holding it the right way, the start she gave drew 

the hook out, and she never felt it.  I made off immediately, 

and left my schoolmistress to come out of her pretended fright 

gradually, and the lady too; and presently the watch was missed.  

'Ay,' says my comrade, 'then it was those rogues that thrust 

me down, I warrant ye; I wonder the gentlewoman did not miss 

her watch before,then we might have taken them.'



She humoured the thing so well that nobody suspected her, 

and I was got home a full hour before her.  This was my first 

adventure in company.  The watch was indeed a very fine one, 

and had a great many trinkets about it, and my governess 

allowed us #20 for it, of which I had half.  And thus I was 

entered a complete thief, hardened to the pitch above all the 

reflections of conscience or modesty, and to a degree which 

I must acknowledge I never thought possible in me.



Thus the devil, who began, by the help of an irresistible poverty, 

to push me into this wickedness, brought me on to a height 

beyond the common rate, even when my necessities were not 

so great, or the prospect of my misery so terrifying; for I had 

now got into a little vein of work, and as I was not at a loss 

to handle my needle, it was very probable, as acquaintance 

came in, I might have got my bread honestly enough.



I must say, that if such a prospect of work had presented itself 

at first, when I began to feel the approach of my miserable 

circumstances--I say, had such a prospect of getting my bread 

by working presented itself then, I had never fallen into this 

wicked trade, or into such a wicked gang as I was now embarked 

with; but practice had hardened me, and I grew audacious to 

the last degree; and the more so because I had carried it on so 

long, and had never been taken; for, in a word, my new partner 

in wickedness and I went on together so long, without being 

ever detected, that we not only grew bold, but we grew rich, 

and we had at one time one-and-twenty gold watches in our 

hands. 



I remember that one day being a little more serious than 

ordinary, and finding I had so good a stock beforehand as I 

had, for I had near #200 in money for my share, it came 

strongly into my mind, no doubt from some kind spirit, if such 

there be, that at first poverty excited me, and my distresses 

drove me to these dreadful shifts; so seeing those distresses 

were now relieved, and I could also get something towards a 

maintenance by working, and had so good a bank to support 

me, why should I now not leave off, as they say, while I was 

well? that I could not expect to go always free; and if I was 

once surprised, and miscarried, I was undone.



This was doubtless the happy minute, when, if I had hearkened 

to the blessed hint, from whatsoever had it came, I had still a 

cast for an easy life.  But my fate was otherwise determined; 

the busy devil that so industriously drew me in had too fast 

hold of me to let me go back; but as poverty brought me into 

the mire, so avarice kept me in, till there was no going back.  

As to the  arguments which my reason dictated for persuading 

me to lay down, avarice stepped in and said, 'Go on, go on; 

you have had very good luck; go on till you have gotten four 

or five hundred pounds, and they you shall leave off, and then 

you may live easy without working at all.'



Thus I, that was once in the devil's clutches, was held fast 

there as with a charm, and had no power to go without the 

circle, till I was engulfed in labyrinths of trouble too great to 

get out at all.



However, these thoughts left some impression upon me, and 

made me act with some more caution than before, and more 

than my directors used for themselves.  My comrade, as I 

called her, but rather she should have been called my teacher,

with another of her scholars, was the first in the misfortune; 

for, happening to be upon the hunt for purchase, they made 

an attempt upon a linen-draper in Cheapside, but were snapped 

by a hawk's-eyed journeyman, and seized with two pieces of 

cambric, which were taken also upon them.



This was enough to lodge them both in Newgate, where they 

had the misfortune to have some of their former sins brought 

to remembrance.  Two other indictments being brought against 

them, and the facts being proved upon them, they were both 

condemned to die.  They both pleaded their bellies, and were 

both voted quick with child; though my tutoress was no more 

with child than I was.



I went frequently to see them, and condole with them, expecting 

that it would be my turn next; but the place gave me so much 

horror, reflecting that it was the place of my unhappy birth, 

and of my mother's misfortunes, and that I could not bear it, 

so I was forced to leave off going to see them.



And oh! could I have but taken warning by their disasters, I 

had been happy still, for I was yet free, and had nothing brought 

against me; but it could not be, my measure was not yet filled 

up.



My comrade, having the brand of an old offender, was executed; 

the young offender was spared, having obtained a reprieve, 

but lay starving a long while in prison, till at last she got her 

name into what they call a circuit pardon, and so came off.



This terrible example of my comrade frighted me heartily, and 

for a good while I made no excursions; but one night, in the 

neighbourhood of my governess's house, they cried "Fire.'  

My governess looked out, for we were all up, and cried 

immediately that such a gentlewoman's house was all of a light 

fire atop, and so indeed it was.  Here she gives me a job.  'Now, 

child,' says she, 'there is a rare opportunity, for the fire being 

so near that you may go to it before the street is blocked up 

with the crowd.'  She presently gave me my cue.  'Go, child,' 

says she, 'to the house, and run in and tell the lady, or anybody 

you see, that you come to help them, and that you came from 

such a gentlewoman (that is, one of her acquaintance farther 

up the street).'  She gave me the like cue to the next house, 

naming another name that was also an acquaintance of the 

gentlewoman of the house.



Away I went, and, coming to the house, I found them all in 

confusion, you may be sure.  I ran in, and finding one of the 

maids, 'Lord! sweetheart,' says I, 'how came this dismal 

accident?  Where is your mistress?  Any how does she do?  

Is she safe?  And where are the children?  I come from 

Madam ---- to help you.'  Away runs the maid.  'Madam, 

madam,' says she, screaming as loud as she could yell, 'here 

is a gentlewoman come from Madam ---- to help us.'  The 

poor woman, half out of her wits, with a bundle under her arm, 

an two little children, comes toward me.  'Lord! madam,' says 

I, 'let me carry the poor children to Madam ----,' she desires 

you to send them; she'll take care of the poor lambs;' and 

immediately I takes one of them out of her hand, and she lifts 

the other up into my arms.  'Ay, do, for God's sake,' says she, 

'carry them to her.  Oh! thank her for her kindness.'  'Have 

you anything else to secure, madam?' says I; 'she will take 

care of it.'  'Oh dear! ay,' says she, 'God bless her, and thank 

her. Take this bundle of plate and carry it to her too.  Oh, she 

is a good woman.  Oh Lord! we are utterly ruined, utterly 

undone!'  And away she runs from me out of her wits, and 

the maids after her; and away comes I with the two children 

and the bundle.



I was no sooner got into the street but I saw another woman 

come to me.  'Oh!' says she, 'mistress,' in a piteous tone, 'you 

will let fall the child.  Come, this is a sad time; let me help you'; 

and immediately lays hold of my bundle to carry it for me.  

'No,' says I; 'if you will help me, take the child by the hand, 

and lead it for me but to the upper end of the street; I'll go 

with you and satisfy you for your pains.'



She could not aviod going, after what I said; but the creature, 

in short, was one of the same business with me, and wanted 

nothing but the bundle; however, she went with me to the 

door, for she could not help it.  When we were come there I 

whispered her, 'Go, child,' said I, 'I understand your trade; 

you may meet with purchase enough.'



She understood me and walked off.  I thundered at the door 

with the children, and as the people were raised before by the 

noise of the fire, I was soon let in, and I said, 'Is madam 

awake?  Pray tell her Mrs. ---- desires the favour of her to 

take the two children in; poor lady, she will be undone, their 

house is all of a flame,'  They took the children in very civilly, 

pitied the family in distress, and away came I with my bundle.  

One of the maids asked me if  I was not to leave the bundle 

too.  I said, 'No, sweetheart, 'tis to go to another place; it 

does not belong to them.'



I was a great way out of the hurry now, and so I went on, 

clear of anybody's inquiry, and brought the bundle of plate, 

which was very considerable, straight home, and gave it to 

my old governess.  She told me she would not look into it, 

but bade me go out again to look for more.



She gave me the like cue to the gentlewoman of the next house 

to that which was on fire, and I did my endeavour to go, but 

by this time the alarm of fire was so great, and so many 

engines playing, and the street so thronged with people, that 

I could not get near the house whatever I would do; so I came 

back again to my governess's, and taking the bundle up into 

my chamber, I began to examine it.  It is with horror that I 

tell what a treasure I found there; 'tis enough to say, that 

besides most of the family plate, which was considerable, I 

found a gold chain, an old-fashioned thing, the locket of which 

was broken, so that I suppose it had not been used some years, 

but the gold was not the worse for that; also a little box of 

burying-rings, the lady's wedding-ring, and some broken bits 

of old lockets of gold, a gold watch, and a purse with about 

#24 value in old pieces of gold coin, and several other things 

of value.



This was the greatest and the worst prize that ever I was 

concerned in; for indeed, though, as I have said above, I was 

hardened now beyond the power of all reflection in other cases, 

yet it really touched me to the very soul when I looked into 

this treasure, to think of the poor disconsolate gentlewoman 

who had lost so much by the fire besides; and who would think, 

to be sure, that she had saved her plate and best things; how 

she would be surprised and afflicted when she should find that 

she had been deceived, and should find that the person that 

took her children and her goods, had not come, as was pretended, 

from the gentlewoman in the next street, but that the children 

had been put upon her without her own knowledge.



I say, I confess the inhumanity of this action moved me very 

much, and made me relent exceedingly, and tears stood in my 

eyes upon that subject; but with all my sense of its being cruel 

and inhuman, I could never find in my heart to make any 

restitution.  The reflection wore off, and I began quickly to 

forget the circumstances that attended the taking them.



Now was this all; for though by this job I was become 

considerably richer than before, yet the resolution I had 

formerly taken, of leaving off this horrid trade when I had 

gotten a little more, did not return, but I must still get farther, 

and more; and the avarice joined so with the success, that I 

had no more thought of coming to a timely alteration of life, 

though without it I could expect no safety, no tranquillity in 

the possession of what I had so wickedly gained; but a little 

more, and a little more, was the case still.



At length, yielding to the importunities of my crime, I cast off 

all remorse and repentance, and all the reflections on that head 

turned to no more than this, that I might perhaps come to have 

one booty more that might complete my desires; but though I 

certainly had that one booty, yet every hit looked towards 

another, and was so encouraging to me to go on with the trade, 

that I had no gust to the thought of laying it down.



In this condition, hardened by success, and resolving to go on, 

I fell into the snare in which I was appointed to meet with my 

last reward for this kind of life.  But even this was not yet, for 

I met with several successful adventures more in this way of 

being undone.



I remained still with my governess, who was for a while really 

concerned for the misfortune of my comrade that had been 

hanged, and who, it seems, knew enough of my governess to 

have sent her the same way, and which made her very uneasy; 

indeed, she was in a very great fright.



It is true that when she was gone, and had not opened mouth 

to tell what she knew, my governess was easy as to that point, 

and perhaps glad she was hanged, for it was in her power to 

have obtained a pardon at the expense of her friends; but on 

the other hand, the loss of her, and the sense of her kindness 

in not making her market of what she knew, moved my 

governess to mourn very sincerely for her.  I comforted her 

as well as I could, and she in return hardened me to merit 

more completely the same fate.



However, as I have said, it made me the more wary, and 

particularly I was very shy of shoplifting, especially among 

the mercers and drapers, who are a set of fellows that have 

their eyes very much about them.  I made a venture or two 

among the lace folks and the milliners, and particularly at one 

shop where I got notice of two young women who were newly 

set up, and had not been bred to the trade.  There I think I 

carried off a piece of bone-lace, worth six or seven pounds, 

and a paper of thread.  But this was but once; it was a trick 

that would not serve again.



It was always reckoned a safe job when we heard of a new 

shop, and especially when the people were such as were not 

bred to shops.  Such may depend upon it that they will be 

visited once or twice at their beginning, and they must be very 

sharp indeed if they can prevent it.



I made another adventure or two, but they were but trifles too, 

though sufficient to live on.  After this nothing considerable 

offering for a good while, I began to think that I must give 

over the trade in earnest; but my governess, who was not 

willing to lose me, and expected great things of me, brought 

me one day into company with a young woman and a fellow 

that went for her husband, though as it appeared afterwards, 

she was not his wife, but they were partners, it seems, in the 

trade they carried on, and partners in something else.  In short, 

they robbed together, lay together, were taken together, and 

at last were hanged together.



I came into a kind of league with these two by the help of my 

governess, and they carried me out into three or four adventures, 

where I rather saw them commit some coarse and unhandy 

robberies, in which nothing but a great stock of impudence 

on their side, and gross negligence on the people's side who 

were robbed, could have made them successful.  so I resolved 

from that time forward to be very cautious how I adventured 

upon anything with them; and indeed, when two or three 

unlucky projects were proposed by them, I declined the offer, 

and persuaded them against it.  One time they particularly 

proposed robbing a watchmaker of three gold watches, which 

they had eyed in the daytime, and found the place where he 

laid them.  One of them had so many keys of all kinds, that he 

made no question to open the place where the watchmaker 

had laid them; and so we made a kind of an appointment; but 

when I came to look narrowly into the thing, I found they 

proposed breaking open the house, and this, as a thing out of 

my way, I would not embark in, so they went without me.  

They did get into the house by main force, and broke up the 

locked place where the watches were, but found but one of 

the gold watches, and a silver one, which they took, and got 

out of the house again very clear.  But the family, being alarmed, 

cried out 'Thieves,' and the man was pursued and taken; the 

young woman had got off too, but unhappily was stopped at 

a distance, and the watches found upon her.  And thus I had 

a second escape, for they were convicted, and both hanged, 

being old offenders, though but young people.  As I said before 

that they robbed together and lay together, so now they hanged 

together, and there ended my new partnership.



I began now to be very wary, having so narrowly escaped a 

scouring, and having such an example before me; but I had a 

new tempter, who prompted me every day--I mean my governess; 

and now a prize presented, which as it came by her management, 

so she expected a good share of the booty.  There was a good 

quantity of Flanders lace lodged in a private house, where she 

had gotten intelligence of it, and Flanders lace being prohibited, 

it was a good booty to any custom-house officer that could 

come at it.  I had a full account from my governess, as well 

of the quantity as of the very place where it was concealed, 

and I went to a custom-house officer, and told him I had such 

a discovery to make to him of such a quantity of lace, if he 

would assure me that I should have my due share of the reward.  

This was so just an offer, that nothing could be fairer; so he 

agreed, and taking a constable and me with him, we beset the 

house.  As I told him I could go directly to the place, he left 

it to me; and the hole being very dark, I squeezed myself into 

it, with a candle in my hand, and so reached the pieces out to 

him, taking care as I gave him some so to secure as much about 

myself as I could conveniently dispose of.  There was near 

#300 worth of lace in the hole, and I secured about #50 worth 

of it to myself.  The people of the house were not owners of 

the lace, but a merchant who had entrusted them with it; so 

that they were not so surprised as I thought they would be.



I left the officer overjoyed with his prize, and fully satisfied 

with what he had got, and appointed to meet him at a house 

of his own directing, where I came after I had disposed of the 

cargo I had about me, of which he had not the least suspicion.  

When I came to him he began to capitulate with me, believing 

I did not understand the right I had to a share in the prize, and 

would fain have put me off with #20, but I let him know that I 

was not so ignorant as he supposed I was; and yet I was glad, 

too, that he offered to bring me to a certainty.



I asked #100, and he rose up to #30; I fell to #80, and he rose 

again to #40; in a word, he offered #50, and I consented, only 

demanding a piece of lace, which I though came to about #8 

or #9, as if it had been for my own wear, and he agreed to it.  

So I got #50 in money paid me that same night, and made an 

end of the bargain; nor did he ever know who I was, or where 

to inquire for me, so that if it had been discovered that part of 

the goods were embezzled, he could have made no challenge 

upon me for it.



I very punctually divided this spoil with my governess, and I 

passed with her from this time for a very dexterous manager 

in the nicest cases.  I found that this last was the best and 

easiest sort of work that was in my way, and I made it my 

business to inquire out prohibited goods, and after buying 

some, usually betrayed them, but none of these discoveries 

amounted to anything considerable, not like that I related just 

now; but I was willing to act safe, and was still cautious of 

running the great risks which I found others did, and in which 

they miscarried every day.



The next thing of moment was an attempt at a gentlewoman's 

good watch.  It happened in a crowd, at a meeting-house, 

where I was in very great danger of being taken.  I had full 

hold of her watch, but giving a great jostle, as if somebody 

had thrust me against her, and in the juncture giving the watch 

a fair pull, I found it would not come, so I let it go that moment, 

and cried out as if I had been killed, that somebody had trod 

upon my foot, and that there were certainly pickpockets there, 

for somebody or other had given a pull at my watch; for you 

are to observe that on these adventures we always went very 

well dressed, and I had very good clothes on, and a gold watch 

by my side, as like a lady as other fold.



I had no sooner said so, but the other gentlewoman cried out 

'A pickpocket' too, for somebody, she said, had tried to pull 

her watch away.



When I touched her watch I was close to her, but when I cried 

out I stopped as it were short, and the crowd bearing her 

forward a little, she made a noise too, but it was at some distance 

from me, so that she did not in the least suspect me; but when 

she cried out 'A pickpocket,' somebody cried, 'Ay, and here 

has been another! this gentlewoman has been attempted too.'



At that very instance, a little farther in the crowd, and very 

luckily too, they cried out 'A pickpocket,' again, and really 

seized a young fellow in the very act.  This, though unhappy 

for the wretch, was very opportunely for my case, though I 

had carried it off handsomely enough before; but now it was 

out of doubt, and all the loose part of the crowd ran that way, 

and the poor boy was delivered up to the rage of the street, 

which is a cruelty I need not describe, and which, however, 

they are always glad of, rather than to be sent to Newgate, 

where they lie often a long time, till they are almost perished, 

and sometimes they are hanged, and the best they can look for, 

if they are convicted, is to be transported.



This was a narrow escape to me, and I was so frighted that I 

ventured no more at gold watches a great while.  There was 

indeed a great many concurring circumstances in this adventure 

which assisted to my escape; but the chief was, that the woman 

whose watch I had pulled at was a fool; that is to say, she was 

ignorant of the nature of the attempt, which one would have 

thought she should not have been, seeing she was wise enough 

to fasten her watch so that it could not be slipped up.  But she 

was in such a fright that she had no thought about her proper 

for the discovery; for she, when she felt the pull, screamed out, 

and pushed herself forward, and put all the people about her into 

disorder, but said not a word of her watch, or of a pickpocket, 

for a least two minutes' time, which was time enough for me, 

and to spare.  For as I had cried out behind her, as I have said, 

and bore myself back in the crowd as she bore forward, there 

were several people, at least seven or eight, the throng being 

still moving on, that were got between me and her in that time, 

and then I crying out 'A pickpocket,' rather sooner than she, 

or at least as soon, she might as well be the person suspected 

as I, and the people were confused in their inquiry; whereas, 

had she with a presence of mind needful on such an occasion, 

as soon as she felt the pull, not screamed out as she did, but 

turned immediately round and seized the next body that was 

behind her, she had infallibly taken me.



This is a direction not of the kindest sort to the fraternity, but 

'tis certainly a key to the clue of a pickpocket's motions, and 

whoever can follow it will as certainly catch the thief as he 

will be sure to miss if he does not.



I had another adventure, which puts this matter out of doubt, 

and which may be an instruction for posterity in the case of a 

pickpocket.  My good old governess, to give a short touch at 

her history, though she had left off the trade, was, as I may say, 

born a pickpocket, and, as I understood afterwards, had run 

through all the several degrees of that art, and yet had never 

been taken but once, when she was so grossly detected, that 

she was convicted and ordered to be transported; but being a 

woman of a rare tongue, and withal having money in her pocket, 

she found means, the ship putting into Ireland for provisions, 

to get on shore there, where she lived and practised her old 

trade for some years; when falling into another sort of bad 

company, she turned midwife and procuress, and played a 

hundred pranks there, which she gave me a little history of in 

confidence between us as we grew more intimate; and it was 

to this wicked creature that I owed all the art and dexterity I 

arrived to, in which there were few that ever went beyond me, 

or that practised so long without any misfortune.



It was after those adventures in Ireland, and when she was 

pretty well known in that country, that she left Dublin and 

came over to England, where, the time of her transportation 

being not expired, she left her former trade, for fear of falling 

into bad hands again, for then she was sure to have gone to 

wreck.  Here she set up the same trade she had followed in 

Ireland, in which she soon, by her admirable management and 

good tongue, arrived to the height which I have already 

described, and indeed began to be rich, though her trade fell 

off again afterwards, as I have hinted before.



I mentioned thus much of the history of this woman here, the 

better to account for the concern she had in the wicked life I 

was now leading, into all the particulars of which she led me, 

as it were, by the hand, and gave me such directions, and I so 

well followed them, that I grew the greatest artist of my time 

and worked myself out of every danger with such dexterity, 

that when several more of my comrades ran themselves into 

Newgate presently, and by that time they had been half a year 

at the trade, I had now practised upwards of five years, and 

the people at Newgate did not so much as know me; they had 

heard much of me indeed, and often expected me there, but I 

always got off, though many times in the extremest danger.



One of the greatest dangers I was now in, was that I was too 

well known among the trade, and some of them, whose hatred 

was owing rather to envy than any injury I had done them, 

began to be angry that I should always escape when they were 

always catched and hurried to Newgate.  These were they that 

gave me the name of Moll Flanders; for it was no more of 

affinity with my real name or with any of the name I had ever 

gone by, than black is of kin to white, except that once, as 

before, I called myself Mrs. Flanders; when I sheltered myself 

in the Mint; but that these rogues never knew, nor could I ever 

learn how they came to give me the name, or what the occasion 

of it was.



I was soon informed that some of these who were gotten fast 

into Newgate had vowed to impeach me; and as I knew that 

two or three of them were but too able to do it, I was under 

a great concern about it, and kept within doors for a good 

while.  But my governess--whom I always made partner in my 

success, and who now played a sure game with me, for that 

she had a share of the gain and no share in the hazard--I say, 

my governess was something impatient of my leading such a 

useless, unprofitable life, as she called it; and she laid a new 

contrivance for my going abroad, and this was to dress me up 

in men's clothes, and so put me into a new kind of practice.



I was tall and personable, but a little too smooth-faced for a 

man; however, I seldom went abroad but in the night, it did 

well enough; but it was a long time before I could behave in 

my new clothes--I mean, as to my craft.  It was impossible to 

be so nimble, so ready, so dexterous at these things in a dress 

so contrary to nature; and I did everything clumsily, so I had 

neither the success nor the easiness of escape that I had before, 

and I resolved to leave it off; but that resolution was confirmed 

soon after by the following accident.



As my governess disguised me like a man, so she joined me 

with a man, a young fellow that was nimble enough at his 

business, and for about three weeks we did very well together.  

Our principal trade was watching shopkeepers' counters, and 

slipping off any kind of goods we could see carelessly laid 

anywhere, and we made several good bargains, as we called 

them, at this work.  And as we kept always together, so we 

grew very intimate, yet he never knew that I was not a man, 

nay, though I several times went home with him to his lodgings, 

according as our business directed, and four or five times lay 

with him all night.  But our design lay another way, and it was 

absolutely necessary to me to conceal my sex from him, as 

appeared afterwards.  The circumstances of our living, coming 

in late, and having such and such business to do as required 

that nobody should be trusted with the coming into our lodgings, 

were such as made it impossible to me to refuse lying with him, 

unless I would have owned my sex; and as it was, I effectually 

concealed myself.  But his ill, and my good fortune, soon put 

an end to this life, which I must own I was sick of too, on 

several other accounts.  We had made several prizes in this 

new way of business, but the last would be extraordinary.  

There was a shop in a certain street which had a warehouse 

behind it that looked into another street, the house making the 

corner of the turning.



Through the window of the warehouse we say, lying on the 

counter or showboard, which was just before it, five pieces of 

silks, besides other stuffs, and though it was almost dark, yet 

the people, being busy in the fore-shop with customers, had 

not had time to shut up those windows, or else had forgot it.



This the young fellow was so overjoyed with, that he could 

not restrain himself.  It lay all within his reach he said, and he 

swore violently to me that he would have it, if he broke down 

the house for it.  I dissuaded him a little, but saw there was no 

remedy; so he ran rashly upon it, slipped out a square of the 

sash window dexterously enough, and without noise, and got 

out four pieces of the silks, and came with them towards me, 

but was immediately pursued with a terrible clutter and noise.  

We were standing together indeed, but I had not taken any of 

the goods out of his hand, when I said to him hastily, 'You are 

undone, fly, for God's sake!'  He ran like lightning, and I too, 

but the pursuit was hotter after him because he had the goods, 

than after me.  He dropped two of the pieces, which stopped 

them a little, but the crowd increased and pursued us both.  

They took him soon after with the other two pieces upon him, 

and then the rest followed me.  I ran for it and got into my 

governess's house whither some quick-eyed people followed 

me to warmly as to fix me there.  They did not immediately 

knock, at the door, by which I got time to throw off my disguise 

and dress me in my own clothes; besides, when they came there, 

my governess, who had her tale ready, kept her door shut, and 

called out to them and told them there was no man come in 

there.  The people affirmed there did a man come in there, and 

swore they would break open the door.



My governess, not at all surprised, spoke calmly to them, told 

them they should very freely come and search her house, if 

they should bring a constable, and let in none but such as the 

constable would admit, for it was unreasonable to let in a whole 

crowd.  This they could not refuse, though they were a crowd.  

So a constable was fetched immediately, and she very freely 

opened the door; the constable kept the door, and the men he 

appointed searched the house, my governess going with them 

from room to room.  When she came to my room she called 

to me, and said aloud, 'Cousin, pray open the door; here's 

some gentlemen that must come and look into your room.'



I had a little girl with me, which was my governess's grandchild, 

as she called her; and I bade her open the door, and there sat 

I at work with a great litter of things about me, as if I had been 

at work all day, being myself quite undressed, with only 

night-clothes on my head, and a loose morning-gown wrapped 

about me.  My governess made a kind of excuse for their 

disturbing me, telling me partly the occasion of it, and that she 

had no remedy but to open the doors to them, and let them 

satisfy themselves, for all she could say to them would not 

satisfy them.  I sat still, and bid them search the room if they 

pleased, for if there was anybody in the house, I was sure they 

were not in my room; and as for the rest of the house, I had 

nothing to say to that, I did not understand what they looked for.



Everything looked so innocent and to honest about me, that 

they treated me civiller than I expected, but it was not till they 

had searched the room to a nicety, even under the bed, in the 

bed, and everywhere else where it was possible anything could 

be hid.  When they had done this, and could find nothing, they 

asked my pardon for troubling me, and went down.



When they had thus searched the house from bottom to top, 

and then top to bottom, and could find nothing, they 

appeased the mob pretty well; but they carried my governess 

before the justice.  Two men swore that they saw the man 

whom they pursued go into her house.  My governess rattled 

and made a great noise that her house should be insulted, and 

that she should be used thus for nothing; that if a man did 

come in, he might go out again presently for aught she knew, 

for she was ready to make oath that no man had been within 

her doors all that day as she knew of (and that was very true 

indeed); that is might be indeed that as she was abovestairs, 

any fellow in a fright might find the door open and run in for 

shelter when he was pursued, but that she knew nothing of it; 

and if it had been so, he certainly went out again, perhaps at 

the other door, for she had another door into an alley, and so 

had made his escape and cheated them all.



This was indeed probable enough, and the justice satisfied 

himself with giving her an oath that she had not received or 

admitted any man into her house to conceal him, or protect or 

hide him from justice.  This oath she might justly take, and 

did so, and so she was dismissed.



It is easy to judge what a fright I was in upon this occasion, 

and it was impossible for my governess ever to bring me to 

dress in that disguise again; for, as I told her, I should certainly 

betray myself.



My poor partner in this mischief was now in a bad case, for 

he was carried away before my Lord Mayor, and by his worship 

committed to Newgate, and the people that took him were so 

willing, as well as able, to prosecute him, that they offered 

themselves to enter into recognisances to appear at the sessions 

and pursue the charge against him.



However, he got his indictment deferred, upon promise to 

discover his accomplices, and particularly the man that was 

concerned with him in his robbery; and he failed not to do his 

endeavour, for he gave in my name, whom he called Gabriel 

Spencer, which was the name I went by to him; and here 

appeared the wisdom of my concealing my name and sex from 

him, which, if he had ever known I had been undone.



He did all he could to discover this Gabriel Spencer; he 

described me, he discovered the place where he said I lodged, 

and, in a word, all the particulars that he could of my dwelling; 

but having concealed the main circumstances of my sex from 

him, I had a vast advantage, and he never could hear of me.  He 

brought two or three families into trouble by his endeavouring 

to find me out, but they knew nothing of me, any more than 

that I had a fellow with me that they had seen, but knew nothing 

of.  And as for my governess, though she was the means of his 

coming to me, yet it was done at second-hand, and he knew 

nothing of her.



This turned to his disadvantage; for having promised discoveries, 

but not being able to make it good, it was looked upon as 

trifling with the justice of the city, and he was the more fiercely 

pursued by the shopkeepers who took him.



I was, however, terribly uneasy all this while, and that I might 

be quite out of the way, I went away from my governess's 

for a while; but not knowing wither to wander, I took a 

maid-servant with me, and took the stage-coach to Dunstable, 

to my old landlord and landlady, where I had lived so 

handsomely with my Lancashire husband.  Here I told her a 

formal story, that I expected my husband every day from 

Ireland, and that I had sent a letter to him that I would meet 

him at Dunstable at her house, and that he would certainly 

land, if the wind was fair, in a few days, so that I was come to 

spend a few days with them till he should come, for he was 

either come post, or in the West Chester coach, I knew not 

which; but whichsoever it was, he would be sure to come to 

that house to meet me.



My landlady was mighty glad to see me, and my landlord made 

such a stir with me, that if I had been a princess I could not 

have been better used, and here I might have been welcome 

a month or two if I had thought fit.



But my business was of another nature.  I was very uneasy 

(though so well disguised that it was scarce possible to detect 

me) lest this fellow should somehow or other find me out; and 

though he could not charge me with this robbery, having 

persuaded him not to venture, and having also done nothing 

in it myself but run away, yet he might have charged me with 

other things, and have bought his own life at the expense of 

mine.



This filled me with horrible apprehensions.  I had no recourse, 

no friend, no confidante but my old governess, and I knew no 

remedy but to put my life in her hands, and so I did, for I let 

her know where to send to me, and had several letters from 

her while I stayed here.  Some of them almost scared me out 

my wits but at last she sent me the joyful news that he was 

hanged, which was the best news to me that I had heard a 

great while.



I had stayed here five weeks, and lived very comfortably indeed 

(the secret anxiety of my mind excepted); but when I received 

this letter I looked pleasantly again, an told my landlady that 

I had received a letter from my spouse in Ireland, that I had 

the good news of his being very well, but had the bad news 

that his business would not permit him to come away so soon 

as he expected, and so I was like to go back again without him.



My landlady complimented me upon the good news however, 

that I had heard he was well.  'For I have observed, madam,' 

says she, 'you hadn't been so pleasant as you used to be; you 

have been over head and ears in care for him, I dare say,' says 

the good woman; ''tis easy to be seen there's an alteration in 

you for the better,' says she.  'Well, I am sorry the esquire 

can't come yet,' says my landlord; 'I should have been heartily 

glad to have seen him.  But I hope, when you have certain 

news of his coming, you'll take a step hither again, madam,' 

says he; 'you shall be very welcome whenever you please to 

come.;



With all these fine compliments we parted, and I came merry 

enough to London, and found my governess as well pleased 

as I was.  And now she told me she would never recommend 

any partner to me again, for she always found, she said, that 

I had the best luck when I ventured by myself.  And so indeed 

I had, for I was seldom in any danger when I was by myself, 

or if I was, I got out of it with more dexterity than when I was 

entangled with the dull measures of other people, who had 

perhaps less forecast, and were more rash and impatient than 

I; for though I had as much courage to venture as any of them, 

yet I used more caution before I undertook a thing, and had 

more presence of mind when I was to bring myself off.



I have often wondered even at my own hardiness another 

way, that when all my companions were surprised and fell so 

suddenly into the hand of justice, and that I so narrowly escaped, 

yet I could not all this while enter into one serious resolution 

to leave off this trade, and especially considering that I was 

now very far from being poor; that the temptation of necessity, 

which is generally the introduction of all such wickedness, was 

now removed; for I had near #500 by me in ready money, on 

which I might have lived very well, if I had thought fit to have 

retired; but I say, I had not so much as the least inclination to 

leave off; no, not so much as I had before when I had but #200 

beforehand, and when I had no such frightful examples before 

my eyes as these were.  From hence 'tis evident to me, that 

when once we are hardened in crime, no fear can affect us, 

no example give us any warning.



I had indeed one comrade whose fate went very near me for 

a good while, though I wore it off too in time.  That case was 

indeed very unhappy.  I had made a prize of a piece of very 

good damask in a mercer's shop, and went clear off myself, 

but had conveyed the piece to this companion of mine when 

we went out of the shop, and she went one way and I went 

another.  We had not been long out of the shop but the mercer 

missed his piece of stuff, and sent his messengers, one one 

way and one another, and they presently seized her that had 

the piece, with the damask upon her.  As for me, I had very 

luckily stepped into a house where there was a lace chamber, 

up one pair of stairs, and had the satisfaction, or the terror 

indeed, of looking out of the window upon the noise they 

made, and seeing the poor creature dragged away in triumph 

to the justice, who immediately committed her to Newgate.



I was careful to attempt nothing in the lace chamber, but 

tumbled their goods pretty much to spend time; then bought 

a few yards of edging and paid for it, and came away very 

sad-hearted indeed for the poor woman, who was in tribulation 

for what I only had stolen.



Here again my old caution stood me in good stead; namely, 

that though I often robbed with these people, yet I never let 

them know who I was, or where I lodged, nor could they ever 

find out my lodging, though they often endeavoured to watch 

me to it.  They all knew me by the name of Moll Flanders, 

though even some of them rather believed I was she than knew 

me to be so.  My name was public among them indeed, but 

how to find me out they knew not, nor so much as how to 

guess at my quarters, whether they were at the east end of the 

town or the west; and this wariness was my safety upon all 

these occasions.



I kept close a great while upon the occasion of this woman's 

disaster.  I knew that if I should do anything that should 

miscarry, and should be carried to prison, she would be there 

and ready to witness against me, and perhaps save her life at 

my expense.  I considered that I began to be very well known 

by name at the Old Bailey, though they did not know my face, 

and that if I should fall into their hands, I should be treated as 

an old offender; and for this reason I was resolved to see what 

this poor creature's fate should be before I stirred abroad, 

though several times in her distress I conveyed money to her 

for her relief.



At length she came to her trial.  She pleaded she did not steal 

the thing, but that one Mrs. Flanders, as she heard her called 

(for she did not know her), gave the bundle to her after they 

came out of the shop, and bade her carry it home to her lodging.  

They asked her where this Mrs. Flanders was, but she could 

not produce her, neither could she give the least account of 

me; and the mercer's men swearing positively that she was in 

the shop when the goods were stolen, that they immediately 

missed them, and pursued her, and found them upon her, 

thereupon the jury brought her in guilty; but the Court, 

considering that she was really not the person that stole the 

goods, an inferior assistant, and that it was very possible she 

could not find out this Mrs. Flanders, meaning me, though it 

would save her life, which indeed was true--I say, considering 

all this, they allowed her to be transported, which was the 

utmost favour she could obtain, only that the Court told her 

that if she could in the meantime produce the said Mrs. Flanders, 

they would intercede for her pardon; that is to say, if she could 

find me out, and hand me, she should not be transported.  This 

I took care to make impossible to her, and so she was shipped 

off in pursuance of her sentence a little while after.



I must repeat it again, that the fate of this poor woman troubled 

me exceedingly, and I began to be very pensive, knowing that 

I was really the instrument of her disaster; but the preservation 

of my own life, which was so evidently in danger, took off all 

my tenderness; and seeing that she was not put to death, I was 

very easy at her transportation, because she was then out of 

the way of doing me any mischief, whatever should happen.



The disaster of this woman was some months before that of 

the last-recited story, and was indeed partly occasion of my 

governess proposing to dress me up in men's clothes, that I 

might go about unobserved, as indeed I did; but I was soon 

tired of that disguise, as I have said, for indeed it exposed me 

to too many difficulties.



I was now easy as to all fear of witnesses against me, for all 

those that had either been concerned with me, or that knew 

me by the name of Moll Flanders, were either hanged or 

transported; and if I should have had the misfortune to be 

taken, I might call myself anything else, as well as Moll Flanders, 

and no old sins could be placed into my account; so I began 

to run a-tick again with the more freedom, and several 

successful adventures I made, though not such as I had made 

before.



We had at that time another fire happened not a great way off 

from the place where my governess lived, and I made an attempt 

there, as before, but as I was not soon enough before the crowd 

of people came in, and could not get to the house I aimed at, 

instead of a prize, I got a mischief, which had almost put a period

 to my life and all my wicked doings together; for the fire being 

very furious, and the people in a great fright in removing their 

goods, and throwing them out of window, a wench from out 

of a window threw a feather-bed just upon me.  It is true, the 

bed being soft, it broke no bones; but as the weight was great, 

and made greater by the fall, it beat me down, and laid me 

dead for a while.  Nor did the people concern themselves much 

to deliver me from it, or to recover me at all; but I lay like one 

dead and neglected a good while, till somebody going to 

remove the bed out of the way, helped me up.  It was indeed 

a wonder the people in the house had not thrown other goods 

out after it, and which might have fallen upon it, and then I 

had been inevitably killed; but I was reserved for further 

afflictions.



This accident, however, spoiled my market for that time, and 

I came home to my governess very much hurt and bruised, 

and frighted to the last degree, and it was a good while before 

she could set me upon my feet again.



It was now a merry time of the year, and Bartholomew Fair 

was begun.  I had never made any walks that way, nor was 

the common part of the fair of much advantage to me; but I 

took a turn this year into the cloisters, and among the rest I 

fell into one of the raffling shops.  It was a thing of no great 

consequence to me, nor did I expect to make much of it; but 

there came a gentleman extremely well dressed and very rich, 

and as 'tis frequent to talk to everybody in those shops, he 

singled me out, and was very particular with me.  First he told 

me he would put in for me to raffle, and did so; and some 

small matter coming to his lot, he presented it to me (I think 

it was a feather muff); then he continued to keep talking to 

me with a more than common appearance of respect, but still 

very civil, and much like a gentleman.



He held me in talk so long, till at last he drew me out of the 

raffling place to the shop-door, and then to a walk in the cloister, 

still talking of a thousand things cursorily without anything to 

the purpose.  At last he told me that, without compliment, he 

was charmed with my company, and asked me if I durst trust 

myself in a coach with him; he told me he was a man of honour, 

and would not offer anything to me unbecoming him as such.  

I seemed to decline it a while, but suffered myself to be 

importuned a little, and then yielded.



I was at a loss in my thoughts to conclude at first what this 

gentleman designed; but I found afterwards he had had some 

drink in his head, and that he was not very unwilling to have 

some more.  He carried me in the coach to the Spring Garden, 

at Knightsbridge, where we walked in the gardens, and he 

treated me very handsomely; but I found he drank very freely.  

He pressed me also to drink, but I decline it.



Hitherto he kept his word with me, and offered me nothing 

amiss.  We came away in the coach again, and he brought me 

into the streets, and by this time it was near ten o'clock at 

night, and he stopped the coach at a house where, it seems, 

he was acquainted, and where they made no scruple to show 

us upstairs into a room with a bed in it.  At first I seemed to 

be unwilling to go up, but after a few words I yielded to that 

too, being willing to see the end of it, and in hope to make 

something of it at last.  As for the bed, etc., I was not much 

concerned about that part.



Here he began to be a little freer with me than he had promised; 

and I by little and little yielded to everything, so that, in a word, 

he did what he pleased with me; I need say no more.  All this 

while he drank freely too, and about one in the morning we 

went into the coach again.  The air and the shaking of the 

coach made the drink he had get more up in his head than it 

was before, and he grew uneasy in the coach, and was for 

acting over again what he had been doing before; but as I 

thought my game now secure, I resisted him, and brought him 

to be a little still, which had not lasted five minutes but he fell 

fast asleep.



I took this opportunity to search him to a nicety.  I took a 

gold watch, with a silk purse of gold, his fine full-bottom 

periwig and silver-fringed gloves, his sword and fine snuff-box, 

and gently opening the coach door, stood ready to jump out 

while the coach was going on; but the coach stopped in the 

narrow street beyond Temple Bar to let another coach pass, 

I got softly out, fastened the door again, and gave my gentleman 

and the coach the slip both together, and never heard more 

of them.



This was an adventure indeed unlooked for, and perfectly 

undesigned by me; though I was not so past the merry part 

of life, as to forget how to behave, when a fop so blinded by 

his appetite should not know an old woman from a young.  I 

did not indeed look so old as I was by ten or twelve years; yet 

I was not a young wench of seventeen, and it was easy enough 

to be distinguished.  There is nothing so absurd, so surfeiting, 

so ridiculous, as a man heated by wine in his head, and wicked 

gust in his inclination together; he is in the possession of two 

devils at once, and can no more govern himself by his reason 

than a mill can grind without water; his vice tramples upon all 

that was in him that had any good in it, if any such thing there 

was; nay, his very sense is blinded by its own rage, and he acts 

absurdities even in his views; such a drinking more, when he 

is drunk already; picking up a common woman, without regard 

to what she is or who she is, whether sound or rotten, clean 

or unclean, whether ugly or handsome, whether old or young, 

and so blinded as not really to distinguish.  Such a man is worse 

than a lunatic; prompted by his vicious, corrupted head, he no 

more knows what he is doing than this wretch of mine knew 

when I picked his pocket of his watch and his purse of gold.



These are the men of whom Solomon says, 'They go like an 

ox to the slaughter, till a dart strikes through their liver'; an 

admirable description, by the way, of the foul disease, which 

is a poisonous deadly contagion mingling with the blood, 

whose centre or foundation is in the liver; from whence, by 

the swift circulation of the whole mass, that dreadful nauseous 

plague strikes immediately through his liver, and his spirits are 

infected, his vitals stabbed through as with a dart.



It is true this poor unguarded wretch was in no danger from 

me, though I was greatly apprehensive at first of what danger 

I might be in from him; but he was really to be pitied in one 

respect, that he seemed to be a good sort of man in himself; 

a gentleman that had no harm in his design; a man of sense, 

and of a fine behaviour, a comely handsome person, a sober 

solid countenance, a charming beautiful face, and everything 

that could be agreeable; only had unhappily had some drink 

the night before, had not been in bed, as he told me when we 

were together; was hot, and his blood fired with wine, and in 

that condition his reason, as it were asleep, had given him up.



As for me, my business was his money, and what I could make 

of him; and after that, if I could have found out any way to 

have done it, I would have sent him safe home to his house 

and to his family, for 'twas ten to one but he had an honest, 

virtuous wife and innocent children, that were anxious for his 

safety, and would have been glad to have gotten him home, 

and have taken care of him till he was restored to himself.  

And then with what shame and regret would he look back 

upon himself! how would he reproach himself with associating 

himself with a whore!  picked up in the worst of all holes, the 

cloister, among the dirt and filth of all the town! how would 

he be trembling for fear he had got the pox, for fear a dart had 

struck through his liver, and hate himself every time he looked 

back upon the madness and brutality of his debauch! how 

would he, if he had any principles of honour, as I verily believe 

he had--I say, how would he abhor the thought of giving any 

ill distemper, if he had it, as for aught he knew he might, to 

his modest and virtuous wife, and thereby sowing the contagion 

in the life-blood of his prosterity.



Would such gentlemen but consider the contemptible thoughts 

which the very women they are concerned with, in such cases 

as these, have of them, it would be a surfeit to them.  As I 

said above, they value not the pleasure, they are raised by no 

inclination to the man, the passive jade thinks of no pleasure 

but the money; and when he is, as it were, drunk in the 

ecstasies of his wicked pleasure, her hands are in his pockets 

searching for what she can find there, and of which he can no 

more be sensible in the moment of his folly that he can forethink 

of it when he goes about it.



I knew a woman that was so dexterous with a fellow, who 

indeed deserved no better usage, that while he was busy with 

her another way, conveyed his purse with twenty guineas in 

it out of his fob-pocket, where he had put it for fear of her, 

and put another purse with gilded counters in it into the room 

of it.  After he had done, he says to her, 'Now han't you picked 

my pocket?'  She jested with him, and told him she supposed 

he had not much to lose; he put his hand to his fob, and with 

his fingers felt that his purse was there, which fully satisfied 

him, and so she brought off his money.  And this was a trade 

with her; she kept a sham gold watch, that is, a watch of silver 

gilt, and a purse of counters in her pocket to be ready on all 

such occasions, and I doubt not practiced it with success.



I came home with this last booty to my governess, and really 

when I told her the story, it so affected her that she was hardly 

able to forbear tears, to know how such a gentleman ran a 

daily risk of being undone every time a glass of wine got into 

his head. 



But as to the purchase I got, and how entirely I stripped him, 

she told me it please her wonderfully.  'Nay child,' says she, 

'the usage may, for aught I know, do more to reform him than 

all the sermons that ever he will hear in his life.'  And if the 

remainder of the story be true, so it did.



I found the next day she was wonderful inquisitive about this 

gentleman; the description I had given her of him, his dress, 

his person, his face, everything concurred to make her think 

of a gentleman whose character she knew, and family too.  

She mused a while, and I going still on with the particulars, 

she starts up; says she, 'I'll lay #100 I know the gentleman.'



'I am sorry you do,' says I, 'for I would not have him exposed 

on any account in the world; he has had injury enough already 

by me, and I would not be instrumental to do him any more.'  

'No, no,' says she, 'I will do him no injury, I assure you, but 

you may let me satisfy my curiosity a little, for if it is he, I 

warrant you I find it out.'  I was a little startled at that, and 

told her, with an apparent concern in my face, that by the same 

rule he might find me out, and then I was undone.  She returned 

warmly, 'Why, do you think I will betray you, child?  No, no,' 

says she, 'not for all he is worth in the world.  I have kept your 

counsel in worse things than these; sure you may trust me in 

this.'  So I said no more at that time.



She laid her scheme another way, and without acquainting me 

of it, but she was resolved to find it out if possible.  So she 

goes to a certain friend of hers who was acquainted in the 

family that she guessed at, and told her friend she had some 

extraordinary business with such a gentleman (who, by the 

way, was no less than a baronet, and of a very good family), 

and that she knew not how to come at him without somebody 

to introduce her.  Her friend promised her very readily to do 

it, and accordingly goes to the house to see if the gentleman 

was in town.




End of Part 6
