



Part 5



I waived the discourse and began to talk of my business; but 

I found he could not have done with it, so I let him alone, and 

he went on to tell me all the circumstances of his case, too 

long to relate here; particularly, that having been out of England 

some time before he came to the post he was in, she had had 

two children in the meantime by an officer of the army; and 

that when he came to England and, upon her submission, took 

her again, and maintained her very well, yet she ran away from 

him with a linen-draper's apprentice, robbed him of what she 

could come at, and continued to live from him still.  'So that, 

madam,' says he, 'she is a whore not by necessity, which is 

the common bait of your sex, but by inclination, and for the 

sake of the vice.'



Well, I pitied him, and wished him well rid of her, and still 

would have talked of my business, but it would not do.  At 

last he looks steadily at me.  'Look you, madam,' says he, 

'you came to ask advice of me, and I will serve you as faithfully 

as if you were my own sister; but I must turn the tables, since 

you oblige me to do it, and are so friendly to me, and I think 

I must ask advice of you.  Tell me, what must a poor abused 

fellow do with a whore?  What can I do to do myself justice 

upon her?'



'Alas! sir,' says I, ''tis a case too nice for me to advise in, but 

it seems she has run away from you, so you are rid of her 

fairly; what can you desire more?'  'Ay, she is gone indeed,' 

said he, 'but I am not clear of her for all that.'



'That's true,' says I; 'she may indeed run you into debt, but 

the law has furnished you with methods to prevent that also; 

you may cry her down, as they call it.'



'No, no,' says he, 'that is not the case neither; I have taken 

care of all that; 'tis not that part that I speak of, but I would 

be rid of her so that I might marry again.'



'Well, sir,' says I, 'then you must divorce her.  If you can 

prove what you say, you may certainly get that done, and then, 

I suppose, you are free.'



'That's very tedious and expensive,' says he.



'Why,' says I, 'if you can get any woman you like to take your 

word, I suppose your wife would not dispute the liberty with 

you that she takes herself.'



'Ay,' says he, 'but 'twould be hard to bring an honest woman 

to do that; and for the other sort,' says he, 'I have had enough 

of her to meddle with any more whores.'



It occurred to me presently, 'I would have taken your word 

with all my heart, if you had but asked me the question'; 

but that was to myself.  To him I replied, 'Why, you shut the 

door against any honest woman accepting you, for you condemn 

all that should venture upon you at once, and conclude, that 

really a woman that takes you now can't be honest.' 



'Why,' says he, 'I wish you would satisfy me that an honest 

woman would take me; I'd venture it'; and then turns short 

upon me, 'Will you take me, madam?'



'That's not a fair question,' says I, 'after what you have said;

however, lest you should think I wait only for a recantation 

of it, I shall answer you plainly, No, not I; my business is of 

another kind with you, and I did not expect you would have 

turned my serious application to you, in my own distracted 

case, into a comedy.'



'Why, madam,' says he, 'my case is as distracted as yours can 

be, and I stand in as much need of advice as you do, for I think 

if I have not relief somewhere, I shall be made myself, and I 

know not what course to take, I protest to you.'



'Why, sir,' says I, ''tis easy to give advice in your case, much 

easier than it is in mine.'  'Speak then,' says he, 'I beg of you, 

for now you encourage me.'



'Why,' says I, 'if your case is so plain as you say it is, you may 

be legally divorced, and then you may find honest women 

enough to ask the question of fairly; the sex is not so scarce 

that you can want a wife.'



'Well, then,' said he, 'I am in earnest; I'll take your advice; 

but shall I ask you one question seriously beforehand?' 



'Any question,' said I, 'but that you did before.'



'No, that answer will not do,' said he, 'for, in short, that is the

question I shall ask.'



'You may ask what questions you please, but you have my 

answer to that already,' said I.  'Besides, sir,' said I, 'can you 

think so ill of me as that I would give any answer to such a 

question beforehand?  Can any woman alive believe you in 

earnest, or think you design anything but to banter her?'



'Well, well,' says he, 'I do not banter you, I am in earnest; 

consider of it.'



'But, sir,' says I, a little gravely, 'I came to you about my own 

business; I beg of you to let me know, what you will advise me 

to do?'



'I will be prepared,' says he, 'against you come again.'



'Nay,' says I, 'you have forbid my coming any more.'



'Why so?' said he, and looked a little surprised.



'Because,' said I, 'you can't expect I should visit you on the 

account you talk of.'



'Well,' says he, 'you shall promise me to come again, however, 

and I will not say any more of it till I have gotten the divorce, 

but I desire you will prepare to be better conditioned when 

that's done, for you shall be the woman, or I will not be 

divorced at all; why, I owe it to your unlooked-for kindness, 

if it were to nothing else, but I have other reasons too.'



He could not have said anything in the world that pleased me 

better; however, I knew that the way to secure him was to 

stand off while the thing was so remote, as it appeared to be, 

and that it was time enough to accept of it when he was able 

to perform it; so I said very respectfully to him, it was time 

enough to consider of these things when he was in a condition 

to talk of them; in the meantime, I told him, I was going a 

great way from him, and he would find objects enough to 

please him better.  We broke off here for the present, and he 

made me promise him to come again the next day, for his 

resolutions upon my own business, which after some pressing 

I did; though had he seen farther into me, I wanted no pressing 

on that account.



I came the next evening, accordingly, and brought my maid 

with me, to let him see that I kept a maid, but I sent her away 

as soon as I was gone in.  He would have had me let the maid 

have stayed, but I would not, but ordered her aloud to come 

for me again about nine o'clock.  But he forbade that, and told 

me he would see me safe home, which, by the way, I was not 

very well please with, supposing he might do that to know 

where I lived and inquire into my character and circumstances.  

However, I ventured that, for all that the people there or 

thereabout knew of me, was to my advantage; and all the 

character he had of me, after he had inquired, was that I was 

a woman of fortune, and that I was a very modest, sober body; 

which, whether true or not in the main, yet you may see how 

necessary it is for all women who expect anything in the world, 

to preserve the character of their virtue, even when perhaps 

they may have sacrificed the thing itself.



I found, and was not a little please with it, that he had provided 

a supper for me.  I found also he lived very handsomely, and 

had a house very handsomely furnished; all of which I was  

rejoiced at indeed, for I looked upon it as all my own.



We had now a second conference upon the subject-matter of 

the last conference.  He laid his business very home indeed; he 

protested his affection to me, and indeed I had no room to 

doubt it; he declared that it began from the first moment I 

talked with him, and long before I had mentioned leaving my 

effects with him.  ''Tis no matter when it began,' thought I; 

'if it will but hold, 'twill be well enough.'  He then told me 

how much the offer I had made of trusting him with my effects, 

and leaving them to him, had enraged him.  'So I intended it 

should,' thought I, 'but then I thought you had been a single 

man too.'  After we had supped, I observed he pressed me 

very hard to drink two or three glasses of wine, which, however, 

I declined, but drank one glass or two.  He then told me he 

had a proposal to make to me, which I should promise him I 

would not take ill if I should not grant it.  I told him I hoped 

he would make no dishonourable proposal to me, especially 

in his own house, and that if it was such, I desired he would 

not propose it, that I might not be obliged to offer any 

resentment to him that did not become the respect I professed 

for him, and the trust I had placed in him in coming to his house; 

and begged of him he would give me leave to go away, and 

accordingly began to put on my gloves and prepare to be gone, 

though at the same time I no more intended it than he intended 

to let me.



Well, he importuned me not to talk of going; he assured me 

he had no dishonourable thing in his thoughts about me, and 

was very far from offering anything to me that was dishonourable, 

and if I thought so, he would choose to say no more of it.



That part I did not relish at all.  I told him I was ready to hear 

anything that he had to say, depending that he would say nothing 

unworthy of himself, or unfit for me to hear.  Upon this, he 

told me his proposal was this:  that I would marry him, though 

he had not yet obtained the divorce from the whore his wife; 

and to satisfy me that he meant honourably, he would promise 

not to desire me to live with him, or go to bed with him till the 

divorce was obtained.  My heart said yet to this offer at first 

word, but it was necessary to play the hypocrite a little more 

with him; so I seemed to decline the motion with some warmth, 

and besides a little condemning the thing as unfair, told him 

that such a proposal could be of no signification, but to entangle 

us both in great difficulties; for if he should not at last obtain 

the divorce, yet we could not dissolve the marriage, neither 

could we proceed in it; so that if he was disappointed in the 

divorce, I left him to consider what a condition we should 

both be in.



In short, I carried on the argument against this so far, that I 

convinced him it was not a proposal that had any sense in it.  

Well, then he went from it to another, and that was, that I 

would sign and seal a contract with him, conditioning to marry 

him as soon as the divorce was obtained, and to be void if he 

could not obtain it.



I told him such a thing was more rational than the other; but 

as this was the first time that ever I could imagine him weak 

enough to be in earnest in this affair, I did not use to say Yes 

at first asking; I would consider of it.



I played with this lover as an angler does with a trout.  I found 

I had him fast on the hook, so I jested with his new proposal, 

and put him off.  I told him he knew little of me, and bade him 

inquire about me; I let him also go home with me to my lodging, 

though I would not ask him to go in, for I told him it was not 

decent.



In short, I ventured to avoid signing a contract of marriage, 

and the reason why I did it was because the lady that had 

invited me so earnestly to go with her into Lancashire insisted 

so positively upon it, and promised me such great fortunes, 

and such fine things there, that I was tempted to go and try.  

'Perhaps,' said I, 'I may mend myself very much'; and then I 

made no scruple in my thoughts of quitting my honest citizen, 

whom I was not so much in love with as not to leave him for 

a richer.



In a word, I avoided a contract; but told him I would go into 

the north, that he should know where to write to me by the 

consequence of the business I had entrusted with him; that I 

would give him a sufficient pledge of my respect for him, for 

I would leave almost all I had in the world in his hands; and 

I would thus far give him my word, that as soon as he had 

sued out a divorce from his first wife, he would send me an 

account of it, I would come up to London, and that then we 

would talk seriously of the matter.



It was a base design I went with, that I must confess, though 

I was invited thither with a design much worse than mine was, 

as the sequel will discover.  Well, I went with my friend, as I 

called her, into Lancashire.  All the way we went she caressed 

me with the utmost appearance of a sincere, undissembled 

affection; treated me, except my coach-hire, all the way; and 

her brother brought a gentleman's coach to Warrington to 

receive us, and we were carried from thence to Liverpool with 

as much ceremony as I could desire.  We were also entertained 

at a merchant's house in Liverpool three or four days very 

handsomely; I forbear to tell his name, because of what followed.  

Then she told me she would carry me to an uncle's house of 

hers, where we should be nobly entertained.  She did so; her 

uncle, as she called him, sent a coach and four horses for us, 

and we were carried near forty miles I know not whither.



We came, however, to a gentleman's seat, where was a 

numerous family, a large park, extraordinary company indeed, 

and where she was called cousin.  I told her if she had resolved 

to bring me into such company as this, she should have let me 

have prepared myself, and have furnished myself with better 

clothes.  The ladies took notice of that, and told me very 

genteelly they did not value people in their country so much 

by their clothes as they did in London; that their cousin had 

fully informed them of my quality, and that I did not want 

clothes to set me off; in short, they entertained me, not like 

what I was, but like what they thought I had been, namely, a 

widow lady of a great fortune.



The first discovery I made here was, that the family were all 

Roman Catholics, and the cousin too, whom I called my friend; 

however, I must say that nobody in the world could behave 

better to me, and I had all the civility shown me that I could 

have had if I had been of their opinion.  The truth is, I had not 

so much principle of any kind as to be nice in point of religion, 

and I presently learned to speak favourably of the Romish 

Church; particularly, I told them I saw little but the prejudice 

of education in all the difference that were among Christians 

about religion, and if it had so happened that my father had 

been a Roman Catholic, I doubted not but I should have been 

as well pleased with their religion as my own.



This obliged them in the highest degree, and as I was besieged 

day and night with good company and pleasant discourse, so 

I had two or three old ladies that lay at me upon the subject 

of religion too.  I was so complaisant, that though I would not 

completely engage, yet I made no scruple to be present at their 

mass, and to conform to all their gestures as they showed me 

the pattern, but I would not come too cheap; so that I only in 

the main encouraged them to expect that I would turn Roman 

Catholic, if I was instructed in the Catholic doctrine as they 

called it, and so the matter rested.



I stayed here about six weeks; and then my conductor led me 

back to a country village, about six miles from Liverpool, 

where her brother (as she called him) came to visit me in his 

own chariot, and in a very good figure, with two footmen in 

a good livery; and the next thing was to make love to me.  As 

it had happened to me, one would think I could not have been 

cheated, and indeed I thought so myself, having a safe card at 

home, which I resolved not to quit unless I could mend myself 

very much.  However, in all appearance this brother was a 

match worth my listening to, and the least his estate was valued 

at was #1000 a year, but the sister said it was worth #1500 a 

year, and  lay most of it in Ireland.



I that was a great fortune, and passed for such, was above 

being asked how much my estate was; and my false friend 

taking it upon a foolish hearsay, had raised it from #500 to 

#5000, and by the time she came into the country she called 

it  #15,000.  The Irishman, for such I understood him to be, 

was stark mad at this bait; in short, he courted me, made me 

presents, and ran in debt like a madman for the expenses of 

his equipage and of  his courtship.  He had, to give him his due, 

the appearance of an extraordinary fine gentleman; he was tall, 

well-shaped, and had an extraordinary address; talked as 

naturally of his park and his stables, of his horses, his gamekeepers, 

his woods, his tenants, and his servants, as if we had been in 

the mansion-house, and I had seen them all about me.



He never so much as asked me about my fortune or estate, but 

assured me that when we came to Dublin he would jointure 

me in #600 a year good land; and that we could enter into a  

deed of settlement or contract here for the performance of it.



This was such language indeed as I had not been used to, and 

I was here beaten out of all my measures; I had a she-devil in 

my bosom, every hour telling me how great her brother lived.  

One time she would come for my orders, how I would have 

my coaches painted, and how lined; and another time what 

clothes my page should wear; in short, my eyes were dazzled.  

I had now lost my power of saying No, and, to cut the story 

short, I consented to be married; but to be the more private, 

we were carried farther into the country, and married by a 

Romish clergyman, who I was assured would marry us as 

effectually as a Church of England parson.



I cannot say but I had some reflections in this affair upon the 

dishonourable forsaking my faithful citizen, who loved me 

sincerely, and who was endeavouring to quit himself of a  

scandalous whore by whom he had been indeed barbarously 

used, and promised himself infinite happiness in his new choice; 

which choice was now giving up herself to another in a manner 

almost as scandalous as hers could be.



But the glittering shoe of a great estate, and of fine things, 

which the deceived creature that was now my deceiver 

represented every hour to my imagination, hurried me away, 

and gave me no time to think of London, or of anything there, 

much less of the obligation I had to a person of infinitely more 

real merit than what was now before me.



But the thing was done; I was now in the arms of my new 

spouse, who appeared still the same as before; great even to 

magnificence, and nothing less than #1000 a year could support 

the ordinary equipage he appeared in.



After we had been married about a month, he began to talk 

of my going to West Chester in order to embark for Ireland.  

However, he did not hurry me, for we stayed near three weeks 

longer, and then he sent to Chester for a coach to meet us at 

the Black Rock, as they call it, over against Liverpool.  Thither 

we went in a fine boat they call a pinnace, with six oars; his 

servants, and horses, and baggage going in the ferry-boat.  

He made his excuse to me that he had no acquaintance in 

Chester, but he would go before and get some handsome 

apartment for me at a private house.  I asked him how long 

we should stay at Chester.  He said, not at all, any longer than 

one night or two, but he would immediately hire a coach to 

go to Holyhead.  Then I told him he should by no means give

 himself the trouble to get private lodgings for one night or 

two, for that Chester being a great place, I made no doubt but 

there would be very good inns and accommodation enough; 

so we lodged at an inn in the West Street, not far from the 

Cathedral; I forget what sign it was at.



Here my spouse, talking of my going to Ireland, asked me if 

I had no affairs to settle at London before we went off.  I 

told him No, not of any great consequence, but what might be 

done as well by letter from Dublin.  'Madam,' says he, very 

respectfully, 'I suppose the greatest part of your estate, which 

my sister tells me is most of it in money in the Bank of England, 

lies secure enough, but in case it required transferring, or any 

way altering its property, it might be necessary to go up to 

London and settle those things before we went over.'



I seemed to look strange at it, and told him I knew not what 

he meant; that I had no effects in the Bank of England that I 

knew of; and I hoped he could not say that I had ever told him 

I had.  No, he said, I had not told him so, but his sister had 

said the greatest part of my estate lay there.  'And I only 

mentioned it, me dear,' said he, 'that if there was any occasion 

to settle it, or order anything about it, we might not be obliged 

to the hazard and trouble of another voyage back again'; for 

he added, that he did not care to venture me too much upon 

the sea.



I was surprised at this talk, and began to consider very seriously 

what the meaning of it must be; and it presently occurred to me 

that my friend, who called him brother, had represented me in 

colours which were not my due; and I thought, since it was come 

to that pitch, that I would know the bottom of it before I went 

out of England, and before I should put myself into I knew not 

whose hands in a strange country.



Upon this I called his sister into my chamber the next morning, 

and letting her know the discourse her brother and I had 

been upon the evening before, I conjured her to tell me what 

she had said to him, and upon what foot it was that she had 

made this marriage.  She owned that she had told him that I 

was a great fortune, and said that she was told so at London. 

'Told so!' says I warmly; 'did I ever tell you so?'  No, she 

said, it was true I did not tell her so, but I had said several 

times that what I had was in my own disposal.  'I did so,' 

returned I very quickly and hastily, 'but I never told you I had 

anything called a fortune; no, not that I had #100, or the value 

of #100, in the world.  Any how did it consist with my being 

a fortune,; said I, 'that I should come here into the north of 

England with you, only upon the account of living cheap?'  

At these words, which I spoke warm and high, my husband, 

her brother (as she called him), came into the room, and I 

desired him to come and sit down, for I had something of 

moment to say before them both, which it was absolutely 

necessary he should hear.



He looked a little disturbed at the assurance with which I 

seemed to speak it, and came and sat down by me, having first 

shut the door; upon which I began, for I was very much provoked, 

and turning myself to him, 'I am afraid,' says I, 'my dear' (for 

I spoke with kindness on his side), 'that you have a very great 

abuse put upon you, and an injury done you never to be 

repaired in your marrying me, which, however, as I have had 

no hand in it, I desire I may be fairly acquitted of it, and that 

the blame may lie where it ought to lie, and nowhere else, for 

I wash my hands of every part of it.'



'What injury can be done me, my dear,' says he, 'in marrying 

you.  I hope it is to my honour and advantage every way.'  'I 

will soon explain it to you,' says I, 'and I fear you will have 

no reason to think yourself well used; but I will convince you, 

my dear,' says I again, 'that I have had no hand in it'; and there 

I stopped a while.



He looked now scared and wild, and began, I believe, to 

suspect what followed; however, looking towards me, and 

saying only, 'Go on,' he sat silent, as if to hear what I had 

more to say; so I went on.  'I asked you last night,' said I, 

speaking to him, 'if ever I made any boast to you of my estate, 

or ever told you I had any estate in the Bank of England or 

anywhere else, and you owned I had not, as is most true; and 

I desire you will tell me here, before your sister, if ever I gave 

you any reason from me to think so, or that ever we had any 

discourse about it'; and he owned again I had not, but said I 

had appeared always as a woman of fortune, and he depended 

on it that I was so, and hoped he was not deceived.  'I am not 

inquiring yet whether you have been deceived or not,' said I; 

'I fear you have, and I too; but I am clearing myself from the 

unjust charge of being concerned in deceiving you.



'I have been now asking your sister if ever I told her of any 

fortune or estate I had, or gave her any particulars of it; and 

she owns I never did.  Any pray, madam,' said I, turning myself 

to her, 'be so just to me, before your brother, to charge me, 

if you can, if ever I pretended to you that I had an estate; and 

why, if I had, should I come down into this country with you 

on purpose to spare that little I had, and live cheap?'  She 

could not deny one word, but said she had been told in London 

that I had a very great fortune, and that it lay in the Bank of 

England.



'And now, dear sir,' said I, turning myself to my new spouse 

again, 'be so just to me as to tell me who has abused both you 

and me so much as to make you believe I was a fortune, and 

prompt you to court me to this marriage?'  He could not speak 

a word, but pointed to her; and, after some more pause, flew 

out in the most furious passion that ever I saw a man in my 

life, cursing her, and calling her all the whores and hard names 

he could think of; and that she had ruined him, declaring that 

she had told him I had #15,000, and that she was to have #500 

of him for procuring this match for him.  He then added, 

directing his speech to me, that she was none of his sister, but 

had been his whore for two years before, that she had had #100 

of him in part of this bargain, and that he was utterly undone 

if things were as I said; and in his raving he swore he would 

let her heart's blood out immediately, which frightened her 

and me too.  She cried, said she had been told so in the house 

where I lodged.  But this aggravated him more than before, 

that she should put so far upon him, and run things such a 

length upon no other authority than a hearsay; and then, turning 

to me again, said very honestly, he was afraid we were both 

undone.  'For, to be plain, my dear, I have no estate,' says he; 

'what little I had, this devil has made me run out in waiting 

on you and putting me into this equipage.'  She took the 

opportunity of his being earnest in talking with me, and got 

out of the room, and I never saw her more.



I was confounded now as much as he,  and knew not what to 

say.  I thought many ways that I had the worst of it, but his 

saying he was undone, and that he had no estate neither, put 

me into a mere distraction.  'Why,' says I to him, 'this has 

been a hellish juggle, for we are married here upon the foot 

of a double fraud; you are undone by the disappointment, it 

seems; and if I had had a fortune I had been cheated too, for 

you say you have nothing.'



'You would indeed have been cheated, my dear,' says he, 'but 

you would not have been undone, for #15,000 would have 

maintained us both very handsomely in this country; and I 

assure you,' added he, 'I had resolved to have dedicated every 

groat of it to you; I would not have wronged you of a shilling, 

and the rest I would have made up in my affection to you, and 

tenderness of you, as long as I lived.'



This was very honest indeed, and I really believe he spoke 

as he intended, and that he was a man that was as well qualified 

to make me happy, as to his temper and behaviour, as any 

man ever was; but his having no estate, and being run into debt 

on this ridiculous account in the country, made all the prospect 

dismal and dreadful, and I knew not what to say, or what to 

think of myself.



I told him it was very unhappy that so much love, and so much 

good nature as I discovered in him, should be thus precipitated 

into misery; that I saw nothing before us but ruin; for as to me, 

it was my unhappiness that what little I had was not able to 

relieve us week, and with that I pulled out a bank bill of #20 

and eleven guineas, which I told him I had saved out of  my 

little income, and that by the account that creature had given 

me of the way of living in that country, I expected it would 

maintain me three or four years; that if it was taken from me, 

I was left destitute, and he knew what the condition of a woman 

among strangers must be, if she had no money in her pocket; 

however, I told him, if he would take it, there it was.



He told me with a great concern, and I thought I saw tears 

stand in his eyes, that he would not touch it; that he abhorred 

the thoughts of stripping me and make me miserable; that, on 

the contrary, he had fifty guineas left, which was all he had in 

the world, and he pulled it out and threw it down on the table, 

bidding me take it, though he were to starve for want of it. 



I returned, with the same concern for him, that I could not 

bear to hear him talk so; that, on the contrary, if he could 

propose any probable method of living, I would do anything 

that became me on my part, and that I would live as close 

and as narrow as he could desire.



He begged of me to talk no more at that rate, for it would 

make him distracted; he said he was bred a gentleman, though 

he was reduced to a low fortune, and that there was but one 

way left which he could think of, and that would not do, 

unless I could answer him one question, which, however, he 

said he would not press me to.  I told him I would answer it 

honestly; whether it would be to his satisfaction or not, that 

I could not tell.



'Why, then, my dear, tell me plainly,' says he, 'will the little 

you have keep us together in any figure, or in any station or 

place, or will it not?'



It was my happiness hitherto that I had not discovered myself 

or my circumstances at all--no, not so much as my name; and 

seeing these was nothing to be expected from him, however 

good-humoured and however honest he seemed to be, but to 

live on what I knew would soon be wasted, I resolved to 

conceal everything but the bank bill and the eleven guineas 

which I had owned; and I would have been very glad to have 

lost that and have been set down where he took me up.  I had 

indeed another bank bill about me of #30, which was the whole 

of what I brought with me, as well to subsist on in the country, 

as not knowing what might offer; because this creature, the 

go-between that had thus betrayed us both, had made me 

believe strange things of my marrying to my advantage in the 

country, and I was not willing to be without money, whatever 

might happen.  This bill I concealed, and that made me the 

freer of the rest, in consideration of his circumstances, for I 

really pitied him heartily.



But to return to his question, I told him I never willingly 

deceived him, and I never would.  I was very sorry to tell him 

that the little I had would not subsist us; that it was not 

sufficient to subsist me alone in the south country, and that 

this was the reason that made me put myself into the hands 

of that woman who called him brother, she having assured 

me that I might board very handsomely at a town called 

Manchester, where I had not yet been, for about #6 a year; 

and my whole income not being about #15 a year, I thought I 

might live easy upon it, and wait for better things.



He shook his head and remained silent, and a very melancholy 

evening we had; however, we supped together, and lay together 

that night, and when we had almost supped he looked a little 

better and more cheerful, and called for a bottle of wine.  'Come, 

my dear,' says he, ' though the case is bad, it is to no purpose 

to be dejected.  come, be as easy as you can; I will endeavour 

to find out some way or other to live; if you can but subsist 

yourself, that is better than nothing.  I must try the world again; 

a man ought to think like a man; to be discouraged is to yield 

to the misfortune.'  With this he filled a glass and drank to me, 

holding my hand and pressing it hard in his hand all the while 

the wine went down, and protesting afterwards his main 

concern was for me.



It was really a true, gallant spirit he was of, and it was the 

more grievous to me.  'Tis something of relief even to be 

undone by a man of honour, rather than by a scoundrel; but 

here the greatest disappointment was on his side, for he had 

really spent a great deal of money, deluded by this madam the 

procuress; and it was very remarkable on what poor terms he 

proceeded.  First the baseness of the creature herself is to be 

observed, who, for the getting #100 herself, could be content 

to let him spend three or four more, though perhaps it was all 

he had in the world, and more than all; when she had not the 

least ground, more than a little tea-table chat, to say that I had 

any estate, or was a fortune, or the like.  It is true the design 

of deluding a woman of fortune, I f I had been so, was base 

enough; the putting the face of great things upon poor 

circumstances was a fraud, and bad enough; but the case a 

little differed too, and that in his favour, for he was not a rake 

that made a trade to delude women, and, as some have done, 

get six or seven fortunes after one another, and then rifle and 

run away from them; but he was really a gentleman, unfortunate 

and low, but had lived well; and though, if I had had a fortune, 

I should have been enraged at the slut for betraying me, yet 

really for the man, a fortune would not have been ill bestowed 

on him, for he was a lovely person indeed, of generous principles, 

good sense, and of abundance of good-humour.



We had a great deal of close conversation that night, for we 

neither of us slept much; he was as penitent for having put all 

those cheats upon me as if it had been felony, and that he was 

going to execution; he offered me again every shilling of the 

money he had about him, and said he would go into the army 

and seek the world for more.



I asked him why he would be so unkind to carry me into 

Ireland, when I might suppose he could not have subsisted me 

there.  He took me in his arms.  'My dear,' said he, 'depend 

upon it, I never designed to go to Ireland at all, much less to 

have carried you thither, but came hither to be out of the 

observation of the people, who had heard what I pretended to, 

and withal, that nobody might ask me for money before I was 

furnished to supply them.'



'But where, then,' said I, 'were we to have gone next?'



'Why, my dear,' said he, 'I'll confess the whole scheme to you 

as I had laid it; I purposed here to ask you something about 

your estate, as you see I did, and when you, as I expected you 

would, had entered into some account with me of the particulars, 

I would have made an excuse to you to have put off our voyage 

to Ireland for some time, and to have gone first towards London.



'Then, my dear,' said he, 'I resolved to have confessed all the 

circumstances of my own affairs to you, and let you know I 

had indeed made use of these artifices to obtain your consent 

to marry me, but had now nothing to do but ask to your pardon, 

and to tell you how abundantly, as I have said above, I would 

endeavour to make you forget what was past, by the felicity 

of the days to come.' 



'Truly,' said I to him, 'I find you would soon have conquered 

me; and it is my affliction now, that I am not in a condition to 

let you see how easily I should have been reconciled to you, 

and have passed by all the tricks you had put upon me, in 

recompense of so much good-humour.  But, my dear,' said I, 

'what can we do now?  We are both undone, and what better 

are we for our being reconciled together, seeing we have 

nothing to live on?'



We proposed a great many things, but nothing could offer 

where there was nothing to begin with.  He begged me at last 

to talk no more of it, for, he said, I would break his heart; so 

we talked of other things a little, till at last he took a husband's 

leave of me, and so we went to sleep.



He rose before me in the morning; and indeed, having lain 

awake almost all night, I was very sleepy, and lay till near 

eleven o'clock.  In this time he took his horses and three 

servants, and all his linen and baggage, and away he went, 

leaving a short but moving letter for me on the table, as 

follows:--





'MY DEAR--I am a dog; I have abused you; but I have been 

drawn into do it by a base creature, contrary to my principle 

and the general practice of my life.  Forgive me, my dear!  I 

ask your pardon with the greatest sincerity; I am the most 

miserable of men, in having deluded you.  I have been so happy 

to posses you, and now am so wretched as to be forced to fly 

from you.  Forgive me, my dear; once more I say, forgive me!  

I am not able to see you ruined by me, and myself unable to 

support you.  Our marriage is nothing; I shall never be able to 

see you again; I here discharge you from it; if you can marry 

to your advantage, do not decline it on my account; I here 

swear to you on my faith, and on the word of a man of honour, 

I will never disturb your repose if I should know of it, which, 

however, is not likely.  On the other hand, if you should not 

marry, and if good fortune should befall me, it shall be all yours, 

wherever you are.



'I have put some of the stock of money I have left into your 

pocket; take places for yourself and your maid in the stage-coach, 

and go for London; I hope it will bear your charges thither, 

without breaking into your own.  Again I sincerely ask your 

pardon, and will do so as often as I shall ever think of you.  

Adieu, my dear, for ever!--I am, your most affectionately, J.E.'





Nothing that ever befell me in my life sank so deep into my 

heart as this farewell.  I reproached him a thousand times in 

my thoughts for leaving me, for I would have gone with him 

through the world, if I had begged my bread.  I felt in my 

pocket, and there found ten guineas, his gold watch, and two 

little rings, one a small diamond ring worth only about #6, and 

the other a plain gold ring.



I sat me down and looked upon these things two hours 

together, and scarce spoke a word, till my maid interrupted 

me by telling me my dinner was ready.  I ate but little, and 

after dinner I fell into a vehement fit of crying, every now and 

then calling him by his name, which was James.  'O Jemmy!' 

said I, 'come back, come back.  I'll give you all I have; I'll 

beg, I'll starve with you.'  And thus I ran raving about the 

room several times, and then sat down between whiles, and 

then walking about again, called upon him to come back, and 

then cried again; and thus I passed the afternoon, till about 

seven o'clock, when it was near dusk, in the evening, being 

August, when, to my unspeakable surprise, he comes back 

into the inn, but without a servant, and comes directly up into 

my chamber.



I was in the greatest confusion imaginable, and so was he too.  

I could not imagine what should be the occasion of it, and 

began to be at odds with myself whether to be glad or sorry; 

but my affection biassed all the rest, and it was impossible to 

conceal my joy, which was too great for smiles, for it burst 

out into tears.  He was no sooner entered the room but he ran 

to me and took me in his arms, holding me fast, and almost 

stopping my breath with his kisses, but spoke not a word.  

At length I began.  'My dear,' said I, 'how could you go away 

from me?' to which he gave no answer, for it was impossible 

for him to speak.



When our ecstasies were a little over, he told me he was gone 

about fifteen miles, but it was not in his power to go any farther 

without coming back to see me again, and to take his leave of 

me once more.



I told him how I had passed my time, and how loud I had 

called him to come back again.  He told me he heard me very 

plain upon Delamere Forest, at a place about twelve miles off.  

I smiled.   'Nay,' says he, 'do not think I am in jest, for if ever 

I heard your voice in my life, I heard you call me aloud, and 

sometimes I thought I saw you running after me.'  'Why,' 

said I, 'what did I say?'--for I had not named the words to him.  

'You called aloud,' says he, 'and said, O Jemmy!  O Jemmy! 

come back, come back.'



I laughed at him.  'My dear,' says he, 'do not laugh, for, depend 

upon it, I heard your voice as plain as you hear mine now; if 

you please, I'll go before a magistrate and make oath of it.'  I 

then began to be amazed and surprised, and indeed frightened, 

and told him what I had really done, and how I had called after 

him, as above.



When we had amused ourselves a while about this, I said to 

him:  'Well, you shall go away from me no more; I'll go all 

over the world with you rather.'  He told me it would be very 

difficult thing for him to leave me, but since it must be, he 

hoped I would make it as easy to me as I could; but as for him, 

it would be his destruction that he foresaw.



However, he told me that he considered he had left me to 

travel to London alone, which was too long a journey; and 

that as he might as well go that way as any way else, he was 

resolved to see me safe thither, or near it; and if he did go 

away then without taking his leave, I should not take it ill of 

him; and this he made me promise.



He told me how he had dismissed his three servants, sold 

their horses, and sent the fellows away to seek their fortunes, 

and all in a little time, at a town on the road, I know not where.  

'And,' says he, 'it cost me some tears all alone by myself, to 

think how much happier they were than their master, for they 

could go to the next gentleman's house to see for a service, 

whereas,' said he, 'I knew not wither to go, or what to do 

with myself.'



I told him I was so completely miserable in parting with him, 

that I could not be worse; and that now he was come again, 

I would not go from him, if he would take me with him, let 

him go whither he would, or do what he would.  And in the 

meantime I agreed that we would go together to London; but 

I could not be brought to consent he should go away at last 

and not take his leave of me, as he proposed to do; but told 

him, jesting, that if he did, I would call him back again as loud 

as I did before.  Then I pulled out his watch and gave it him 

back, and his two rings, and his ten guineas; but he would not 

take them, which made me very much suspect that he resolved 

to go off upon the road and leave me.



The truth is, the circumstances he was in, the passionate 

expressions of his letter, the kind, gentlemanly treatment I had 

from him in all the affair, with the concern he showed for me 

in it, his manner of parting with that large share which he gave 

me of his little stock left--all these had joined to make such 

impressions on me, that I really loved him most tenderly, and 

could not bear the thoughts of parting with him.



Two days after this we quitted Chester, I in the stage-coach, 

and he on horseback.  I dismissed my maid at Chester.  He 

was very much against my being without a maid, but she being 

a servant hired in the country, and I resolving to keep no 

servant at London, I told him it would have been barbarous 

to have taken the poor wench and have turned her away as 

soon as I came to town; and it would also have been a needless 

charge on the road, so I satisfied him, and he was easy enough 

on the score.



He came with me as far as Dunstable, within thirty miles of 

London, and then he told me fate and his own misfortunes 

obliged him to leave me, and that it was not convenient for 

him to go to London, for reasons which it was of no value to 

me to know, and I saw him preparing to go.  The stage-coach 

we were in did not usually stop at Dunstable, but I desiring it 

but for a quart of an hour, they were content to stand at an 

inndoor a while, and we went into the house.



Being in the inn, I told him I had but one favour more to as 

of him, and that was, that since he could not go any farther, 

he would give me leave to stay a week or two in the town with 

him, that we might in that time think of something to prevent 

such a ruinous thing to us both, as a final separation would be; 

and that I had something of moment to offer him, that I had 

never said yet, and which perhaps he might find practicable to 

our mutual advantage.



This was too reasonable a proposal to be denied, so he called 

the landlady of the house, and told her his wife was taken ill, 

and so ill that she could not think of going any farther in the 

stage-coach, which had tired her almost to death, and asked 

if she could not get us a lodging for two or three days in a 

private house, where I might rest me a little, for the journey 

had been too much for me.  The landlady, a good sort of 

woman, well-bred and very obliging, came immediately to 

see me; told me she had two or three very good rooms in a 

part of the house quite out of the noise, and if I saw them, 

she did not doubt but I would like them, and I should have 

one of her maids, that should do nothing else but be appointed 

to wait on me.  This was so very kind, that I could not but 

accept of it, and thank her; so I went to look on the rooms and 

liked them very well, and indeed they were extraordinarily 

furnished, and very pleasant lodgings; so we paid the stage-coach, 

took out our baggage, and resolved to stay here a while.



Here I told him I would live with him now till all my money 

was spent, but would not let him spend a shilling of his own.  

We had some kind squabble about that, but I told him it was 

the last time I was like to enjoy his company, and I desired he 

would let me be master in that thing only, and he should govern 

in everything else; so he acquiesced.



Here one evening, taking a walk into the fields, I told him I 

would now make the proposal to him I had told him of; 

accordingly I related to him how I had lived in Virginia, that 

I had a mother I believed was alive there still, though my 

husband was dead some years.  I told him that had not my 

effects miscarried, which, by the way, I magnified pretty much, 

I might have been fortune good enough to him to have kept 

us from being parted in this manner.  Then I entered into the 

manner of peoples going over to those countries to settle, 

how they had a quantity of land given them by the Constitution 

of the place; and if not, that it might be purchased at so easy a 

rate this it was not worth naming.



I then gave him a full and distinct account of the nature of 

planting; how with carrying over but two or three hundred 

pounds value in English goods, with some servants and tools, 

a man of application would presently lay a foundation for a 

family, and in a very few years be certain to raise an estate.



I let him into the nature of the product of the earth; how the 

ground was cured and prepared, and what the usual increase 

of it was; and demonstrated to him, that in a very few years, 

with such a beginning, we should be as certain of being rich 

as we were now certain of being poor.



He was surprised at my discourse; for we made it the whole 

subject of our conversation for near a week together, in which 

time I laid it down in black and white, as we say, that it was 

morally impossible, with a supposition of any reasonable good 

conduct, but that we must thrive there and do very well.



Then I told him what measures I would take to raise such a 

sum of #300 or thereabouts; and I argued with him how good 

a method it would be to put an end to our misfortunes and 

restore our circumstances in the world, to what we had both 

expected; and I added, that after seven years, if we lived, we 

might be in a posture to leave our plantations in good hands, 

and come over again and receive the income of it, and live 

here and enjoy it; and I gave him examples of some that had 

done so, and lived now in very good circumstances in London.



In short, I pressed him so to it, that he almost agreed to it, but 

still something or other broke it off again; till at last he turned 

the tables, and he began to talk almost to the same purpose of 

Ireland.



He told me that a man that could confine himself to country 

life, and that could find but stock to enter upon any land, 

should have farms there for #50 a year, as good as were here 

let for #200 a year; that the produce was such, and so rich the 

land, that if much was not laid up, we were sure to live as 

handsomely upon it as a gentleman of #3000 a year could do 

in England and that he had laid a scheme to leave me in London, 

and go over and try; and if he found he could lay a handsome 

foundation of living suitable to the respect he had for me, as 

he doubted not he should do, he would come over and fetch me.



I was dreadfully afraid that upon such a proposal he would 

have taken me at my word, viz. to sell my little income as I 

called it, and turn it into money, and let him carry it over into 

Ireland and try his experiment with it; but he was too just to 

desire it, or to have accepted it if I had offered it; and he 

anticipated me in that, for he added, that he would go and try 

his fortune that way, and if he found he could do anything at 

it to live, then, by adding mine to it when I went over, we 

should live like ourselves; but that he would not hazard a 

shilling of mine till he had made the experiment with a little, 

and he assured me that if he found nothing to be done in Ireland,

he would then come to me and join in my project for Virginia.



He was so earnest upon his project being to be tried first, that 

I could not withstand him; however, he promised to let me 

hear from him in a very little time after his arriving there, to 

let me know whether his prospect answered his design, that 

if there was not a possibility of success, I might take the 

occasion to prepare for our other voyage, and then, he assured 

me, he would go with me to America with all his heart.



I could bring him to nothing further than this.  However, those 

consultations entertained us near a month, during which I 

enjoyed his company, which indeed was the most entertaining 

that ever I met in my life before.  In this time he let me into 

the whole story of his own life, which was indeed surprising, 

and full of an infinite variety sufficient to fill up a much brighter 

history, for its adventures and incidents, than any I ever say in 

print; but I shall have occasion to say more of him hereafter.



We parted at last, though with the utmost reluctance on my 

side; and indeed he took his leave very unwillingly too, but 

necessity obliged him, for his reasons were very good why he 

would not come to London, as I understood more fully some 

time afterwards.



I gave him a direction how to write to me, though still I 

reserved the grand secret, and never broke my resolution, 

which was not to let him ever know my true name, who I was, 

or where to be found; he likewise let me know how to write a 

letter to him, so that, he said, he would be sure to receive it.



I came to London the next day after we parted, but did not go 

directly to my old lodgings; but for another nameless reason 

took a private lodging in St. John's Street, or, as it is vulgarly 

called, St. Jones's, near Clerkenwell; and here, being perfectly 

alone, I had leisure to sit down and reflect seriously upon the 

last seven months' ramble I had made, for I had been abroad 

no less.  The pleasant hours I had with my last husband I looked 

back on with an infinite deal of pleasure; but that pleasure was 

very much lessened when I found some time after that I was 

really with child.



This was a perplexing thing, because of the difficulty which 

was before me where I should get leave to lie in; it being one of 

the nicest things in the world at that time of day for a woman 

that was a stranger, and had no friends, to be entertained in 

that circumstance without security, which, by the way, I had 

not, neither could I procure any.



I had taken care all this while to preserve a correspondence 

with my honest friend at the bank, or rather he took care to 

correspond with me, for he wrote to me once a week; and 

though I had not spent my money so fast as to want any from 

him, yet I often wrote also to let him know I was alive.  I had 

left directions in Lancashire, so that I had these letters, which 

he sent, conveyed to me; and during my recess at St. Jones's 

received a very obliging letter from him, assuring me that his 

process for a divorce from his wife went on with success, 

though he met with some difficulties in it that he did not expect.



I was not displeased with the news that his process was more 

tedious than he expected; for though I was in no condition to 

have him yet, not being so foolish to marry him when I knew 

myself to be with child by another man, as some I know have 

ventured to do, yet I was not willing to lose him, and, in a 

word, resolved to have him if he continued in the same mind, 

as soon as I was up again; for I saw apparently I should hear 

no more from my husband; and as he had all along pressed to 

marry, and had assured me he would not be at all disgusted at 

it, or ever offer to claim me again, so I made no scruple to 

resolve to do it if I could, and if my other friend stood to his 

bargain; and I had a great deal of reason to be assured that he 

would stand to it, by the letters he wrote to me, which were 

the kindest and most obliging that could be.



I now grew big, and the people where I lodged perceived it, 

and began to take notice of it to me, and, as far as civility 

would allow, intimated that I must think of removing.  This 

put me to extreme perplexity, and I grew very melancholy, for 

indeed I knew not what course to take.  I had money, but no 

friends, and was like to have a child upon my hands to keep, 

which was a difficult I had never had upon me yet, as the 

particulars of my story hitherto make appear.



In the course of this affair I fell very ill, and my melancholy 

really increased my distemper; my illness proved at length to 

be only an ague, but my apprehensions were really that I should 

miscarry.  I should not say apprehensions, for indeed I would 

have been glad to miscarry, but I could never be brought to 

entertain so much as a thought of endeavouring to miscarry, 

or of taking any thing to make me miscarry; I abhorred, I say, 

so much as the thought of it.



However, speaking of it in the house, the gentlewoman who 

kept the house proposed to me to send for a midwife.  I 

scrupled it at first, but after some time consented to it, but 

told her I had no particular acquaintance with any midwife, 

and so left it to her.



It seems the mistress of the house was not so great a stranger 

to such cases as mine was as I thought at first she had been, 

as will appear presently, and she sent for a midwife of the 

right sort--that is to say, the right sort for me.



The woman appeared to be an experienced woman in her 

business, I mean as a midwife; but she had another calling too, 

in which she was as expert as most women if not more.  My 

landlady had told her I was very melancholy, and that she 

believed that had done me harm; and once, before me, said to 

her, 'Mrs. B----' (meaning the midwife), 'I believe this lady's 

trouble is of a kind that is pretty much in your way, and 

therefore if you can do anything for her, pray do, for she is a 

very civil gentlewoman'; and so she went out of the room.



I really did not understand her, but my Mother Midnight began 

very seriously to explain what she mean, as soon as she was 

gone.  'Madam,' says she, 'you seem not to understand what 

your landlady means; and when you do understand it, you need 

not let her know at all that you do so.



'She means that you are under some circumstances that may 

render your lying in difficult to you, and that you are not willing 

to be exposed.  I need say no more, but to tell you, that if you 

think fit to communicate so much of your case to me, if it be so, 

as is necessary, for I do not desire to pry into those things, I 

perhaps may be in a position to help you and to make you 

perfectly easy, and remove all your dull thoughts upon that 

subject.'



Every word this creature said was a cordial to me, and put 

new life and new spirit into my heart; my blood began to 

circulate immediately, and I was quite another body; I ate my 

victuals again, and grew better presently after it.  She said a 

great deal more to the same purpose, and then, having pressed 

me to be free with her, and promised in the solemnest manner 

to be secret, she stopped a little, as if waiting to see what 

impression it made on me, and what I would say.



I was to sensible too the want I was in of such a woman, not 

to accept her offer; I told her my case was partly as she 

guessed, and partly not, for I was really married, and had a 

husband, though he was in such fine circumstances and so 

remote at that time, as that he could not appear publicly.



She took me short, and told me that was none of her business; 

all the ladies that came under her care were married women 

to her.  'Every woman,' she says, 'that is with child has a father 

for it,' and whether that father was a husband or no husband, 

was no business of hers; her business was to assist me in my 

present circumstances, whether I had a husband or no.  'For, 

madam,' says she, 'to have a husband that cannot appear, is 

to have no husband in the sense of the case; and, therefore, 

whether you are a wife or a mistress is all one to me.'



I found presently, that whether I was a whore or a wife, I was 

to pass for a whore here, so I let that go.  I told her it was 

true, as she said, but that, however, if I must tell her my case, 

I must tell it her as it was; so I related it to her as short as I 

could, and I concluded it to her thus.  'I trouble you with all 

this, madam,' said I, 'not that, as you said before, it is much 

to the purpose in your affair, but this is to the purpose, namely, 

that I am not in any pain about being seen, or being public or 

concealed, for 'tis perfectly indifferent to me; but my difficulty 

is, that I have no acquaintance in this part of the nation.'



'I understand you, madam' says she; 'you have no security to 

bring to prevent the parish impertinences usual in such cases, 

and perhaps,' says she, 'do not know very well how to dispose 

of the child when it comes.'  'The last,' says I, 'is not so much 

my concern as the first.'  'Well, madam,' answered the midwife, 

'dare you put yourself into my hands?  I live in such a place; 

though I do not inquire after you, you may inquire after me.  

My name is B----; I live in such a street'--naming the street--'

at the sign of the Cradle.  My profession is a midwife, and I 

have many ladies that come to my house to lie in.  I have given 

security to the parish in general terms to secure them from any 

charge from whatsoever shall come into the world under my 

roof.  I have but one question to ask in the whole affair, madam,' 

says she, 'and if that be answered you shall be entirely easy for 

all the rest.'



I presently understood what she meant, and told her, 'Madam, 

I believe I understand you.  I thank God, though I want friends 

in this part of the world, I do not want money, so far as may 

be necessary, though I do not abound in that neither':  this I 

added because I would not make her expect great things.  

'Well, madam,' says she, 'that is the thing indeed, without 

which nothing can be done in these cases; and yet,' says she, 

'you shall see that I will not impose upon you, or offer anything 

that is unkind to you, and if you desire it, you shall know 

everything beforehand, that you may suit yourself to the 

occasion, and be neither costly or sparing as you see fit.'



I told her she seemed to be so perfectly sensible of my condition, 

that I had nothing to ask of her but this, that as I had told her 

that I had money sufficient, but not a great quantity, she would 

order it so that I might be at as little superfluous charge as 

possible.



She replied that she would bring in an account of the expenses 

of it in two or three shapes, and like a bill of fare, I should 

choose as I pleased; and I desired her to do so.



The next day she brought it, and the copy of her three bills 

was a follows:--





1.  For three months' lodging in her house, including 

my diet, at 10s. a week . . . . . .6#, 0s., 0d.



2. For a nurse for the month, and use of childbed 

linen . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .1#, 10s., 0d.



3. For a minister to christen the child, and to the 

godfathers and clerk . . . . . . . .1#, 10s., 0d.



4. For a supper at the christening if I had five friends 

at it . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .1#, 0s., 0d.



For her fees as a midwife, and the taking off the 

trouble of the parish . . . . . . . . 3#, 3s., 0d.



To her maid servant attending . 0#, 10s., 0d.

                                                ________________

                                                 13#, 13s. 0d



This was the first bill; the second was the same terms:--



1. For three months' lodging and diet, etc., at 20s.

per week . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .13#, 0s., 0d.



2. For a nurse for the month, and the use of linen 

and lace . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .2#, 10s., 0d.



3. For the minister to christen the child, etc., as 

above . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2#, 0s., 0d.



4. For supper and for sweetmeats

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3#, 3s., 0d.



For her fees as above . . . . . . 5#, 5s., 0d.



For a servant-maid . . . . . . . . 1#, 0s., 0d.

                                              _______________

                                               26#, 18s., 0d



This was the second-rate bill; the third, she said, was for 

a degree higher, and when the father or friends appeared:-- 



1. For three months' lodging and diet, having two 

rooms and a garret for a servant . . 30#, 0s., 0d.,



2. For a nurse for the month, and the finest suit 

of childbed linen . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4#, 4s., 0d.



3. For the minister to christen the child, etc. 

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2#, 10s., 0d.



4. For a super, the gentlemen to send in the 

wine . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6#, 0s., 0d.



For my fees, etc. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10#, 10s., 0d.



The maid, besides their own maid, only

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 0#, 10s., 0d.

                                                      _________________

                                                       53#, 14s., 0d.





I looked upon all three bills, and smiled, and told her I did not 

see but that she was very reasonable in her demands, all things 

considered, and for that I did not doubt but her  accommodations 

were good.



She told me I should be judge of that when I saw them.  I told 

her I was sorry to tell her that I geared I must be her lowest- 

rated customer.  'And perhaps, madam,' said I, 'you will make 

me the less welcome upon that account.'  'No, not at all,' said 

she; 'for where I have one of the third sort I have two of the 

second, and four to one of the first, and I get as much by them 

in proportion as by any; but if you doubt my care of you, I will 

allow any friend you have to overlook and see if you are well 

waited on or no.'



Then she explained the particulars of her bill.  'In the first place, 

madam,' said she, 'I would have you observe that here is three 

months' keeping; you are but ten shillings a week; I undertake 

to say you will not complain of my table.  I suppose,' says she, 

'you do not live cheaper where you are now?'  'No, indeed,' 

said I, 'not so cheap, for I give six shillings per week for my 

chamber, and find my own diet as well as I can, which costs 

me a great deal more.'



'Then, madam,' says she, 'if the child should not live, or should 

be dead-born, as you know sometimes happens, then there is 

the minister's article saved; and if you have no friends to come 

to you, you may save the expense of a supper; so that take those 

articles out, madam,' says she, 'your lying in will not cost you 

above #5, 3s. in all more than your ordinary charge of  living.'



This was the most reasonable thing that I ever heard of; so I 

smiled, and told her I would come and be her customer; but I 

told her also, that as I had two months and more to do, I might 

perhaps be obliged to stay longer with her than three months, 

and desired to know if she would not be obliged to remove me 

before it was proper.  No, she said; her house was large, and 

besides, she never put anybody to remove, that had lain in, till 

they were willing to go; and if she had more ladies offered, she 

was not so ill-beloved among her neighbours but she could 

provide accommodations for twenty, if there was occasion.



I found she was an eminent lady in her way; and, in short, I 

agreed to put myself into her hands, and promised her.  She 

then talked of other things, looked about into my accommodations 

where I was, found fault with my wanting attendance and 

conveniences, and that I should not be used so at her house.  

I told her I was shy of speaking, for the woman of the house 

looked stranger, or at least I thought so, since I had been ill, 

because I was with child; and I was afraid she would put some 

affront or other upon me, supposing that I had been able to 

give but a slight account of myself.



'Oh dear,' said she, 'her ladyship is no stranger to these things; 

she has tried to entertain ladies in your condition several times, 

but she could not secure the parish; and besides, she is not such a 

nice lady as you take her to be; however, since you are a-going, 

you shall not meddle with her, but I'll see you are a little better 

looked after while you are here than I think you are, and it shall 

not cost you the more neither.'



I did not understand her at all; however, I thanked her, and  so 

we parted.  The next morning she sent me a chicken roasted 

and hot, and a pint bottle of sherry, and ordered the maid to 

tell me that she was to wait on me every day as long as I stayed 

there.



This was surprisingly good and kind, and I accepted it very 

willingly.  At night she sent to me again, to know if I wanted 

anything, and how I did, and to order the maid to come to her 

in the morning with my dinner.  The maid  had orders to make 

me some chocolate in the morning before she came away, and 

did so, and at noon she brought me the sweetbread of a breast 

of veal, whole, and a dish of soup for my dinner; and after this 

manner she nursed me up at a distance, so that I was mightily 

well pleased, and quickly well, for indeed my dejections before 

were the principal part of my illness.



I expected, as is usually the case among such people, that the 

servant she sent me would have been some imprudent brazen 

wench of Drury Lane breeding, and I was very uneasy at having 

her with me upon that account; so I would not let her lie in 

that house the first night by any means, but had my eyes about 

me as narrowly as if she had been a public thief.



My gentlewoman guessed presently what was the matter, and 

sent her back with a short note, that I might depend upon the 

honesty of her maid; that she would be answerable for her upon 

all accounts; and that she took no servants into her house 

without very good security for their fidelity.  I was then perfectly 

easy; and indeed the maid's behaviour spoke for itself, for a 

modester, quieter, soberer girl never came into anybody's family, 

and I found her so afterwards.



As soon as I was well enough to go abroad, I went with the 

maid to see the house, and to see the apartment I was to have; 

and everything was so handsome and so clean and well, that, 

in short, I had nothing to say, but was wonderfully pleased 

and satisfied with what I had met with, which, considering 

the melancholy circumstances I was in, was far beyond what 

I looked for.



It might be expected that I should give some account of the 

nature of the wicked practices of this woman, in whose hands 

I was now fallen; but it would be too much encouragement to 

the vice, to let the world see what easy measures were here 

taken to rid the women's unwelcome burthen of a child 

clandestinely gotten.  This grave matron had several sorts of 

practice, and this was one particular, that if a child was born, 

though not in her house (for she had occasion to be called to 

many private labours), she had people at hand, who for a piece 

of money would take the child off their hands, and off from 

the hands of the parish too; and those children, as she said, 

were honestly provided for and taken care of.  What should 

become of them all, considering so many, as by her account 

she was concerned with, I cannot conceive.



I had many times discourses upon that subject with her; but 

she was full of this argument, that she save the life of many an 

innocent lamb, as she called them, which would otherwise 

perhaps have been murdered; and of many women who, made 

desperate by the misfortune, would otherwise be tempted to 

destroy their children, and bring themselves to the gallows.  I 

granted her that this was true, and a very commendable thing, 

provided the poor children fell into good hands afterwards, 

and were not abused, starved, and neglected by the nurses 

that bred them up.  She answered, that she always took care 

of that, and had no nurses in her business but what were very 

good, honest people, and such as might be depended upon.



I could say nothing to the contrary, and so was obliged to say, 

'Madam, I do not question you do your part honestly, but what 

those people do afterwards is the main question'; and she 

stopped my mouth again with saying that she took the utmost 

care about it.



The only thing I found in all her conversation on these subjects 

that gave me any distaste, was, that one time in discouraging 

about my being far gone with child, and the time I expected 

to come, she said something that looked as if she could help 

me off with my burthen sooner, if I was willing; or, in English, 

that she could give me something to make me miscarry, if I 

had a desire to put an end to my troubles that way; but I soon 

let her see that I abhorred the thoughts of it; and, to do her 

justice, she put it off so cleverly, that I could not say she really 

intended it, or whether she only mentioned the practice as a 

horrible thing; for she couched her words so well, and took my 

meaning so quickly, that she gave her negative before I could 

explain myself.



To bring this part into as narrow a compass as possible, I quitted 

my lodging at St. Jones's and went to my new governess, for 

so they called her in the house, and there I was indeed treated 

with so much courtesy, so carefully looked to, so handsomely 

provided, and everything so well, that I was surprised at it, and 

could not at first see what advantage my governess made of it; 

but I found afterwards that she professed to make no profit of 

lodgers' diet, nor indeed could she get much by it, but that 

her profit lay in the other articles of her management, and she 

made enough that way, I assure you; for 'tis scarce credible 

what practice she had, as well abroad as at home, and yet all 

upon the private account, or, in plain English, the whoring 

account.



While I was in her house, which was near four months, she 

had no less than twelve ladies of pleasure brought to bed within 

the doors, and I think she had two-and-thirty, or thereabouts, 

under her conduct without doors, whereof one, as nice as she 

was with me, was lodged with my old landlady at St. Jones's.



This was a strange testimony of the growing vice of the age, 

and such a one, that as bad as I had been myself, it shocked 

my very senses.  I began to nauseate the place I was in and, 

about all, the wicked practice; and yet I must say that I never 

saw, or do I believe there was to be seen, the least indecency 

in the house the whole time I was there.



Not a man was ever seen to come upstairs, except to visit the 

lying-in ladies within their month, nor then without the old lady 

with them, who made it a piece of honour of her management 

that no man should touch a woman, no, not his own wife, within 

the month; nor would she permit any man to lie in the house 

upon any pretence whatever, no, not though she was sure it 

was with his own wife; and her general saying for it was, that 

she cared not how many children were born in her house, but 

she would have none got there if she could help it.



It might perhaps be carried further than was needful, but it was 

an error of the right hand if it was an error, for by this she kept 

up the reputation, such as it was, of her business, and obtained 

this character, that though she did take care of the women when 

they were debauched, yet she was not instrumental to their being 

debauched at all; and yet it was a wicked trade she drove too.



While I was there, and before I was brought to bed, I received 

a letter from my trustee at the bank, full of kind, obliging things, 

and earnestly pressing me to return to London.  It was near a 

fortnight old when it came to me, because it had been first sent 

into Lancashire, and then returned to me.  He concludes with 

telling me that he had obtained a decree, I think he called it, 

against his wife, and that he would be ready to make good his 

engagement to me, if I would accept of him, adding a great 

many protestations of kindness and affection, such as he would 

have been far from offering if he had known the circumstances 

I had been in, and which as it was I had been very far from 

deserving.



I returned an answer to his letter, and dated it at Liverpool, 

but sent it by messenger, alleging that it came in cover to a 

friend in town.  I gave him joy of his deliverance, but raised 

some scruples at the lawfulness of his marrying again, and told 

him I supposed he would consider very seriously upon that 

point before he resolved on it, the consequence being too great 

for a man of his judgment to venture rashly upon a thing of that 

nature; so concluded, wishing him very well in whatever he 

resolved, without letting him into anything of my own mind, 

or giving any answer to his proposal of my coming to London 

to him, but mentioned at a distance my intention to return the 

latter end of the year, this being dated in April. 



I was brought to bed about the middle of May and had another 

brave boy, and myself in as good condition as usual on such 

occasions.  My governess did her part as a midwife with the 

greatest art and dexterity imaginable, and far beyond all that 

ever I had had any experience of before.



Her care of me in my travail, and after in my lying in, was 

such, that if she had been my own mother it could not have 

been better.  Let none be encouraged in their loose practices 

from this dexterous lady's management, for she is gone to her 

place, and I dare say has left nothing behind her that can or 

will come up on it.



I think I had been brought to bed about twenty-two days when 

I received another letter from my friend at the bank, with the 

surprising news that he had obtained a final sentence of divorce 

against his wife, and had served her with it on such a day, and 

that he had such an answer to give to all my scruples about his 

marrying again, as I could not expect, and as he had no desire 

of; for that his wife, who had been under some remorse before 

for her usage of him, as soon as she had the account that he 

had gained his point, had very unhappily destroyed herself that 

same evening.



He expressed himself very handsomely as to his being concerned 

at her disaster, but cleared himself of having any hand in it, 

and that he had only done himself justice in a case in which he 

was notoriously injured and abused.  However, he said that 

he was extremely afflicted at it, and had no view of any 

satisfaction left in his world, but only in the hope that I would 

come and relieve him by my company; and then he pressed me 

violently indeed to give him some hopes that I would at least 

come up to town and let him see me, when he would further 

enter into discourse about it.



I was exceedingly surprised at the news, and began now  

seriously to reflect on my present circumstances, and the 

inexpressible misfortune it was to me to have a child upon my 

hands, and what to do in it I knew not.  At last I opened my 

case at a distance to my governess.  I appeared melancholy 

and uneasy for several days, and she lay at me continually to 

know what trouble me.  I could not for my life tell her that I 

had an offer of marriage, after I had so often told her that I 

had a husband, so that I really knew not what to say to her.  I 

owned I had something which very much troubled me, but at 

the same time told her I could not speak of it to any one alive.



She continued importuning me several days, but it was 

impossible, I told her, for me to commit the secret to anybody.  

This, instead of being an answer to her, increased her 

importunities; she urged her having been trusted with the 

greatest secrets of this nature, that it was her business to 

conceal everything, and that to discover things of that nature 

would be her ruin.  She asked me if ever I had found her tattling 

to me of other people's affairs, and how could I suspect her?  

She told me, to unfold myself to her was telling it to nobody; 

that she was silent as death; that it must be a very strange case 

indeed that she could not help me out of; but to conceal it was 

to deprive myself of all possible help, or means of help, and to 

deprive her of the opportunity of serving me.  In short, she had 

such a bewitching eloquence, and so great a power of persuasion 

that there was no concealing anything from her.



So I resolved to unbosom myself to her.  I told her the history 

of my Lancashire marriage, and how both of us had been 

disappointed; how we came together, and how we parted; how 

he absolutely discharged me, as far as lay in him, free liberty to 

marry again, protesting that if he knew it he would never claim 

me, or disturb or expose me; that I thought I was free, but was 

dreadfully afraid to venture, for fear of the consequences that 

might follow in case of a discovery.



Then I told her what a good offer I had; showed her my friend's 

two last letters, inviting me to come to London, and let her see 

with what affection and earnestness they were written, but 

blotted out the name, and also the story about the disaster of 

his wife, only that she was dead.



She fell a-laughing at my scruples about marrying, and told 

me the other was no marriage, but a cheat on both sides; and 

that, as we were parted by mutual consent, the nature of the 

contract was destroyed, and the obligation was mutually 

discharged.  She had arguments for this at the tip of her tongue; 

and, in short, reasoned me out of my reason; not but that it 

was too by the help of my own inclination.



But then came the great and main difficulty, and that was the 

child; this, she told me in so many words, must be removed, 

and that so as that it should never be possible for any one to 

discover it.  I knew there was no marrying without entirely 

concealing that I had had a child, for he would soon have 

discovered by the age of it that it was born, nay, and gotten 

too, since my parley with him, and that would have destroyed 

all the affair.



But it touched my heart so forcibly to think of parting entirely 

with the child, and, for aught I knew, of having it murdered, 

or starved by neglect and ill-usage (which was much the same), 

that I could not think of it without horror.  I wish all those 

women who consent to the disposing their children out of the 

way, as it is called, for decency sake, would consider that 'tis 

only a contrived method for murder; that is to say, a-killing 

their children with safety.



It is manifest to all that understand anything of children, that 

we are born into the world helpless, and incapable either to 

supply our own wants or so much as make them known; and 

that without help we must perish; and this help requires not 

only an assisting hand, whether of the mother or somebody 

else, but there are two things necessary in that assisting  hand, 

that is, care and skill; without both which, half the children 

that are born would die, nay, thought they were not to be 

denied food; and one half more of those that remained would 

be cripples or fools, lose their limbs, and perhaps their sense.  

I question not but that these are partly the reasons why affection 

was placed by nature in the hearts of mothers to their children; 

without which they would never be able to give themselves up, 

as 'tis necessary they should, to the care and waking pains 

needful to the support of their children.



Since this care is needful to the life of children, to neglect them 

is to murder them; again, to give them up to be managed by 

those people who have none of that needful affection placed 

by nature in them, is to neglect them in the highest degree; nay, 

in some it goes farther, and is a neglect in order to their being 

lost; so that 'tis even an intentional murder, whether the child 

lives or dies.



All those things represented themselves to my view, and that 

is the blackest and most frightful form:  and as I was very free 

with my governess, whom I had now learned to call mother, 

I represented to her all the dark thoughts which I had upon 

me about it, and told her what distress I was in.  She seemed 

graver by much at this part than at the other; but as she was 

hardened in these things beyond all possibility of being touched 

with the religious part, and the scruples about the murder, so 

she was equally impenetrable in that part which related to 

affection.  She asked me if she had not been careful and tender 

to me in my lying in, as if I had been her own child.  I told her 

I owned she had.  'Well, my dear,' says she, 'and when you 

are gone, what are you to me?  And what would it be to me 

if you were to be hanged?  Do you think there are not women 

who, as it is their trade and they get their bread by it, value 

themselves upon their being as careful of children as their own 

mothers can be, and understand it rather better?  Yes, yes, 

child,' says she, 'fear it not; how were we nursed ourselves?  

Are you sure you was nursed up by your own mother? and 

yet you look fat and fair, child,' says the old beldam; and with 

that she stroked me over the face.  'Never be concerned, child,' 

says she, going on in her drolling way; 'I have no murderers 

about me; I employ the best and the honestest nurses that can 

be had, and have as few children miscarry under their hands 

as there would if they were all nursed by mothers; we want 

neither care nor skill.'



She touched me to the quick when she asked if I was sure 

that I was nursed by my own mother; on the contrary I was 

sure I was not; and I trembled, and looked pale at the very 

expression.  'Sure,' said I to myself, 'this creature cannot be 

a witch, or have any conversation with a spirit, that can inform 

her what was done with me before I was able to know it myself'; 

and I looked at her as if I had been frightened; but reflecting 

that it could not be possible for her to know anything about 

me, that disorder went off, and I began to be easy, but it was 

not presently.



She perceived the disorder I was in, but did not know the 

meaning of it; so she ran on in her wild talk upon the weakness 

of my supposing that children were murdered because they 

were not all nursed by the mother, and to persuade me that 

the children she disposed of were as well used as if the mothers 

had the nursing of them themselves.



'It may be true, mother,' says I, 'for aught I know, but my 

doubts are very strongly grounded indeed.'  'Come, then,' says 

she, 'let's hear some of them.'  'Why, first,' says I, 'you give 

a piece of money to these people to take the child off the 

parent's hands, and to take care of it as long as it lives.  Now 

we know, mother,' said I, 'that those are poor people, and 

their gain consists in being quit of the charge as soon as they 

can; how can I doubt but that, as it is best for them to have 

the child die, they are not over solicitous about life?'



'This is all vapours and fancy,' says the old woman; 'I tell you 

their credit depends upon the child's life, and they are as careful 

as any mother of you all.'



'O mother,' says I, 'if I was but sure my little baby would be 

carefully looked to, and have justice done it, I should be happy 

indeed; but it is impossible I can be satisfied in that point 

unless I saw it, and to see it would be ruin and destruction to 

me, as now my case stands; so what to do I know not.'



'A fine story!' says the governess.  'You would see the child, 

and you would not see the child; you would be concealed and 

discovered both together.  These are things impossible, my 

dear; so you must e'en do as other conscientious mothers have 

done before you, and be contented with things as they must be, 

though they are not as you wish them to be.'



I understood what she meant by conscientious mothers; she 

would have said conscientious whores, but she was not willing 

to disoblige me, for really in this case I was not a whore, 

because legally married, the force of former marriage excepted.



However, let me be what I would, I was not come up to that 

pitch of hardness common to the profession; I mean, to be 

unnatural, and regardless of the safety of my child; and I 

preserved this honest affection so long, that I was upon the 

point of giving up my friend at the bank, who lay so hard at 

me to come to him and marry him, that, in short, there was 

hardly any room to deny him.



At last my old governess came to me, with her usual assurance.  

'Come, my dear,' says she, 'I have found out a way how you 

shall be at a certainty that your child shall be used well, and 

yet the people that take care of it shall never know you, or 

who the mother of the child is.'



'Oh mother,' says I, 'if you can do so, you will engage me to 

you for ever.'  'Well,' says she, 'are you willing to be a some 

small annual expense, more than what we usually give to the 

people we contract with?'  'Ay,' says I, 'with all my heart, 

provided I may be concealed.'  'As to that,' says the governess, 

'you shall be secure, for the nurse shall never so much as dare 

to inquire about you, and you shall once or twice a year go 

with me and see yourchild, and see how 'tis used, and be 

satisfied that it is in good hands, nobody knowing who you are.'



'Why,' said I, 'do you think, mother, that when I come to see 

my child, I shall be able to conceal my being the mother of it?  

Do you think that possible?'



'Well, well,' says my governess, 'if you discover it, the nurse 

shall be never the wiser; for she shall be forbid to ask any 

questions about you, or to take any notice.  If she offers it, 

she shall lose the money which you are suppose to give her, 

and the child shall be taken from her too.'



I was very well pleased with this.  So the next week a 

countrywoman was brought from Hertford, or thereabouts, 

who was to take the child off our hands entirely for #10 in 

money.  But if I would allow #5 a year more of her, she would 

be obliged to bring the child to my governess's house as often 

as we desired, or we should come down and look at it, and see 

how well she used it.



The woman was very wholesome-looking, a likely woman, 

a cottager's wife, but she had very good clothes and linen, and 

everything well about her; and with a heavy heart and many a 

tear, I let her have my child.  I had been down at Hertford, and 

looked at her and at her dwelling, which I liked well enough; 

and I promised her great things if she would be kind to the 

child, so she knew at first word that I was the child's mother.  

But she seemed to be so much out of the way, and to have no 

room to inquire after me, that I thought I was safe enough.  

So, in short, I consented to let her have the child, and I gave 

her #10; that is to say, I gave it to my governess, who gave it 

the poor woman before my face, she agreeing never to return 

the child back to me, or to claim anything more for its keeping 

or bringing up; only that I promised, if she took a great deal 

of care of it, I would give her something more as often as I 

came to see it; so that I was not bound to pay the #5, only 

that I promised my governess I would do it.  And thus my 

great care was over, after a manner, which though it did not 

at all satisfy my mind, yet was the most convenient for me, 

as my affairs then stood, of any that could be thought of at 

that time.



I then began to write to my friend at the bank in a more kindly 

style, and particularly about the beginning of July I sent him a 

letter, that I proposed to be in town some time in August.  He  

returned me an answer in the most passionate terms imaginable, 

and desired me to let him have timely notice, and he would 

come and meet me, two day's journey.  This puzzled me scurvily, 

and I did not know what answer to make of it.  Once I resolved 

to take the stage-coach to West Chester, on purpose only to 

have the satisfaction of coming back, that he might see me 

really come in the same coach; for I had a jealous thought, 

though I had no ground for it at all, lest he should think I was 

not really in the country.  And it was no ill-grounded thought 

as you shall hear presently.



I endeavoured to reason myself out of it, but it was in vain; 

the impression lay so strong on my mind, that it was not to 

be resisted.  At last it came as an addition to my new design 

of going into the country, that it would be an excellent blind 

to my old governess, and would cover entirely all my other 

affairs, for she did not know in the least whether my new lover 

lived in London or in Lancashire; and when I told her my 

resolution, she was fully persuaded it was in Lancashire.



Having taken my measure for this journey I let her know it, 

and sent the maid that tended me, from the beginning, to take 

a place for me in the coach.  She would have had me let the 

maid have waited on me down to the last stage, and come up 

again in the waggon, but I convinced her it would not be 

convenient.  When I went away, she told me she would enter 

into no measures for correspondence, for she saw evidently 

that my affection to my child would cause me to write to her, 

and to visit her too when I came to town again.  I assured her 

it would, and so took my leave, well satisfied to have been 

freed from such a house, however good my accommodations 

there had been, as I have related above.



I took the place in the coach not to its full extent, but to a  

place called Stone, in Cheshire, I think it is, where I not only 

had no manner of business, but not so much as the least 

acquaintance with any person in the town or near it.  But I 

knew that with money in the pocket one is at home anywhere; 

so I lodged there two or three days, till, watching my opportunity, 

I found room in another stage-coach, and took passage back 

again for London, sending a letter to my gentleman that I should 

be such a certain day at Stony-Stratford, where the coachman 

told me he was to lodge.



It happened to be a chance coach that I had taken up, which, 

having been hired on purpose to carry some gentlemen to West 

Chester who were going for Ireland, was now returning, and 

did not tie itself to exact times or places as the stages did; so 

that, having been obliged to lie still on Sunday, he had time to 

get himself ready to come out, which otherwise he could not 

have done.



However, his warning was so short, that he could not reach 

to Stony-Stratford time enough to be with me at night, but he 

met me at a place called Brickhill the next morning, as we 

were just coming in to tow.



I confess I was very glad to see him, for I had thought myself 

a little disappointed over-night, seeing I had gone so far to 

contrive my coming on purpose.  He pleased me doubly too 

by the figure he came in, for he brought a very handsome 

(gentleman's) coach and four horses, with a servant to attend 

him.



He took me out of the stage-coach immediately, which stopped 

at an inn in Brickhill; and putting into the same in, he set up 

his own coach, and bespoke his dinner.  I asked him what he 

meant by that, for I was for going forward with the journey.  

He said, No, I had need of a little rest upon the road, and that 

was a very good sort of a house, though it was but a little town; 

so we would go no farther that night, whatever came of it.



I did not press him much, for since he had come so to meet 

me, and put himself to so much expense, it was but reasonable 

I should oblige him a little too; so I was easy as to that point. 



After dinner we walked to see the town, to see the church, 

and to view the fields, and the country, as is usual for strangers 

to do; and our landlord was our guide in going to see the 

church. I observed my gentleman inquired pretty much about 

the parson, and I took the hint immediately that he certainly 

would propose to be married; and though it was a sudden 

thought, it followed presently, that, in short, I would not refuse 

him; for, to be plain, with my circumstances I was in no 

condition now to say No; I had no reason now to run any more 

such hazards.



But while these thoughts ran round in my head, which was the 

work but of a few moments, I observed my landlord took him 

aside and whispered to him, though not very softly neither, for 

so much I overheard:  'Sir, if you shall have occasion----' the 

rest I could not hear, but it seems it was to this purpose:  'Sir, 

if you shall have occasion for a minister, I have a friend a little 

way off that will serve you, and be as private as you please.'  

My gentleman answered loud enough for me to hear, 'Very 

well, I believe I shall.'



I was no sooner come back to the inn but he fell upon me with 

irresistible words, that since he had had the good fortune to 

meet me, and everything concurred, it would be hastening his 

felicity if I would put an end to the matter just there.  'What 

do you mean?' says I, colouring a little.  'What, in an inn, and 

upon the road!  Bless us all,' said I, as if I had been surprised, 

'how can you talk so?'  'Oh, I can talk so very well,' says he, 

'I came a-purpose to talk so, and I'll show you that I did'; and 

with that he pulls out a great bundle of papers.  'You fright me,' 

said I; 'what are all these?'  'Don't be frighted, my dear,' said 

he, and kissed me.  This was the first time that he had been so 

free to call me 'my dear'; then he repeated it, 'Don't be frighted; 

you shall see what it is all'; then he laid them all abroad.  There 

was first the deed or sentence of divorce from his wife, and 

the full evidence of her playing the whore; then there were the 

certificates of the minister and churchwardens of the parish 

where she lived, proving that she was buried, and intimating 

the manner of her death; the copy of the coroner's warrant for 

a jury to sit upon her, and the verdict of the jury, who brought 

it in Non compos mentis.  All this was indeed to the purpose, 

and to give me satisfaction, though, by the way, I was not so 

scrupulous, had he known all, but that I might have taken him 

without it.  However, I looked them all over as well as I could, 

and told him that this was all very clear indeed, but that he 

need not have given himself the trouble to have brought them 

out with him, for it was time enough.  Well, he said, it might 

be time enough for me, but notime but the present time was 

time enough for him.



There were other papers rolled up, and I asked him what they 

were.  'Why, ay,' says he, 'that's the question I wanted to have 

you ask me'; so he unrolls them and takes out a little shagreen 

case, and gives me out of it a very fine diamond ring.  I could 

not refuse it, if I had a mind to do so, for he put it upon my 

finger; so I made him a curtsy and accepted it.  Then he takes 

out another ring:  'And this,' says he, 'is for another occasion,' 

so he puts that in his pocket.  'Well, but let me see it, though,' 

says I, and smiled; 'I guess what it is; I think you are mad.'  

'I should have been mad if I had done less,' says he, and still 

he did not show me, and I had a great mind to see it; so I says, 

'Well, but let me see it.'  'Hold,' says he, 'first look here'; 

then he took up the roll again and read it, and behold! it was 

a licence for us to be married.  'Why,' says I, 'are you distracted?  

Why, you were fully satisfied that I would comply and yield 

at first word, or resolved to take no denial.'  'The last is 

certainly the case,' said he.  'But you may be mistaken,' said I.  

'No, no,' says he, 'how can you think so?  I must not be denied, 

I can't be denied'; and with that he fell to kissing me so violently, 

I could not get rid of him.



There was a bed in the room, and we were walking to and 

again, eager in the discourse; at last he takes me by surprise 

in his arms, and threw me on the bed and himself with me, 

and holding me fast in his arms, but without the least offer of 

any indecency, courted me to consent with such repeated 

entreaties and arguments, protesting his affection, and vowing 

he would not let me go till I had promised him, that at last I 

said, 'Why, you resolve not to be denied, indeed, I can't be 

denied.'  'Well, well,' said I, and giving him a slight kiss, 'then 

you shan't be denied,' said I; 'let me get up.'



He was so transported with my consent, and the kind manner 

of it, that I began to think once he took it for a marriage, and 

would not stay for the form; but I wronged him, for he gave 

over kissing me, and then giving me two or three kisses again, 

thanked me for my kind yielding to him; and was so overcome 

with the satisfaction and joy of it, that I saw tears stand in his eyes.



I turned from him, for it filled my eyes with tears too, and I 

asked him leave to retire a little to my chamber.  If ever I had 

a grain of true repentance for a vicious and abominable life 

for twenty-four years past, it was then.  On, what a felicity is 

it to mankind, said I to myself, that they cannot see into the 

hearts of one another!  How happy had it been for me if I had 

been wife to a man of so much honesty, and so much affection 

from the beginning!




End of Part 5
