



Part 3




Away goes the old lady to her daughters and tells them the 

whole story, just as I had told it her; and they were surprised 

at it, you may be sure, as I believed they would be.  One said 

she could never have thought it; another said Robin was a fool; 

a third said she would not believe a word of it, and she would 

warrant that Robin would tell the story another way.  But the 

old gentlewoman, who was resolved to go to the bottom of it 

before I could have the least opportunity of acquainting her 

son with what had passed, resolved too that she would talk 

with her son immediately, and to that purpose sent for him, 

for he was gone but to a lawyer's house in the town, upon 

some petty business of his own, and upon her sending he 

returned immediately.



Upon his coming up to them, for they were all still together, 

'Sit down, Robin,' says the old lady, 'I must have some talk 

with you.'  'With all my heart, madam,' says Robin, looking 

very merry.  'I hope it is about a good wife, for I am at a great 

loss in that affair.'  'How can that be?' says his mother; 'did 

not you say you resolved to have Mrs. Betty?'  'Ay, madam,' 

says Robin, 'but there is one has forbid the banns.'  'Forbid, 

the banns!' says his mother; 'who can that be?'  'Even Mrs. 

Betty herself,' says Robin.  'How so?' says his mother.  'Have 

you asked her the question, then?'  'Yes, indeed, madam,' says 

Robin.  'I have attacked her in form five times since she was sick, 

and am beaten off; the jade is so stout she won't capitulate nor 

yield upon any terms, except such as I cannot effectually grant.'  

'Explain yourself,' says the mother, 'for I am surprised; I do 

not understand you.  I hope you are not in earnest.'



'Why, madam,' says he, 'the case is plain enough upon me, 

it explains itself; she won't have me, she says; is not that plain 

enough?  I think 'tis plain, and pretty rough too.'  'Well, but,' 

says the mother, 'you talk of conditions that you cannot grant; 

what does she want--a settlement?  Her jointure ought to be 

according to her portion; but what fortune does she bring you?'  

'Nay, as to fortune,' says Robin, 'she is rich enough; I am 

satisfied in that point; but 'tis I that am not able to come up 

to her terms, and she is positive she will not have me without.'



Here the sisters put in.  'Madam,' says the second sister, ''tis 

impossible to be serious with him; he will never give a direct 

answer to anything; you had better let him alone, and talk no 

more of it to him; you know how to dispose of her out of his 

way if you thought there was anything in it.'  Robin was a little 

warmed with his sister's rudeness, but he was even with her, 

and yet with good manners too.  'There are two sorts of people, 

madam,' says he, turning to his mother, 'that there is no 

contending with; that is, a wise body and a fool; 'tis a little 

hard I should engage with both of them together.'



The younger sister then put in.  'We must be fools indeed,' 

says she, 'in my brother's opinion, that he should think we can 

believe he has seriously asked Mrs. Betty to marry him, and 

that she has refused him.'



'Answer, and answer not, say Solomon,' replied her brother.  

'When your brother had said to your mother that he had asked 

her no less than five times, and that it was so, that she positively 

denied him, methinks a younger sister need not question the 

truth of it when her mother did not.'  'My mother, you see, 

did not understand it,' says the second sister.  'There's some 

difference,' says Robin, 'between desiring me to explain it, 

and telling me she did not believe it.'



'Well, but, son,' says the old lady, 'if you are disposed to let 

us into the mystery of it, what were these hard conditions?'  

'Yes, madam,' says Robin, 'I had done it before now, if the 

teasers here had not worried my by way of interruption.  The 

conditions are, that I bring my father and you to consent to it, 

and without that she protests she will never see me more upon 

that head; and to these conditions, as I said, I suppose I shall 

never be able to grant.  I hope my warm sisters will be 

answered now, and blush a little; if not, I have no more to say 

till I hear further.'



This answer was surprising to them all, though less to the 

mother, because of what I had said to her.  As to the daughters, 

they stood mute a great while; but the mother said with some 

passion, 'Well, I had heard this before, but I could not believe 

it; but if it is so, they we have all done Betty wrong, and she 

has behaved better than I ever expected.'  'Nay,' says the eldest 

sister, 'if it be so, she has acted handsomely indeed.'  'I confess,' 

saysthe mother, 'it was none of her fault, if he was fool enough 

totake a fancy to her; but to give such an answer to him, shows

more respect to your father and me than I can tell how to 

express; I shall value the girl the better for it as long as I know 

her.'  'But I shall not,' says Robin, 'unless you will give your 

consent.' 'I'll consider of that a while,' says the mother; 'I 

assure you, if there were not some other objections in the way, 

this conduct of hers would go a great way to bring me to 

consent.'  'I wish it would go quite through it,' says Robin; 

'if you had a much thought about making me easy as you have 

about making me rich, you would soon consent to it.'



'Why, Robin,' says the mother again, 'are you really in earnest?  

Would you so fain have her as you pretend?'  "Really, madam,' 

says Robin, 'I think 'tis hard you should question me upon 

that head after all I have said.  I won't say that I will have her; 

how can I resolve that point, when you see I cannot have her 

without your consent?  Besides, I am not bound to marry at 

all.  But this I will say, I am in earnest in, that I will never have 

anybody else if I can help it; so you may determine for me.  

Betty or nobody is the word, and the question which of the 

two shall be in your breast to decide, madam, provided only, 

that my good-humoured sisters here may have no vote in it.' 



All this was dreadful to me, for the mother began to yield, 

and Robin pressed her home on it.  On the other hand, she 

advised with the eldest son, and he used all the arguments in 

the world to persuade her to consent; alleging his brother's 

passionate love for me, and my generous regard to the family, 

in refusing my own advantages upon such a nice point of 

honour, and a thousand such things.  And as to the father, he 

was a man in a hurry of public affairs and getting money, 

seldom at home, thoughtful of the main chance, but left all 

those things to his wife.



You may easily believe, that when the plot was thus, as they 

thought, broke out, and that every one thought they knew how 

things were carried, it was not so difficult or so dangerous for 

the elder brother, whom nobody suspected of anything, to have 

a freer access to me than before; nay, the mother, which was 

just as he wished, proposed it to him to talk with Mrs. Betty.  

'For it may be, son,' said she, 'you may see farther into the 

thing than I, and see if you think she has been so positive as 

Robin says she has been, or no.'  This was as well as he could 

wish, and he, as it were, yielding to talk with me at his mother's 

request, she brought me to him into her own chamber, told me 

her son had some business with me at her request, and desired 

me to be very sincere with him, and then she left us together, 

and he went and shut the door after her.



He came back to me and took me in his arms, and kissed me 

very tenderly; but told me he had a long discourse to hold 

with me, and it was not come to that crisis, that I should make 

myself happy or miserable as long as I lived; that the thing 

was now gone so far, that if I could not comply with his desire, 

we would both be ruined.  Then he told the whole story 

between Robin, as he called him, and his mother and sisters 

and himself, as it is above.  'And now, dear child,' says he, 

'consider what it will be to marry a gentleman of a good family, 

in good circumstances, and with the consent of the whole house, 

and to enjoy all that he world can give you; and what, on the 

other hand, to be sunk into the dark circumstances of a woman 

that has lost her reputation; and that though I shall be a private 

friend to you while I live, yet as I shall be suspected always, 

so you will be afraid to see me, and I shall be afraid to own you.'



He gave me no time to reply, but went on with me thus:  'What 

has happened between us, child, so long as we both agree to do 

so, may be buried and forgotten.  I shall always be your sincere 

friend, without any inclination to nearer intimacy, when you 

become my sister; and we shall have all the honest part of  

conversation without any reproaches between us of having  

done amiss.  I beg of you to consider it, and to not stand in the 

way of your own safety and prosperity; and to satisfy you that 

I am sincere,' added he, 'I here offer you #500 in money, to 

make you some amends for the freedoms I havetaken with  

you, which we shall look upon as some of the folliesof our 

lives,  which 'tis hoped we may repent of.'



He spoke this in so much more moving terms than it is possible 

for me to express, and with so much greater force of argument 

than I can repeat, that I only recommend it to those who read 

the story, to suppose, that as he held me above an hour and a 

half in that discourse, so he answered all my objections, and 

fortified his discourse with all the arguments that human wit 

and art could devise.



I cannot say, however, that anything he said made impression 

enough upon me so as to give me any thought of the matter, 

till he told me at last very plainly, that if I refused, he was 

sorry to add that he could never go on with me in that station 

as we stood before; that though he loved me as well as ever, 

and that I was as agreeable to him as ever, yet sense of virtue 

had not so far forsaken him as to suffer him to lie with a 

woman that his brother courted to make his wife; and if he 

took his leave of me, with a denial in this affair, whatever he 

might do for me in the point of support, grounded on his first 

engagement of maintaining me, yet he would not have me be 

surprised that he was obliged to tell me he could not allow 

himself to see me any more; and that, indeed, I could not 

expect it of him.



I received this last part with some token of surprise and 

disorder, and had much ado to avoid sinking down, for indeed 

I loved him to an extravagance not easy to imagine; but he 

perceived my disorder.  He entreated me to consider seriously 

of it; assured me that it was the only way to preserve our 

mutual affection; that in this station we might love as friends, 

with the utmost passion, and with a love of relation untainted, 

free from our just reproaches, and free from other people's 

suspicions; that he should ever acknowledge his happiness 

owing to me; that he would be debtor to me as long as he 

lived, and would be paying that debt as long as he had breath.  

Thus he wrought me up, in short, to a kind of hesitation in the 

matter; having the dangers on one side represented in lively 

figures, and indeed, heightened by my imagination of being 

turned out to the wide world a mere cast-off whore, for it was 

no less, and perhaps exposed as such, with little to provide for

 myself, with no friend, no acquaintance in the whole world, 

out of that town, and there I could not pretend to stay.  All 

this terrified me to the last degree, and he took care upon all 

occasions to lay it home to me in the worst colours that it could 

be possible to be drawn in.  On the other hand, he failed not to 

set forth the easy, prosperous life which I was going to live.

 

He answered all that I could object from affection, and from 

former engagements, with telling me the necessity that was 

before us of taking other measures now; and as to his promises 

of marriage, the nature of things, he said, had put an end to 

that, by the probability of my being his brother's wife, before 

the time to which his promises all referred.



Thus, in a word, I may say, he reasoned me out of my reason; 

he conquered all my arguments, and I began to see a danger 

that I was in, which I had not considered of before, and that 

was, of being dropped by both of them and left alone in the 

world to shift for myself.



This, and his persuasion, at length prevailed with me to 

consent, though with so much reluctance, that it was easy to 

see I should go to church like a bear to the stake.  I had some 

little apprehensions about me, too, lest my new spouse, who, 

by the way, I had not the least affection for, should be skillful 

enough to challenge me on another account, upon our first 

coming to bed together.  But whether he did it with design or 

not, I know not, but his elder brother took care to make him 

very much fuddled before he went to bed, so that I had the 

satisfaction of a drunken bedfellow the first night.  How he 

did it I know not, but I concluded that he certainly contrived 

it, that his brother might be able to make no judgment of the 

difference between a maid and a married woman; nor did he 

ever entertain any notions of it, or disturb his thoughts about it.



I should go back a little here to where I left off.  The elder 

brother having thus managed me, his next business was to 

manage his mother, and he never left till he had brought her 

to acquiesce and be passive in the thing, even without 

acquainting the father, other than by post letters; so that she 

consented to our marrying privately, and leaving her to mange 

the father afterwards.



Then he cajoled with his brother, and persuaded him what 

service he had done him, and how he had brought his mother 

to consent, which, though true, was not indeed done to serve 

him, but to serve himself; but thus diligently did he cheat him, 

and had the thanks of a faithful friend for shifting off his whore 

into his brother's arms for a wife.  So certainly does interest 

banish all manner of affection, and so naturally do men give 

up honour and justice, humanity, and even Christianity, to 

secure themselves.



I must now come back to brother Robin, as we always called 

him, who having got his mother's consent, as above, came 

big with the news to me, and told me the whole story of it, 

with a sincerity so visible, that I must confess it grieved me 

that I must be the instrument to abuse so honest a gentleman.  

But there was no remedy; he would have me, and I was not 

obliged to tell him that I was his brother's whore, though I had 

no other way to put him off; so I came gradually into it, to his 

satisfaction, and behold we were married.



Modesty forbids me to reveal the secrets of the marriage-bed, 

but nothing could have happened more suitable to my 

circumstances than that, as above, my husband was so fuddled 

when he came to bed, that he could not remember in the 

morning whether he had had any conversation with me or no, 

and I was obliged to tell him he had, though in reality he had 

not, that I might be sure he could make to inquiry about 

anything else.



It concerns the story in hand very little to enter into the further 

particulars of the family, or of myself, for the five years that I 

lived with this husband, only to observe that I had two children 

by him, and that at the end of five years he died.  He had been 

really a very good husband to me, and we lived very agreeably 

together; but as he had not received much from them, and had 

in the little time he lived acquired no great matters, so my 

circumstances were not great, nor was I much mended by the 

match.  Indeed, I had preserved the elder brother's bonds to 

me,to pay #500, which he offered me for my consentto marry 

his brother; and this, with what I had saved of the moneyhe 

formerly gave me, about as much more by my husband, left me 

a widow with about #1200 in my pocket.



My two children were, indeed, taken happily off my hands by

my husband's father and mother, and that, by the way, was all

they got by Mrs. Betty.



I confess I was not suitably affected with the loss of my husband, 

nor indeed can I say that I ever loved him as I ought to have 

done, or as was proportionable to the good usage I had from 

him, for he was a tender, kind, good-humoured man as any 

woman could desire; but his brother being so always in my 

sight, at least while we were in the country, was a continual 

snare to me, and I never was in bed with my husband but I 

wished myself in the arms of his brother; and though his brother 

never offered me the least kindness that way after our marriage, 

but carried it just as a brother out to do, yet it was impossible 

for me to do so to him; in short, I committed adultery and incest 

with him every day in my desires, which, without doubt, was as 

effectually criminal in the nature of the guilt as if I had actually 

done it.



Before my husband died his elder brother was married, and 

we, being then removed to London, were written to by the old 

lady to come and be at the wedding.  My husband went, but I 

pretended indisposition, and that I could not possibly travel, 

so I stayed behind; for, in short, I could not bear the sight of 

his being given to another woman, though I knew I was never 

to have him myself.



I was now, as above, left loose to the world, and being still 

young and handsome, as everybody said of me, and I assure 

you I thought myself so, and with a tolerable fortune in my 

pocket, I put no small value upon myself.  I was courted by 

several very considerable tradesmen, and particularly very 

warmly by one, a linen-draper, at whose house, after my 

husband's death, I took a lodging, his sister being my acquaintance.  

Here I had all the liberty and all the opportunity to be gay and 

appear in company that I could desire, my landlord's sister 

being one of the maddest, gayest things alive, and not so much 

mistress of her virtue as I thought as first she had been.  She 

brought me into a world of  wild company, and even brought 

home several persons, such as she liked well enough to gratify, 

to see her pretty widow, so she was pleased to call me, and 

that name I got in a little time in public.  Now, as fame and 

fools make an assembly, I was here wonderfully caressed, had 

abundance of admirers, and such as called themselves lovers; 

but I found not one fair proposal among them all.  As for their 

common design, that I understood too well to be drawn into 

any more snares of that kind.  The case was altered with me:  

I had money in my pocket, and had nothing to say to them.  I 

had been tricked once by that cheat called love, but the game 

was over;  I was resolved now to be married or nothing, and 

to be well married or not at all.



I loved the company, indeed, of men of mirth and wit, men of 

gallantry and figure, and was often entertained with such, as 

I was also with others; but I found by just observation, that the 

brightest men came upon the dullest errand--that is to say, the 

dullest as to what I aimed at.  On the other hand, those who 

came with the best proposals were the dullest and most  

disagreeable part of the world.  I was not averse to a tradesman, 

but then I would have a tradesman, forsooth, that was 

something of a gentleman too; that when my husband had a 

mind to carry me to the court, or to the play, he might become 

a sword, and look as like a gentleman as another man; and not 

be one that had the mark of his apron-strings upon his coat, 

or the mark of his hat upon his periwig; that should look as if 

he was set on to his sword, when his sword was put on to him, 

and that carried his trade in his countenance.



Well, at last I found this amphibious creature, this land-water 

thing called a gentleman-tradesman; and as a just plague upon 

my folly, I was catched in the very snare which, as I might say, 

I laid for myself.  I said for myself, for I was not trepanned, 

I confess, but I betrayed myself.



This was a draper, too, for though my comrade would have 

brought me to a bargain with her brother, yet when it came to 

the point, it was, it seems, for a mistress, not a wife; and I kept 

true to this notion, that a woman should never be kept for a 

mistress that had money to keep herself.



Thus my pride, not my principle, my money, not my virtue, 

kept me honest; though, as it proved, I found I had much better 

have been sold by my she-comrade to her brother, than have 

sold myself as I did to a tradesman that was rake, gentleman, 

shopkeeper, and beggar, all together.



But I was hurried on (by my fancy to a gentleman) to ruin 

myself in the grossest manner that every woman did; for my 

new husband coming to a lump of money at once, fell into 

such a profusion of expense, that all I had, and all he had 

before, if he had anything worth mentioning, would not have 

held it out above one year.



He was very fond of me for about a quarter of a year, and 

what  I got by that was, that I had the pleasure of seeing a great 

deal of my money spent upon myself, and, as I may say, had 

some of the spending it too.  'Come, my dear,' says he to me 

one day, 'shall we go and take a turn into the country for about 

a week?' 'Ay, my dear,' says I, 'whither would you go?'  'I 

care not whither,' says he, 'but I have a mind to look like 

quality for a week.  We'll go to Oxford,' says he.  'How,' says 

I, 'shall we go? I am no horsewoman, and 'tis too far for a coach.'

  'Too far!' says he; 'no place is too far for a coach-and-six.  If 

I carry you out, you shall travel like a duchess.'  'Hum,' says 

I, 'my dear, 'tis a frolic; but if you have a mind to it, I don't 

care.'  Well, the time was appointed, we had a rich coach, very 

good horses, a coachman, postillion, and two footmen in very 

good liveries; a gentleman on horseback, and a page with a 

feather in his hat upon another horse.  The servants all called 

him my lord, and the inn-keepers, you may be sure, did the like, 

and I was her honour the Countess, and thus we traveled to 

Oxford, and a very pleasant journey we had; for, give him his 

due, not a beggar alive knew better how to be a lord than my 

husband.  We saw all the rarities at Oxford, talked with two or 

three Fellows of colleges about putting out a young nephew, 

that was left to his lordship's care, to the University, and of 

their being his tutors.  We diverted ourselves with bantering 

several other poor scholars, with hopes of being at least his 

lordship's chaplains and putting on a scarf; and thus having 

lived like quality indeed, as to expense, we went away for 

Northampton, and, in a word, in about twelve days' ramble 

came home again, to the tune of about #93 expense.



Vanity is the perfection of a fop.  My husband had this 

excellence, that he valued nothing of expense; and as his 

history, you may be sure, has very little weight in it, 'tis 

enough to tell you that in about two years and a quarter he 

broke, and was not so happy to get over into the Mint, but got 

into a sponging-house, being arrested in an action too heavy 

from him to give bail to, so he sent for me to come to him.



It was no surprise to me, for I had foreseen some time that 

all was going to wreck, and had been taking care to reserve 

something if I could, though it was not much, for myself.  But 

when he sent for me, he behaved much better than I expected, 

and told me plainly he had played the fool, and suffered 

himself to be surprised, which he might have prevented; that 

now he foresaw he could not stand it, and therefore he would 

have me go home, and in the night take away everything I had 

in the house of any value, and secure it; and after that, he told 

me that if I could get away one hundred or two hundred pounds 

in goods out of the shop, I should do it; 'only,' sayshe, 'let me 

know nothing of it, neither what you take norwhither you 

carry it; for as for me,' says he, 'I am resolved toget out of 

this house and be gone; and if you never hear of memore, my 

dear,' says he, 'I wish you well; I am only sorry forthe injury 

I have done you.'  He said some very handsomethings to me 

indeed at parting; for I told you he was a gentleman, and that 

was all the benefit  I had of his being so; that he used me very 

handsomely and with good mannersupon all occasions, even 

to the last, only spent all I had, andleft me to rob the creditors 

for something to subsist on.



However, I did as he bade me, that you may be sure; and 

having thus taken my leave of him, I never saw him more, for 

he found means to break out of the bailiff's house that night 

or the next, and go over into France, and for the rest of the 

creditors scrambled for it as well as they could.  How, I knew 

not, for I could come at no knowledge of anything, more than 

this, that he came home about three o'clock in the morning, 

caused the rest of his goods to be removed into the Mint, and 

the shop to be shut up; and having raised what money he could 

get together, he got over, as I said, to France, from whence I 

had one or two letters from him, and no more.  I did not see him 

when he came home, for he having given me such instructions 

as above, and I having made the best of my time, I had no more 

business back again at the house, not knowing but I might have 

been stopped there by the creditors; for a commission of  

bankrupt being soon after issued, they might have stopped me 

by orders from the commissioners.  But my husband, having 

so dexterously got out of the bailiff's house by letting himself 

down in a most desperate manner from almost the top of the 

house to the top of another building, and leaping from thence, 

which was almost two storeys, and which was enough indeed 

to have broken his neck, he came home and got away his goods 

before the creditors could come to seize; that is to say, before 

they could get out the commission, and be ready to send their 

officers to take possession.



My husband was so civil to me, for still I say he was much 

of a gentleman, that in the first letter he wrote me from France, 

he let me know where he had pawned twenty pieces of fine 

holland for #30, which were really worth #90, and enclosed 

me the token and an order for the taking them up, paying the 

money, which I did, and made in time above #100 of them, 

having leisure to cut them and sell them, some and some, to 

private families, as opportunity offered.



However, with all this, and all that I had secured before, I 

found, upon casting things up, my case was very much altered, 

any my fortune much lessened; for, including the hollands and 

a parcel of fine muslins, which I carried off before, and some 

plate, and other things, I found I could hardly muster up #500; 

and my condition was very odd, for though I had no child (I 

had had one by my gentleman draper, but it was buried), yet I 

was a widow bewitched; I had a husband and no husband, and 

I could not pretend to marry again, though I knew well enough 

my husband would never see England any more, if he lived fifty 

years.  Thus, I say, I was limited from marriage, what offer 

mightsoever be made me; and I had not one friend to advise 

with in the condition I was in, lease not one I durst trust the 

secret of my circumstances to, for if the commissioners were 

to have been informed where I was, I should have been fetched 

up and examined upon oath, and all I have saved be taken aware 

from me.



Upon these apprehensions, the first thing I did was to go quite 

out of my knowledge, and go by another name.  This I did 

effectually, for I went into the Mint too, took lodgings in a 

very private place, dressed up in the habit of a widow, and 

called myself Mrs. Flanders.



Here, however, I concealed myself, and though my new 

acquaintances knew nothing of me, yet I soon got a great 

deal of company about me; and whether it be that women are 

scarce among the sorts of people that generally are to be found 

there, or that some consolations in the miseries of the place 

are more requisite than on other occasions, I soon found an 

agreeable woman was exceedingly valuable among the sons 

of affliction there, and that those that wanted money to pay 

half a crown on the pound to their creditors, and that run in debt 

at the sign of the Bull for their dinners, would yet find money 

for a supper, if they liked the woman.



However, I kept myself safe yet, though I began, like my Lord 

Rochester's mistress, that loved his company, but would not 

admit him farther, to have the scandal of a whore, without the 

joy; and upon this score, tired with the place, and indeed 

with the company too, I began to think of removing.



It was indeed a subject of strange reflection to me to see men 

who were overwhelmed in perplexed circumstances, who 

were reduced some degrees below being ruined, whose families 

were objects of their own terror and other people's charity, 

yet while a penny lasted, nay, even beyond it, endeavouring to 

drown themselves, labouring to forget former things, which 

not it was the proper time to remember, making more work for 

repentance, and sinning on, as a remedy for sin past.



But it is none of my talent to preach; these men were too 

wicked, even for me.  There was something horrid and absurd 

in their way of sinning, for it was all a force even upon 

themselves; they did not only act against conscience, but 

against nature; they put a rape upon their temper to drown the 

reflections, which their circumstances continually gave them; 

and nothing was more easy than to see how sighs would 

interrupt their songs, and paleness and anguish sit upon their 

brows, in spite of the forced smiles they put on; nay, sometimes 

it would break out at their very mouths when they had parted 

with their money for a lewd treat or a wicked embrace.  I have 

heard them, turning about, fetch a deep sigh, and cry, 'What a 

dog am I!  Well, Betty, my dear, I'll drink thy health, though'; 

meaning the honest wife, that perhaps had not a half-crown 

for herself and three or four children.  The next morning they 

are at their penitentials again; and perhaps the poor weeping 

wife comes over to him, either brings him some account of 

what his creditors are doing, and how she and the children are 

turned out of doors, or some other dreadful news; and this 

adds to his self-reproaches; but when he has thought and pored 

on it till he is almost mad, having no principles to support him, 

nothing within him or above him to comfort him, but finding 

it all darkness on every side, he flies to the same relief again, 

viz. to drink it away, debauch it away, and falling into  

company of men in just the same condition with himself, he 

repeats the crime, and thus he goes every day one step 

onward of his way to destruction.



I was not wicked enough for such fellows as these yet.  On 

the contrary, I began to consider here very seriously what I 

had to do; how things stood with me, and what course I ought 

to take.  I knew I had no friends, no, not one friend or relation 

in the world; and that little I had left apparently wasted, which 

when it was gone, I saw nothing but misery and starving was 

before me.  Upon these considerations, I say, and filled with 

horror at the place I was in, and the dreadful objects which I 

had always before me, I resolved to be gone.



I had made an acquaintance with a very sober, good sort of a 

woman, who was a widow too, like me, but in better circumstances.  

Her husband had been a captain of a merchant ship, and having 

had the misfortune to be cast away coming home on a voyage 

from the West Indies, which would have been very profitable 

if he had come safe, was so reduced by the loss, that though 

he had saved his life then, it broke his heart, and killed him 

afterwards; and his widow, being pursued by the creditors, was 

forced to take shelter in the Mint.  She soon made things up 

with the help of friends, and was at liberty again; and finding 

that I rather was there to be concealed, than by any particular 

prosecutions and finding also that I agreed with her, or rather 

she with me, in a just abhorrence of the place and of the 

company, she invited to go home with her till I could put 

myself in some posture of settling in the world to my mind; 

withal telling me, that it was ten to one but some good captain 

of a ship might take a fancy to me, and court me, in that part 

of the town where she lived.



I accepted her offer, and was with her half a year, and should 

have been longer, but in that interval what she proposed to me 

happened to herself, and she married very much to her advantage.  

But whose fortune soever was upon the increase, mine seemed 

to be upon the wane, and I found nothing present, except two 

or three boatswains, or such fellows, but as for the commanders, 

they were generally of two sorts:  1. Such as, having good

business, that is to say, a good ship, resolved not to marry

but with advantage, that is, with a good fortune; 2. Such as,

being out of employ, wanted a wife to help them to a ship; I 

mean (1) a wife who, having some money, could enable them 

to hold, as they call it, a good part of a ship themselves, so to 

encourage owners to come in; or (2) a wife who, if she had not 

money, had friends who were concerned in shipping, and so 

could help to put the young man into a good ship, which to 

them is as good as a portion; and neither of these was my case, 

so I looked like one that was to lie on hand.



This knowledge I soon learned by experience, viz. that the 

state of things was altered as to  matrimony, and that I was not 

to expect at London what I had found in the country:  that 

marriages were here the consequences of politic schemes for 

forming interests, and carrying on business, and that Love had 

no share, or but very little, in the matter.



That as my sister-in-law at Colchester had said, beauty, wit, 

manners, sense, good humour, good behaviour, education, 

virtue, piety, or any other qualification, whether of body or 

mind, had no power to recommend; that money only made a 

woman agreeable; that men chose mistresses indeed by the 

gust of their affection, and it was requisite to a whore to be 

handsome, well-shaped, have a good mien and a graceful 

behaviour; but that for a wife, no deformity would shock the 

fancy, no ill qualities the judgment; the money was the thing; 

the portion was neither crooked nor monstrous, but the money 

was always agreeable, whatever the wife was.



On the other hand, as the market ran very unhappily on the 

men's side, I found the women had lost the privilege of saying 

No; that it was a favour now for a woman to have the Question 

asked, and if any young lady had so much arrogance as to 

counterfeit a negative, she never had the opportunity given 

her of denying twice, much less of recovering that false step, 

and accepting what she had but seemed to decline.  The men 

had such choice everywhere, that the case of the women was 

very unhappy; for they seemed to ply at every door, and if the 

man was by great chance refused at one house, he was sure to 

be received at the next.



Besides this, I observed that the men made no scruple to set 

themselves out, and to go a-fortunehunting, as they call it, 

when they had really no fortune themselves to demand it, or 

merit to deserve it; and that they carried it so high, that a woman 

was scarce allowed to inquire after the character or estate of 

the person that pretended to her.  This I had an example of, in 

a young lady in the next house to me, and with whom I had 

contracted an intimacy; she was courted by a young captain, 

and though she had near #2000 to her fortune, she did but 

inquire of some of his neighbours about his character, his 

morals, or substance, and he took occasion at the next visit to 

let her know, truly, that he took it very ill, and that he should 

not give her the trouble of his visits any more.  I heard of it, 

and I had begun my acquaintance with her, I went to see her 

upon it.  She entered into a close conversation with me about 

it, and unbosomed herself very freely.  I perceived presently 

that though she thought herself very ill used, yet she had no 

power to resent it, and was exceedingly piqued that she had 

lost him, and particularly that another of  less fortune had 

gained him.



I fortified her mind against such a meanness, as I called it; I 

told her, that as low as I was in the world, I would have 

despised a man that should think I ought to take him upon his 

own recommendation only, without having the liberty to 

inform myself of his fortune and of his character; also I told 

her, that as she had a good fortune, she had no need to stoop 

to the disaster of the time; that it was enough that the men 

could insult us that had but little money to recommend us, but 

if she suffered such an affront to pass upon her without resenting 

it, she would be rendered low-prized upon all occasions, and 

would be the contempt of all the women in that part of the town; 

that a woman can never want an opportunity to be revenged 

of a man that has used her ill, and that there were ways enough 

to humble such a fellow as that, or else certainly women were 

the most unhappy creatures in the world.



I found she was very well pleased with the discourse, and she 

told me seriously that she would be very glad to make him 

sensible of her just resentment, and either to bring him on again,

 or have the satisfaction of her revenge being as public as possible.



I told her, that if she would take my advice, I would tell her 

how she should obtain her wishes in both those things, and 

that I would engage I would bring the man to her door again, 

and make him beg to be let in.  She smiled at that, and soon 

let me see, that if he came to her door, her resentment was 

not so great as to give her leave to let him stand long there.



However, she listened very willingly to my offer of advice; 

so I told her that the first thing she ought to do was a piece 

of justice to herself, namely, that whereas she had been told 

by several people that he had reported among the ladies that 

he had left her, and pretended to give the advantage of the 

negative to himself, she should take care to have it well spread 

among the women--which she could not fail of an opportunity 

to do in a neighbourhood so addicted to family news as that 

she live in was--that she had inquired into his circumstances, 

and found he was not the man as to estate he pretended to be.  

'Let them be told, madam,' said I, 'that you had been well 

informed that he was not the man that you expected, and that 

you thought it was not safe to meddle with him; that you heard 

he was of an ill temper, and that he boasted how he had used 

the women ill upon many occasions, and that particularly he 

was debauched in his morals', etc.  The last of which, indeed, 

had some truth in it; but at the same time I did not find that 

she seemed to like him much the worse for that part.



As I had put this into her head, she came most readily into it.  

Immediately she went to work to find instruments, and she 

had very little difficulty in the search, for telling her story in 

general to a couple of gossips in the neighbourhood, it was the 

chat of the tea-table all over that part of the town, and I met 

with it wherever I visited; also, as it was known that I was 

acquainted with the young lady herself, my opinion was asked 

very often, and I confirmed it with all the necessary aggravations, 

and set out his character in the blackest colours; but then as a 

piece of secret intelligence, I added, as what the other gossips 

knew nothing of, viz. that I had heard he was in very bad 

circumstances; that he was under a necessity of a fortune to 

support his interest with the owners of the ship he commanded; 

that his own part was not paid for, and if it was not paid quickly, 

his owners would put him out of the ship, and his chief mate 

was likely to command it, who offered to buy that part which 

the captain had promised to take.



I added, for I confess I was heartily piqued at the rogue, as I 

called him, that I had heard a rumour, too, that he had a wife 

alive at Plymouth, and another in the West Indies, a thing which 

they all knew was not very uncommon for such kind of gentlemen. 



This worked as we both desire it, for presently the young lady 

next door, who had a father and mother that governed both 

her and her fortune, was shut up, and her father forbid him the 

house.  Also in one place more where he went, the woman had 

the courage, however strange it was, to say No; and he could 

try nowhere but he was reproached with his pride, and that he 

pretended not to give the women leave to inquire into his 

character, and the like.



Well, by this time he began to be sensible of his mistake; and 

having alarmed all the women on that side of the water, he 

went over to Ratcliff, and got access to some of the ladies 

there; but though the young women there too were, according 

to the fate of the day, pretty willing to be asked, yet such was 

his ill-luck, that his character followed him over the water and 

his good name was much the same there as it was on our side; 

so that though he might have had wives enough, yet it did not 

happen among the women that had good fortunes, which was 

what he wanted.



But this was not all; she very ingeniously managed another 

thing herself, for she got a young gentleman, who as a relation,  

and was indeed a married man, to come and visit her two or 

three times a week in a very fine chariot and good liveries, and 

her two agents, and I also, presently spread a report all over, 

that this gentleman came to court her; that he was a gentleman 

of a #1000 a year, and that he was fallen in love with her, and 

that she was going to her aunt's in the city, because it was 

inconvenient for the gentleman to come to her with his coach 

in Redriff, the streets being so narrow and difficult.



This took immediately.  The captain was laughed at in all 

companies, and was ready to hang himself.  He tried all the 

ways possible to come at her again, and wrote the most 

passionate letters to her in the world, excusing his former 

rashness; and in short, by great application, obtained leave to 

wait on her again, as he said, to clear his reputation.





At this meeting she had her full revenge of him; for she told 

him she wondered what he took her to be, that she should 

admit any man to a treaty of so much consequence as that to 

marriage, without inquiring very well into his circumstances; 

that if he thought she was to be huffed into wedlock, and that 

she was in the same circumstances which her neighbours might 

be in, viz. to take up with the first good Christian that came, 

he was mistaken; that, in a word, his character was really bad, 

or he was very ill beholden to his neighbours; and that unless 

he could clear up some points, in which she had justly been 

prejudiced, she had no more to say to him, but to do herself 

justice, and give him the satisfaction of knowing that she was 

not afraid to say No, either to him or any man else.



With that she told him what she had heard, or rather raised 

herself by my means, of his character; his not having paid for 

the part he pretended to own of the ship he commanded; of 

the resolution of his owners to put him out of the command, 

and to put his mate in his stead; and of the scandal raised on 

his morals; his having been reproached with such-and-such 

women, and having a wife at Plymouth and in the West Indies, 

and the like; and she asked him whether he could deny that she 

had good reason, if these things were not cleared up, to refuse 

him, and in the meantime to insist upon having satisfaction in 

points to significant as they were.



He was so confounded at her discourse that he could not 

answer a word, and she almost began to believe that all was 

true, by his disorder, though at the same time she knew that 

she had been the raiser of all those reports herself.



After some time he recovered himself a little, and from that 

time became the most humble, the most modest, and most 

importunate man alive in his courtship.



She carried her jest on a great way.  She asked him, if he 

thought she was so at her last shift that she could or ought to 

bear such treatment, and if he did not see that she did not 

want those who thought it worth their while to come farther 

to her than he did; meaning the gentleman whom she had 

brought to visit her by way of sham.



She brought him by these tricks to submit to all possible 

measures to satisfy her, as well of his circumstances as of his 

behaviour.  He brought her undeniable evidence of his having 

paid for his part of the ship; he brought her certificates from 

his owners, that the report of their intending to remove him 

from the command of the ship and put his chief mate in was 

false and groundless; in short, he was quite the reverse of what 

he was before.



Thus I convinced her, that if the men made their advantage 

of our sex in the affair of marriage, upon the supposition of 

there being such choice to be had, and of the women being 

so easy, it was only owing to this, that the women wanted 

courage to maintain their ground and to play their part; and 

that, according to my Lord Rochester,



     'A woman's ne'er so ruined but she can 

     Revenge herself on her undoer, Man.'



After these things this young lady played her part so well, that 

though she resolved to have him, and that indeed having him 

was the main bent of her design, yet she made his obtaining 

her be to him the most difficult thing in the world; and this she 

did, not by a haughty reserved carriage, but by a just policy, 

turning the tables upon him, and playing back upon him his 

own game; for as he pretended, by a kind of lofty carriage, to 

place himself above the occasion of a character, and to make 

inquiring into his character a kind of an affront to him, she 

broke with him upon that subject, and at the same time that 

she make him submit to all possible inquiry after his affairs, 

she apparently shut the door against his looking into her own.



It was enough to him to obtain her for a wife.  As to what 

she had, she told him plainly, that as he knew her circumstances, 

it was but just she should know his; and though at the same 

time he had only known her circumstances by common fame, 

yet he had made so many protestations of his passion for her, 

that he could ask no more but her hand to his grand request, 

and the like ramble according to the custom of lovers.  In short, 

he left himself no room to ask any more questions about her 

estate, and she took the advantage of it like a prudent woman, 

for she placed part of her fortune so in trustees, without letting 

him know anything of it, that it was quite out of his reach, and 

made him be very well content with the rest.



It is true she was pretty well besides, that is to say, she had  

about #1400 in money, which she gave him; and the other, 

after some time, she brought to light as a perquisite to herself, 

which he was to accept as a mighty favour, seeing though it 

was not to be his, it might ease him in the article of her particular 

expenses; and I must add, that by this conduct the gentleman 

himself became not only the more humble in his applications 

to her to obtain her, but also was much the more an obliging 

husband to her when he had her.  I cannot but remind the ladies 

here how much they place themselves below the common 

station of a wife, which, if I may be allowed not to be partial, 

is low enough already; I say, they place themselves below their 

common station, and prepare their own mortifications, by their

submitting so to be insulted by the men beforehand, which I 

confess I see no necessity of.



This relation may serve, therefore, to let the ladies see that 

the advantage is not so much on the other side as the men 

think it is; and though it may be true that the men have but too 

much choice among us, and that some women may be found 

who will dishonour themselves, be cheap, and easy to come 

at, and will scarce wait to be asked, yet if they will have women, 

as I may say, worth having, they may find them as uncomeatable 

as ever and that those that are otherwise are a sort of people 

that have such deficiencies, when had, as rather recommend 

the ladies that are difficult than encourage the men to go on 

with their easy courtship, and expect wives equally valuable 

that will come at first call.



Nothing is more certain than that the ladies always gain of the 

men by keeping their ground, and letting their pretended 

lovers see they can resent being slighted, and that they are not 

afraid of saying No.  They, I observe, insult us mightily with 

telling us of the number of women; that the wars, and the sea, 

and trade, and other incidents have carried the men so much 

away, that there is no proportion between the numbers of the 

sexes, and therefore the women have the disadvantage; but I 

am far from granting that the number of women is so great, 

or the number of men so small; but if they will have me tell 

the truth, the disadvantage of the women is a terrible scandal 

upon the men, and it lies here, and here only; namely, that the 

age is so wicked, and the sex so debauched, that, in short, the 

number of such men as an honest woman ought to meddle 

with is small indeed, and it is but here and there that a man is 

to be found who is fit for a woman to venture upon.



But the consequence even of that too amounts to no more 

than this, that women ought to be the more nice; for how do 

we know the just character of the man that makes the offer?  

To say that the woman should be the more easy on this 

occasion, is to say we should be the forwarder to venture 

because of the greatness of the danger, which, in my way of 

reasoning, is very absurd.

 

On the contrary, the women have ten thousand times the more 

reason to be wary and backward, by how much the hazard of 

being betrayed is the greater; and would the ladies consider 

this, and act the wary part, they would discover every cheat 

that offered; for, in short, the lives of very few men nowadays 

will bear a character; and if the ladies do but make a little 

inquiry, they will soon be able to distinguish the men and 

deliver themselves.  As for women that do not think they own 

safety worth their though, that, impatient of their perfect state, 

resolve, as they call it, to take the first good Christian that 

comes, that run into matrimony as a horse rushes into the battle, 

I can say nothing to them but this, that they are a sort of ladies 

that are to be prayed for among the rest of distempered people, 

and to me they look like people that venture their whole estates 

in a lottery where there is a hundred thousand blanks to one prize. 



No man of common-sense will value a woman the less for not 

giving up herself at the first attack, or for accepting his proposal 

without inquiring into his person or character; on the contrary, 

he must think her the weakest of all creatures in the world, as 

the rate of men now goes.  In short, he must have a very 

contemptible opinion of her capacities, nay, every of her 

understanding, that, having but one case of her life, shall call 

that life away at once, and make matrimony, like death, be a 

leap in the dark.



I would fain have the conduct of my sex a little regulated in 

this particular, which is the thing in which, of all the parts of 

life, I think at this time we suffer most in; 'tis nothing but lack 

of courage, the fear of not being married at all, and of that 

frightful state of life called an old maid, of which I have a 

story to tell by itself.  This, I say, is the woman's snare; but 

would the ladies once but get above that fear and manage 

rightly, they would more certainly avoid it by standing their 

ground, in a case so absolutely necessary to their felicity, that 

by exposing themselves as they do; and if they did not marry 

so soon as they may do otherwise, they would make themselves 

amends by marrying safer.  She is always married too soon who 

gets a bad husband, and she is never married too late who gets 

a good one; in a word, there is no woman, deformity or lost 

reputation excepted, but if she manages well, may be married 

safely one time or other; but if she precipitates herself, it is ten 

thousand to one but she is undone.



But I come now to my own case, in which there was at this 

time no little nicety.  The circumstances I was in made the 

offer of a good husband the most necessary thing in the world 

to me, but I found soon that to be made cheap and easy was 

not the way.  It soon began to be found that the widow had 

no fortune, and to say this was to say all that was ill of me, 

for I began to be dropped in all the discourses of matrimony.  

Being well-bred, handsome, witty, modest, and agreeable; all 

which I had allowed to my character--whether justly or no is 

not the purpose--I say, all these would not do without the 

dross, which way now become more valuable than virtue itself.  

In short, the widow, they said, had no money.



I resolved, therefore, as to the state of my present circumstances, 

that it was absolutely necessary to change my station, and make 

a new appearance in some other place where I was not known, 

and even to pass by another name if I found occasion.



I communicated my thoughts to my intimate friend, the captain's 

lady, whom I had so faithfully served in her case with the 

captain, and who was as ready to serve me in the same kind 

as I could desire.  I made no scruple to lay my circumstances 

open to her; my stock was but low, for I had made but about 

#540 at the close of my last affair, and I had wasted some of 

that; however, I had about #460 left, a great many very rich 

clothes, a gold watch, and some jewels, though of no 

extraordinary value, and about #30 or #40 left in linen not 

disposed of.



My dear and faithful friend, the captain's wife, was so sensible 

of the service I had done her in the affair above, that she was 

not only a steady friend to me, but, knowing my circumstances, 

she frequently made me presents as money came into her 

hands, such as fully amounted to a maintenance, so that I spent 

none of my own; and at last she made this unhappy proposal 

to me, viz. that as we had observed, as above, how the men 

made no scruple to set themselves out as persons meriting a 

woman of fortune, when they had really no fortune of their 

own, it was but just to deal with them in their own way and, 

if it was possible, to deceive the deceiver.



The captain's lady, in short, put this project into my head, and 

told me if I would be ruled by her I should certainly get a 

husband of fortune, without leaving him any room to reproach 

me with want of my own.  I told her, as I had reason to do, 

that I would give up myself wholly to her directions, and that 

I would have neither tongue to speak nor feet to step in that 

affair but as she should direct me, depending that she would 

extricate me out of every difficulty she brought me into, 

which she said she would answer for.



The first step she put me upon was to call her cousin, and to 

to a relation's house of hers in the country, where she directed 

me, and where she brought her husband to visit me; and calling 

me cousin, she worked matters so about, that her husband 

and she together invited me most passionately to come to town 

and be with them, for they now live in a quite different place 

from where they were before.  In the next place, she tells her 

husband that I had at least #1500 fortune, and that after some 

of my relations I was like to have a great deal more.



It was enough to tell her husband this; there needed nothing 

on my side.  I was but to sit still and wait the event, for it 

presently went all over the neighbourhood that the young 

widow at Captain ----'s was a fortune, that she had at least 

#1500, and perhaps a great deal more, and that the captain 

said so; and if the captain was asked at any timeabout me, 

he made no scruple to affirm it, though he knew not one word 

of the matter, other  than that his wife had told him so; and in 

this he thought no harm, for he really believed it to be so, 

because he had it from his wife:  so slender a foundation will 

those fellows build upon, if they do but think there is a fortune 

in the game.  With the reputation of this fortune, I presently 

found myself blessed with admirers enough, and that I had my 

choice of men, as scarce as they said they were, which, by the 

way, confirms what I was saying before.  This being my case, 

I, who had a subtle game to play, had nothing now to do but 

to single out from them all the properest man that might be 

for my purpose; that is to say, the man who was most likely 

to depend upon the hearsay of a fortune, and not inquire too 

far into the particulars; and unless I did this I did nothing, for 

my case would not bear much inquiry.



I picked out my man without much difficulty, by the judgment 

I made of his way of courting me.  I had let him run on with 

his protestations and oaths that he loved me above all the world; 

that if I would make him happy, that was enough; all which I 

knew was upon supposition, nay, it was upon a full satisfaction, 

that I was very rich, though I never told him a word of it myself.



This was my man; but I was to try him to the bottom, and 

indeed in that consisted my safety; for if he baulked, I knew I 

was undone, as surely as he was undone if he took me; and 

if I did not make some scruple about his fortune, it was the 

way to lead him to raise some about mine; and first, therefore, 

I pretended on all occasions to doubt his sincerity, and told 

him, perhaps he only courted me for my fortune.  He stopped 

my mouth in that part with the thunder of his protestations, 

as above,  but still I pretended to doubt.



One morning he pulls off his diamond ring, and writes upon 

the glass of the sash in my chamber this line-- 

     'You I love, and you alone.'



I read it, and asked him to lend me his ring, with which I wrote 

under it, thus--



    'And so in love says every one.'



He takes his ring again, and writes another line thus-- 



     'Virtue alone is an estate.'  



I borrowed it again, and I wrote under it-- 



     'But money's virtue, gold is fate.'



He coloured as red as fire to see me turn so quick upon him, 

and in a kind of a rage told me he would conquer me, and 

writes again thus-- 



     'I scorn your gold, and yet I love.'



I ventured all upon the last cast of poetry, as you'll see, for I 

wrote boldly under his last-- 



     'I'm poor:  let's see how kind you'll prove.'  



This was a sad truth to me; whether he believed me or no, I 

could not tell; I supposed then that he did not.  However, he 

flew to me, took me in his arms, and, kissing me very eagerly, 

and with the greatest passion imaginable, he held me fast till 

he called for a pen and ink, and then told me he could not wait 

the tedious writing on the glass, but, pulling out a piece of 

paper, he began and wrote again--



     'Be mine, with all your poverty.'



I took his pen, and followed him immediately, thus-- 



     'Yet secretly you hope I lie.'



He told me that was unkind, because it was not just, and that 

I put him upon contradicting me, which did not consist with 

good manners, any more than with his affection; and therefore, 

since I had insensibly drawn him into this poetical scribble, he 

begged I would not oblige him to break it off; so he writes 

again-- 



     'Let love alone be our debate.'



I wrote again--



     'She loves enough that does not hate.'





This he took for a favour, and so laid down the cudgels, that 

is to say, the pen; I say, he took if for a favour, and a mighty 

one it was, if he had known all.  However, he took it as I meant 

it, that is, to let him think I was inclined to go on with him, as 

indeed I had all the reason in the world to do, for he was the 

best-humoured, merry sort of a fellow that I ever met with, 

and I often reflected on myself how doubly criminal it was to 

deceive such a man; but that necessity, which pressed me to 

a settlement suitable to my condition, was my authority for it; 

and certainly his affection to me, and the goodness of his temper, 

however they might argue against using him ill, yet they strongly 

argued to me that he would better take the disappointment 

than some fiery-tempered wretch, who might have nothing to 

recommend him but those passions which would serve only to 

make a woman miserable all her days.



Besides, though I jested with him (as he supposed it) so 

often about my poverty, yet, when he found it to be true, he 

had foreclosed all manner of objection, seeing, whether he 

was in jest or in earnest, he had declared he took me without 

any regard to my portion, and, whether I was in jest or in 

earnest, I had declared myself to be very poor; so that, in a 

word, I had him fast both ways; and though he might say 

afterwards he was cheated, yet he could never say that I had 

cheated him.



He pursued me close after this, and as I saw there was no need 

to fear losing him, I played the indifferent part with him longer 

than prudence might otherwise have dictated to me.  But I 

considered how much this caution and indifference would give 

me the advantage over him, when I should come to be under 

the necessity of owning my own circumstances to him; and I 

managed it the more warily, because I found he inferred from 

thence, as indeed he ought to do, that I either had the more 

money or the more judgment, and would not venture at all.



I took the freedom one day, after we had talked pretty close 

to the subject, to tell him that it was true I had received the 

compliment of a lover from him, namely, that he would take 

me without inquiring into my fortune, and I would make him 

a suitable return in this, viz. that I would make as little inquiry 

into his as consisted with reason, but I hoped he would allow 

me to ask a few questions, which he would answer or not as 

he thought fit; and that I would not be offended if he did not 

answer me at all; one of these questions related to our manner 

of living, and the place where, because I had heard he had a 

great plantation in Virginia, and that he had talked of going 

to live there, and I told him I did not care to be transported. 



He began from this discourse to let me voluntarily into all 

his affairs, and to tell me in a frank, open way all his 

circumstances, by which I found he was very well to pass in 

the world; but that great part of his estate consisted of three 

plantations, which he had in Virginia, which brought him in a 

very good income, generally speaking, to the tune of #300, a 

year, but that if he was to live upon them, would bring him in 

four times as much.  'Very well,' thought I; 'you shall carry 

me thither as soon as you please, though I won't tell you so 

beforehand.' 



I jested with him extremely about the figure he would make 

in Virginia; but I found he would do anything I desired, though 

he did not seem glad to have me undervalue his plantations, 

so I turned my tale.  I told him I had good reason not to go 

there to live, because if his plantations were worth so much 

there, I had not a fortune suitable to a gentleman of #1200 a 

year, as he said his estate would be.



He replied generously, he did not ask what my fortune was; 

he had told me from the beginning he would not, and he would 

be as good as his word; but whatever it was, he assured me he 

would never desire me to go to Virginia with him, or go thither 

himself without me, unless I was perfectly willing, and made 

it my choice.



All this, you may be sure, was as I wished, and indeed nothing 

could have happened more perfectly agreeable.  I carried it on 

as far as this with a sort of indifferency that he often wondered 

at, more than at first, but which was the only support of his 

courtship; and I mention it the rather to intimate again to the 

ladies that nothing but want of courage for such an indifferency 

makes our sex so cheap, and prepares them to be ill-used as 

they are; would they venture the loss of a pretending fop now 

and then, who carries it high upon the point of his own merit, 

they would certainly be less slighted, and courted more.  Had 

I discovered really and truly what my great fortune was, and 

that in all I had not full #500 when he expected #1500, yet I 

had hooked him so fast, and played him so long, that I was 

satisfied he would have had me in my worst circumstances; 

and indeed it was less a surprise to him when he learned the 

truth than it would have been, because having not the least 

blame to lay on me, who had carried it with an air of indifference 

to the last, he would not say one word, except that indeed he 

thought it had been more, but that if it had been less he did 

not repent his bargain; only that he should not be able to 

maintain me so well as he intended.



In short, we were married, and very happily married on my 

side, I assure you, as to the man; for he was the best-humoured 

man that every woman had, but his circumstances were not so 

good as I imagined, as, on the other hand, he had not bettered 

himself by marrying so much as he expected.



When we were married, I was shrewdly put to it to bring him 

that little stock I had, and to let him see it was no more; but 

there was a necessity for it, so I took my opportunity one day 

when we were alone, to enter into a short dialogue with him 

about it.  'My dear,' said I, 'we have been married a fortnight; 

is it not time to let you know whether you have got a wife 

with something or with nothing?'  'Your own time for that, 

my dear,' says he; 'I am satisfied that I have got the wife I 

love; I have not troubled you much,' says he, 'with my inquiry 

after it.' 



'That's true,' says I, 'but I have a great difficulty upon me 

about it, which I scarce know how to manage.'



'What's that, m dear?' says he.



'Why,' says I, ''tis a little hard upon me, and 'tis harder upon 

you.  I am told that Captain ----' (meaning my friend's husband) 

'has told you I had a great deal more money than I ever 

pretended to have, and I am sure I never employed him to do so.'



'Well,' says he, 'Captain ---- may have told me so, but what 

then?  If you have not so much, that may lie at his door, but 

you never told me what you had, so I have no reason to blame 

you if you have nothing at all.'



'That's is so just,' said I, 'and so generous, that it makes my 

having but a little a double affliction to me.'



'The less you have, my dear,' says he, 'the worse for us both; 

but I hope your affliction you speak of is not caused for fear 

I should be unkind to you, for want of a portion.  No, no, if 

you have nothing, tell me plainly, and at once; I may perhaps 

tell the captain he has cheated me, but I can never say you 

have cheated me, for did you not give it under your hand that 

you were poor?  and so I ought to expect you to be.'



'Well,' said I, 'my dear, I am glad I have not been concerned 

in deceiving you before marriage.  If I deceive you since, 'tis 

ne'er the worse; that I am poor is too true, but not so poor as 

to have nothing neither'; so I pulled out some bank bills, and 

gave him about #160.  'There's something, my dear,' said I, 

'and not quite all neither.'



I had brought him so near to expecting nothing, by what I had 

said before, that the money, though the sum was small in itself, 

was doubly welcome to him; he owned it was more than he 

looked for, and that he did not question by my discourse to 

him, but that my fine clothes, gold watch, and a diamond ring 

or two, had been all my fortune.



I let him please himself with that #160 two or three days, and 

then, having been abroad that day, and as if I had  been to fetch 

it, I brought him #100 more home in gold, and told him there 

was a little more portion for him; and, in short, in about a week 

more I brought him #180 more, and about #60 in linen, which 

I made him believe I had been obliged to take with the #100

which I gave him in gold, as a composition for a debt of #600, 

being little more than five shillings in the pound, and overvalued too.



'And now, my dear,' says I to him, 'I am very sorry to tell you, 

that there is all, and that I have given you my whole fortune.' 

I added, that if the person who had my #600 had not abused 

me, I had been worth #1000 to him, but that as it was, I had 

been faithful to him, and reserved nothing to myself, but if it 

had been more he should have had it.



He was so obliged by the manner, and so pleased with the sum,

for he had been in a terrible fright lest it had been nothing at 

all, that he accepted it very thankfully.  And thus I got over 

the fraud of passing for a fortune without money, and cheating 

a man into marrying me on pretence of a fortune; which, by 

the way, I take to be one of the most dangerous steps a woman 

can take, and in which she runs the most hazard of being 

ill-used afterwards.



My husband, to give him his due, was a man of infinite good 

nature, but he was no fool; and finding his income not suited 

to the manner of living which he had intended, if I had brought 

him what he expected, and being under a disappointment in 

his return of his plantations in Virginia, he discovered many 

times his inclination of going over to Virginia, to live upon 

his own; and often would be magnifying the way of living 

there, how cheap, how plentiful, how pleasant, and the like.



I began presently to understand this meaning, and I took 

him up very plainly one morning, and told him that I did so; 

that I found his estate turned to no account at this distance, 

compared to what it would do if he lived upon the spot, and 

that I found he had a mind to go and live there; and I added, 

that I was sensible he had been disappointed in a wife, and 

that finding his expectations not answered that way, I could 

do no less, to make him amends, than tell him that I was very 

willing to go over to Virginia with him and live there.



He said a thousand kind things to me upon the subject of my 

making such a proposal to him.  He told me, that however 

he was disappointed in his expectations of a fortune, he was 

not disappointed in a wife, and that I was all to him that a 

wife could be, and he was more than satisfied on the whole 

when the particulars were put together, but that this offer was 

so kind, that it was more than he could express.



To bring the story short, we agreed to go.  He told me that he 

had a very good house there, that it was well furnished, that 

his mother was alive and lived in it, and one sister, which was 

all the relations he had; that as soon as he came there, his 

mother would remove to another house, which was her own 

for life, and his after her decease; so that I should have all the 

house to myself; and I found all this to be exactly as he had 

said.



To make this part of the story short, we put on board the ship 

which we went in, a large quantity of good furniture for our 

house, with stores of linen and other necessaries, and a good 

cargo for sale, and away we went.



To give an account of the manner of our voyage, which was 

long and full of dangers, is out of my way; I kept no journal, 

neither did my husband.  All that I can say is, that after a 

terrible passage, frighted twice with dreadful storms, and once 

with what was still more terrible, I mean a pirate who came 

on board and took away almost all our provisions; and which 

would have been beyond all to me, they had once taken my 

husband to go along with them, but by entreaties were prevailed 

with to leave him;--I say, after all these terrible things, we 

arrived in York River in Virginia, and coming to our plantation, 

we were received with all the demonstrations of tenderness 

and affection, by my husband's mother, that were possible to 

be expressed.



We lived here all together, my mother-in-law, at my entreaty, 

continuing in the house, for she was too kind a mother to be 

parted with; my husband likewise continued the same as at 

first, and I thought myself the happiest creature alive, when 

an odd and surprising event put an end to all that felicity in a 

moment, and rendered my condition the most uncomfortable, 

if not the most miserable, in the world.



My mother was a mighty cheerful, good-humoured old woman 

--I may call her old woman, for her son was above thirty; I 

say she was very pleasant, good company, and used to entertain 

me, in particular, with abundance of stories to divert me, as 

well of  the country we were in as of the people.



Among the rest, she often told me how the greatest part of 

the inhabitants of the colony came thither in very indifferent 

circumstances from England; that, generally speaking, they 

were of two sorts; either, first, such as were brought over by 

masters of ships to be sold as servants.  'Such as we call them, 

my dear,' says she, 'but they are more properly called slaves.'  

Or, secondly, such as are transported from Newgate and other 

prisons, after having been found guilty of felony and other 

crimes punishable with death.



'When they come here,' says she, 'we make no difference; the 

planters buy them, and they work together in the field till 

their time is out.  When 'tis expired,' said she, 'they have 

encouragement given them to plant for themselves; for they 

have a certain number of acres of land allotted them by the 

country, and they go to work to clear and cure the land, and 

then to plant it with tobacco and corn for their own use; and 

as the tradesmen and merchants will trust them with tools and 

clothes and other necessaries, upon the credit of their crop 

before it is grown, so they again plant every year a little more 

than the year before, and so buy whatever they want with the 

crop that is before them.



'Hence, child,' says she, 'man a Newgate-bird becomes a great 

man, and we have,' continued she, 'several justices of the peace, 

officers of the trained bands, and magistrates of the towns they 

live in, that have been burnt in the hand.'



She was going on with that part of the story, when her own 

part in it interrupted her, and with a great deal of good-humoured 

confidence she told me she was one of the second sort of 

inhabitants herself; that she came away openly, having ventured 

too far in a particular case, so that she was become a criminal.  

'And here's the mark of it, child,' says she; and, pulling off her 

glove, 'look ye here,' says she, turning up the palm of her 

hand, and showed me a very fine white arm and hand, but 

branded in the inside of the hand, as in such cases it must be.



This story was very moving to me, but my mother, smiling, 

said, 'You need not thing a thing strange, daughter, for as I 

told you, some of the best men in this country are burnt in the 

hand, and they are not ashamed to own it.  There's Major ----,' 

says she, 'he was an eminent pickpocket; there's Justice Ba----r, 

was a shoplifter, and both of them were burnt in the hand; and 

I could name you several such as they are.'



We had frequent discourses of this kind, and abundance of 

instances she gave me of the like.  After some time, as she was 

telling some stories of one that was transported but a few 

weeks ago, I began in an intimate kind of way to ask her to 

tell me something of her own story, which she did with the 

utmost plainness and sincerity; how she had fallen into very ill 

company in London in her young days, occasioned by her 

mother sending her frequently to carry victuals and other relief 

to a kinswoman of hers who was a prisoner in Newgate, and 

who lay in a miserable starving condition, was afterwards 

condemned to be hanged, but having got respite by pleading 

her belly, dies afterwards in the prison.



Here my mother-in-law ran out in a long account of the wicked 

practices in that dreadful place, and how it ruined more young 

people that all the town besides.  'And child,' says my mother, 

'perhaps you may know little of it, or, it may be, have heard 

nothing about it; but depend upon it,' says she, 'we all know 

here that there are more thieves and rogues made by that one 

prison of Newgate than by all the clubs and societies of villains 

in the nation; 'tis that cursed place,' says my mother, 'that half 

peopled this colony.'



Here she went on with her own story so long, and in so particular 

a manner, that I began to be very uneasy; but coming to one 

particular that required telling her name, I thought I should 

have sunk down in the place.  She perceived I was out of 

order, and asked me if I was not well, and what ailed me.  I 

told her I was so affected with the melancholy story she had 

told, and the terrible things she had gone through, that it had 

overcome me, and I begged of her to talk no more of it.  'Why, 

my dear,' says she very kindly, 'what need these things trouble 

you?  These passages were long before your time, and they 

give me no trouble at all now; nay, I look back on them with 

a particular satisfaction, as they have been a means to bring 

me to this place.'  Then she went on to tell me how she very 

luckily fell into a good family, where, behaving herself well, 

and her mistress dying, her master married her, by whom she 

had my husband and his sister, and that by her diligence and 

good management after her husband's death, she had improved 

the plantations to such a degree as they then were, so that most 

of the estate was of her getting, not her husband's, for she had 

been a widow upwards of sixteen years.



I heard this part of they story with very little attention, because 

I wanted much to retire and give vent to my passions, which 

I did soon after; and let any one judge what must be the anguish 

of my mind, when I came to reflect that this was certainly no 

more or less than my own mother, and I had now had two

children, and was big with another by my own brother, and 

lay with him still every night.



I was now the most unhappy of all women in the world.  Oh!  

had the story never been told me, all had been well; it had been 

no crime to have lain with my husband, since as to his being 

my relation I had known nothing of it.



I had now such a load on my mind that it kept me perpetually 

waking; to reveal it, which would have been some ease to me, 

I could not find would be to any purpose, and yet to conceal 

it would be next to impossible; nay, I did not doubt but I should 

talk of it in my sleep, and tell my husband of it whether I would 

or no.  If I discovered it, the least thing I could expect was to 

lose my husband, for he was too nice and too honest a man 

to have continued my husband after he had known I had been 

his sister; so that I was perplexed to the last degree.



I leave it to any man to judge what difficulties presented to 

my view.  I was away from my native country, at a distance 

prodigious, and the return to me unpassable.  I lived very well, 

but in a circumstance insufferable in itself.  If I had discovered 

myself to my mother, it might be difficult to convince her of 

the particulars, and I had no way to prove them.  On the other 

hand, if she had questioned or doubted me, I had been undone, 

for the bare suggestion would have immediately separated me 

from my husband, without gaining my mother or him, who 

would have been neither a husband nor a brother; so that 

between the surprise on one hand, and the uncertainty on the 

other, I had been sure to be undone.



In the meantime, as I was but too sure of the fact, I lived 

therefore in open avowed incest and whoredom, and all under 

the appearance of an honest wife; and though I was not much 

touched with the crime of it, yet the action had something in 

it shocking to nature, and made my husband, as he thought 

himself, even nauseous to me.



However, upon the most sedate consideration, I resolved that 

it was absolutely necessary to conceal it all and not make the 

least discovery of it either to mother or husband; and thus I 

lived with the greatest pressure imaginable for three years 

more, but had no more children. 



During this time my mother used to be frequently telling me 

old stories of her former adventures, which, however, were 

no ways pleasant to me; for by it, though she did not tell it me 

in plain terms, yet I could easily understand, joined with what 

I had heard myself, of my first tutors, that in her younger days 

she had been both whore and thief; but I verily believed she 

had lived to repent sincerely of both, and that she was then a 

very pious, sober, and religious woman.



Well, let her life have been what it would then, it was certain 

that my life was very uneasy to me; for I lived, as I have said, 

but in the worst sort of whoredom, and as I could expect no 

good of it, so really no good issue came of it, and all my 

seeming prosperity wore off, and ended in misery and 

destruction.  It was some time, indeed, before it came to this, 

for, but I know not by what ill fate guided, everything went 

wrong with us afterwards, and that which was worse, my 

husband grew strangely altered, forward, jealous, and unkind, 

and I was as impatient of bearing his carriage, as the carriage 

was unreasonable and unjust.  These things proceeded so far, 

that we came at last to be in such ill terms with one another, 

that I claimed a promise of him, which he entered willingly 

into with me when I consented to come from England with 

him, viz. that if I found the country not to agree with me, or 

that I did not like to live there, I should come away to England 

again when I pleased, giving him a year's warning to settle 

his affairs.



I say, I now claimed this promise of him, and I must confess 

I did it not in the most obliging terms that could be in the 

world neither; but I insisted that he treated me ill, that I was 

remote from my friends, and could do myself no justice, and 

that he was jealous without cause, my conversation having 

been unblamable, and he having no pretense for it, and that to 

remove to England would take away all occasion from him.



I insisted so peremptorily upon it, that he could not avoid 

coming to a point, either to keep his word with me or to break 

it; and this, notwithstanding he used all the skill he was master 

of, and employed his mother and other agents to prevail with 

me to alter my resolutions; indeed, the bottom of the thing lay 

at my heart, and that made all his endeavours fruitless, for my 

heart was alienated from him as a husband.  I loathed the 

thoughts of bedding with him, and used a thousand pretenses 

of illness and humour to prevent his touching me, fearing 

nothing more than to be with child by him, which to be sure 

would have prevented, or at least delayed, my going over to 

England.



However, at last I put him so out of humour, that he took up 

a rash and fatal resolution; in short, I should not go to England; 

and though he had promised me, yet it was an unreasonable 

thing for me to desire it; that it would be ruinous to his affairs, 

would unhinge his whole family, and be next to an undoing 

him in the world; that therefore I ought not to desire it of him, 

and that no wife in the world that valued her family and her 

husband's prosperity would insist upon such a thing.



This plunged me again, for when I considered the thing 

calmly, and took my husband as he really was, a diligent, 

careful man in the main work of laying up an estate for his 

children, and that he knew nothing of the dreadful circumstances 

that he was in, I could not but confess to myself that my 

proposal was very unreasonable, and what no wife that had 

the good of her family at heart would have desired.



But my discontents were of another nature; I looked upon him 

no longer as a husband, but as a near relation, the son of my 

own mother, and I resolved somehow or other to be clear of 

him, but which way I did not know, nor did it seem possible.



It is said by the ill-natured world, of our sex, that if we are 

set on a thing, it is impossible to turn us from our resolutions; 

in short, I never ceased poring upon the means to bring to 

pass my voyage, and came that length with my husband at last, 

as to propose going without him.  This provoked him to the 

last degree, and he called me not only an unkind wife, but an 

unnatural mother, and asked me how I could entertain such a 

thought without horror, as that of leaving my two children 

(for one was dead) without a mother, and to be brought up by 

strangers, and never to see them more.  It was true, had things 

been right, I should not have done it, but now it was my real 

desire never to see them, or him either, any more; and as to the 

charge of unnatural, I could easily answer it to myself, while 

I knew that the whole relation was unnatural in the highest 

degree in the world. 



However, it was plain there was no bringing my husband to 

anything; he would neither go with me nor let me go without 

him, and it was quite out of my power to stir without his  

consent, as any one that knows the constitution of the country 

I was in, knows very well.



We had many family quarrels about it, and they began in 

time to grow up to a dangerous height; for as I was quite 

estranged form my husband (as he was called) in affection, so 

I took no heed to my words, but sometimes gave him language 

that was provoking; and, in short, strove all I could to bring 

him to a parting with me, which was what above all things in 

the world I desired most.



He took my carriage very ill, and indeed he might well do so, 

for at last I refused to bed with him, and carrying on the breach 

upon all occasions to extremity, he told me once he thought I 

was mad, and if I did not alter my conduct, he would put me 

under cure; that is to say, into a madhouse.  I told him he 

should find I was far enough from mad, and that it was not in 

his power, or any other villain's, to murder me.  I confess at 

the same time I was heartily frighted at his thoughts of putting 

me into a madhouse, which would at once have destroyed all 

the possibility of breaking the truth out, whatever the occasion 

might be; for that then no one would have given credit to a 

word of it.



This therefore brought me to a resolution, whatever came of 

it, to lay open my whole case; but which way to do it, or to 

whom, was an inextricable difficulty, and took me many months 

to resolve.  In the meantime, another quarrel with my husband 

happened, which came up to such a mad extreme as almost 

pushed me on to tell it him all to his face; but though I kept it 

in so as not to come to the particulars, I spoke so much as put 

him into the utmost confusion, and in the end brought out the 

whole story.



He began with a calm expostulation upon my being so resolute 

to go to England; I defended it, and one hard word bringing 

on another, as is usual in all family strife, he told me I did not 

treat him as if he was my husband, or talk of my children as if

I was a mother; and, in short, that I did not deserve to be used

as a wife; that he had used all the fair means possible with me;

that he had argued with all the kindness and calmness that a

husband or a Christian ought to do, and that I made him such 

a vile return, that I treated him rather like a dog than a man, 

and rather like the most contemptible stranger than a husband; 

that he was very loth to use violence with me, but that, in short, 

he saw a necessity of it now, and that for the future he should 

be obliged to take such measures as should reduce me to my 

duty.



My blood was now fired to the utmost, though I knew what 

he had said was very true, and nothing could appear more 

provoked.  I told him, for his fair means and his foul, they 

were equally contemned by me; that for my going to England, 

I was resolved on it, come what would; and that as to treating 

him not like a husband, and not showing myself a mother to 

my children, there might be something more in it than he 

understood at present; but, for his further consideration, I 

thought fit to tell him thus much, that he neither was my lawful 

husband, nor they lawful children, and that I had reason to 

regard neither of them more than I did.



I confess I was moved to pity him when I spoke it, for he 

turned pale as death, and stood mute as one thunderstruck, 

and once or twice I thought he would have fainted; in short, 

it put him in a fit something like an apoplex; he trembled, a 

sweat or dew ran off his face, and yet he was cold as a clod, 

so that I was forced to run and fetch something for him to 

keep life in him.  When he recovered of that, he grew sick and 

vomited, and in a little after was put to bed, and the next 

morning was, as he had been indeed all night, in a violent fever.



However, it went off again, and he recovered, though but 

slowly, and when he came to be a little better, he told me I 

had given him a mortal wound with my tongue, and he had 

only one thing to ask before he desired an explanation.  I 

interrupted him, and told him I was sorry I had gone so far, 

since I saw what disorder it put him into, but I desired him 

not to talk to me of explanations, for that would but make 

things worse.



This heightened his impatience, and, indeed, perplexed him 

beyond all bearing; for now he began to suspect that there 

was some mystery yet unfolded, but could not make the least 

guess at the real particulars of it; all that ran in his brain was, 

that I had another husband alive, which I could not say in fact 

might not be true, but I assured him, however, there was not 

the least of that in it; and indeed, as to my other husband, he 

was effectually dead in law to me, and had told me I should 

look on him as such, so I had not the least uneasiness on that 

score.



But now I found the thing too far gone to conceal it much 

longer, and my husband himself gave me an opportunity to 

ease myself of the secret, much to my satisfaction.  He had 

laboured with me three or four weeks, but to no purpose, only 

to tell him whether I had spoken these words only as the effect 

of my passion, to put him in a passion, or whether there was 

anything of  truth in the bottom of them.  But I continued 

inflexible, and would explain nothing, unless he would first 

consent to my going to England, which he would never do, 

he said, while he lived; on the other hand, I said it was in my 

power to make him willing when I pleased--nay, to make him 

entreat me to go; and this increased his curiosity, and made him 

importunate to the highest degree, but it was all to no purpose.



At length he tells all this story to his mother, and sets her upon 

me to get the main secret out of me, and she used her utmost 

skill with me indeed; but I put her to a full stop at once by 

telling her that the reason and mystery of the whole matter lay 

in herself, and that it was my respect to her that had made me 

conceal it; and that, in short, I could go no farther, and therefore 

conjured her not to insist upon it.



She was struck dumb at this suggestion, and could not tell 

what to say or to think; but, laying aside the supposition as a 

policy of mine, continued her importunity on account of her 

son, and, if possible, to make up the breach between us two.  

As to that, I told her that it was indeed a good design in her, 

but that it was impossible to be done; and that if I should reveal 

to her the truth of what she desired, she would grant it to be 

impossible, and cease to desire it.  At last I seemed to be 

prevailed on by her importunity, and told her I dared trust her 

with a secret of the greatest importance, and she would soon 

see that this was so, and that I would consent to lodge it in 

her breast, if she would engage solemnly not to acquaint her 

son with it without my consent.



She was long in promising this part, but rather than not come 

at the main secret, she agreed to that too, and after a great 

many other preliminaries, I began, and told her the whole story.  

First I told her how much she was concerned in all the unhappy 

breach which had happened between her son and me, by telling 

me her own story and her London name; and that the surprise 

she saw I was in was upon that occasion.   The I told her my 

own story, and my name, and assured her, by such other tokens 

as she could not deny, that I was no other, nor more or less, 

than her own child, her daughter, born of her body in Newgate; 

the same that had saved her from the gallows by being in her 

belly, and the same that she left in such-and-such hands when 

she was transported.



It is impossible to express the astonishment she was in; she 

was not inclined to believe the story, or to remember the 

particulars, for she immediately foresaw the confusion that 

must follow in the family upon it.  But everything concurred 

so exactly with the stories she had told me of herself, and which, 

if she had not told me, she would perhaps have been content 

to have denied, that she had stopped her own mouth, and she 

had nothing to do but to take me about the neck and kiss me, 

and cry most vehemently over me, without speaking one word 

for a long time together.  At last she broke out:  'Unhappy child!' 

says she, 'what miserable chance could bring thee hither? and 

in the arms of my own son, too!  Dreadful girl,' says she, 'why, 

we are all undone!  Married to thy own brother!  Three children, 

and two alive, all of the same flesh and blood!  My son and my 

daughter lying together as husband and wife!  All confusion 

and distraction for ever!  Miserable family! what will become 

of us?  What is to be said?  What is to be done?'  And thus she 

ran on for a great while; nor had I any power to speak, or if 

I had, did I know what to say, for every word wounded me to 

the soul.  With this kind of amazement on our thoughts we 

parted for the first time, though my mother was more surprised 

than I was, because it was more news to her than to me.  

However, she promised again to me at parting, that she would 

say nothing of it to her son, till we had talked of it again.





End of Part 3
