



Part 8




My poor afflicted governess was now as much concerned as 

I, and a great deal more truly penitent, though she had no 

prospect of being brought to trial and sentence.  Not but that 

she deserved it as much as I, and so she said herself; but she 

had not done anything herself for many years, other than 

receiving what I and others stole, and encouraging us to steal 

it.  But she cried, and took on like a distracted body, wringing 

her hands, and crying out that she was undone, that she 

believed there was a curse from heaven upon her, that she 

should be damned, that she had been the destruction of all her 

friends, that she had brought such a one, and such a one, and 

such a one to the gallows; and there she reckoned up ten or 

eleven people, some of which I have given account of, that 

came to untimely ends; and that now she was the occasion 

of my ruin, for she had persuaded me to go on, when I would 

have left off.  I interrupted her there.  'No, mother, no,' said I, 

'don't speak of that, for you would have had me left off when 

I got the mercer's money again, and when I came home from 

Harwich, and I would not hearken to you; therefore you have 

not been to blame; it is I only have ruined myself, I have 

brought myself to this misery'; and thus we spent many hours 

together.



Well, there was no remedy; the prosecution went on, and on 

the Thursday I was carried down to the sessions-house, where 

I was arraigned, as they called it, and the next day I was 

appointed to be tried.  At the arraignment I pleaded 'Not guilty,' 

and well I might, for I was indicted for felony and burglary; 

that is, for feloniously stealing two pieces of brocaded silk, 

value #46, the goods of Anthony Johnson, and for breaking 

open his doors; whereas I knew very well they could not 

pretend to prove I had broken up the doors, or so much as 

lifted up a latch.



On the Friday I was brought to my trial.  I had exhausted my 

spirits with crying for two or three days before, so that I slept 

better the Thursday night than I expected, and had more courage 

for my trial than indeed I thought possible for me to have.



When the trial began, the indictment was read, I would have 

spoke, but they told me the witnesses must be heard first, and 

then I should have time to be heard.  The witnesses were the 

two wenches, a couple of hard-mouthed jades indeed, for 

though the thing was truth in the main, yet they aggravated it 

to the utmost extremity, and swore I had the goods wholly in 

my possession, that I had hid them among my clothes, that I 

was going off with them, that I had one foot over the threshold 

when they discovered themselves, and then I put t' other over, 

so that I was quite out of the house in the street with the goods 

before they took hold of me, and then they seized me, and 

brought me back again, and they took the goods upon me.  The 

fact in general was all true, but I believe, and insisted upon it, 

that they stopped me before I had set my foot clear of the 

threshold of the house.  But that did not argue much, for certain 

it was that I had taken the goods, and I was bringing them away, 

if I had not been taken.



But I pleaded that I had stole nothing, they had lost nothing,

that the door was open, and I went in, seeing the goods lie

there, and with design to buy.  If, seeing nobody in the house, I 

had taken any of them up in my hand it could not be concluded 

that I intended to steal them, for that I never carried them 

farther than the door to look on them with the better light.



The Court would not allow that by any means, and made a 

kind of a jest of my intending to buy the goods, that being no 

shop for the selling of anything, and as to carrying them to the 

door to look at them, the maids made their impudent mocks 

upon that, and spent their wit upon it very much; told the 

Court I had looked at them sufficiently, and approved them 

very well, for I had packed them up under my clothes, and 

was a-going with them.



In short, I was found guilty of felony, but acquitted of the 

burglary, which was but small comfort to me, the first bringing 

me to a sentence of death, and the last would have done no 

more.  The next day I was carried down to receive the dreadful 

sentence, and when they came to ask me what I had to say 

why sentence should not pass, I stood mute a while, but 

somebody that stood behind me prompted me aloud to speak 

to the judges, for that they could represent things favourably 

for me.  This encouraged me to speak, and I told them I had 

nothing to say to stop the sentence, but that I had much to say 

to bespeak the mercy of the Court; that I hoped they would 

allow something in such a case for the circumstances of it; 

that I had broken no doors, had carried nothing off; that 

nobody had lost anything; that the person whose goods they 

were was pleased to say he desired mercy might be shown 

(which indeed he very honestly did); that, at the worst, it was 

the first offence, and that I had never been before any court 

of justice before; and, in a word, I spoke with more courage 

that I thought I could have done, and in such a moving tone, 

and though with tears, yet not so many tears as to obstruct my 

speech, that I could see it moved others to tears that heard me.



The judges sat grave and mute, gave me an easy hearing, and 

time to say all that I would, but, saying neither Yes nor No to 

it, pronounced the sentence of death upon me, a sentence that 

was to me like death itself, which, after it was read, confounded 

me.  I had no more spirit left in me, I had no tongue to speak, 

or eyes to look up either to God or man.



My poor governess was utterly disconsolate, and she that was 

my comforter before, wanted comfort now herself; and sometimes 

mourning, sometimes raging, was as much out of herself, as to 

all outward appearance, as any mad woman in Bedlam.  Nor 

was she only disconsolate as to me, but she was struck with 

horror at the sense of her own wicked life, and began to look 

back upon it with a taste quite different from mine, for she 

was penitent to the highest degree for her sins, as well as 

sorrowful for the misfortune.  She sent for a minister, too, a 

serious, pious, good man, and applied herself with such 

earnestness, by his assistance, to the work of a sincere repentance, 

that I believe, and so did the minister too, that she was a true 

penitent; and, which is still more, she was not only so for the 

occasion, and at that juncture, but she continued so, as I was 

informed, to the day of her death.



It is rather to be thought of than expressed what was now my 

condition.  I had nothing before me but present death; and as 

I had no friends to assist me, or to stir for me, I expected 

nothing but to find my name in the dead warrant, which was 

to come down for the execution, the Friday afterwards, of five 

more and myself.



In the meantime my poor distressed governess sent me a 

minister, who at her request first, and at my own afterwards, 

came to visit me.  He exhorted me seriously to repent of all 

my sins, and to dally no longer with my soul; not flattering 

myself with hopes of life, which, he said, he was informed 

there was no room to expect, but unfeignedly to look up to 

God with my whole soul, and to cry for pardon in the name 

of Jesus Christ.  He backed his discourses with proper quotations 

of Scripture, encouraging the greatest sinner to repent, and turn 

from their evil way, and when he had done, he kneeled down 

and prayed with me.



It was now that, for the first time, I felt any real signs of 

repentance.  I now began to look back upon my past life with 

abhorrence, and having a kind of view into the other side of 

time, and things of life, as I believe they do with everybody 

at such a time, began to look with a different aspect, and quite 

another shape, than they did before.  The greatest and best 

things, the views of felicity, the joy, the griefs of life, were 

quite other things; and I had nothing in my thoughts but what 

was so infinitely superior to what I had known in life, that it 

appeared to me to be the greatest stupidity in nature to lay 

any weight upon anything, though the most valuable in this 

world.



The word eternity represented itself with all its incomprehensible 

additions, and I had such extended notions of it, that I know 

not how to express them.  Among the rest, how vile, how gross, 

how absurd did every pleasant thing look!--I mean, that we 

had counted pleasant before--especially when I reflected that 

these sordid trifles were the things for which we forfeited 

eternal felicity.



With these reflections came, of mere course, severe reproaches 

of my own mind for my wretched behaviour in my past life; 

that I had forfeited all hope of any happiness in the eternity 

that I was just going to enter into, and on the contrary was 

entitled to all that was miserable, or had been conceived of 

misery; and all this with the frightful addition of its being 

also eternal.



I am not capable of reading lectures of instruction to anybody, 

but I relate this in the very manner in which things then 

appeared to me, as far as I am able, but infinitely short of the 

lively impressions which they made on my soul at that time; 

indeed, those impressions are not to be explained by words, 

or if they are, I am not mistress of words enough to express 

them.  It must be the work of every sober reader to make just 

reflections on them, as their own circumstances may direct; 

and, without question, this is what every one at some time or 

other may feel something of; I mean, a clearer sight into things 

to come than they had here, and a dark view of their own 

concern in them.



But I go back to my own case.  The minister pressed me to 

tell him, as far as I though convenient, in what state I found 

myself as to the sight I had of things beyond life.  He told me 

he did not come as ordinary of the place, whose business it 

is to extort confessions from prisoners, for private ends, or 

for the further detecting of other offenders; that his business 

was to move me to such freedom of discourse as might serve 

to disburthen my own mind, and furnish him to administer 

comfort to me as far as was in his power; and assured me, 

that whatever I said to him should remain with him, and be 

as much a secret as if it was known only to God and myself; 

and that he desired to know nothing of me, but as above to 

qualify him to apply proper advice and assistance to me, and 

to pray to God for me.



This honest, friendly way of treating me unlocked all the 

sluices of my passions.  He broke into my very soul by it; and 

I unravelled all the wickedness of my life to him. In a word, I 

gave him an abridgment of this whole history; I gave him a 

picture of my conduct for fifty years in miniature.



I hid nothing from him, and he in return exhorted me to sincere 

repentance, explained to me what he meant by repentance, and 

then drew out such a scheme of infinite mercy, proclaimed 

from heaven to sinners of the greatest magnitude, that he left 

me nothing to say, that looked like despair, or doubting of 

being accepted; and in this condition he left me the first night.



He visited me again the next morning, and went on with his 

method of explaining the terms of divine mercy, which 

according to him consisted of nothing more, or more difficult, 

than that of being sincerely desirous of it, and willing to accept 

it; only a sincere regret for, and hatred of, those things I had 

done, which rendered me so just an object of divine vengeance.  

I am not able to repeat the excellent discourses of this 

extraordinary man; 'tis all that I am able to do, to say that he 

revived my heart, and brought me into such a condition that 

I never knew anything of in my life before.  I was covered 

with shame and tears for things past, and yet had at the same 

time a secret surprising joy at the prospect of being a true 

penitent, and obtaining the comfort of a penitent--I mean, the 

hope of being forgiven; and so swift did thoughts circulate, 

and so high did the impressions they had made upon me run, 

that I thought I could freely have gone out that minute to 

execution, without any uneasiness at all, casting my soul 

entirely into the arms of infinite mercy as a penitent.



The good gentleman was so moved also in my behalf with a 

view of the influence which he saw these things had on me, 

that he blessed God he had come to visit me, and resolved not 

to leave me till the last moment; that is, not to leave visiting me.



It was no less than twelve days after our receiving sentence 

before any were ordered for execution, and then upon a 

Wednesday the dead warrant, as they call it, came down, and 

I found my name was among them.  A terrible blow this was 

to my new resolutions; indeed my heart sank within me, and 

I swooned away twice, one after another, but spoke not a word.  

The good minister was sorely afflicted for me, and did what he 

could to comfort me with the same arguments, and the same 

moving eloquence that he did before, and left me not that 

evening so long as the prisonkeepers would suffer him to stay 

in the prison, unless he would be locked up with me all night, 

which he was not willing to be.



I wondered much that I did not see him all the next day, it 

being the day before the time appointed for execution; and I 

was greatly discouraged, and dejected in my mind, and indeed 

almost sank for want of the comfort which he had so often, 

and with such success, yielded me on his former visits.  I 

waited with great impatience, and under the greatest oppressions 

of spirits imaginable, till about four o'clock he came to my 

apartment; for I had obtained the favour, by the help of money, 

nothing being to be done in that place without it, not to be 

kept in the condemned hole, as they call it, among the rest of 

the prisoners who were to die, but to have a little dirty 

chamber to myself.



My heart leaped within me for joy when I heard his voice at 

the door, even before I saw him; but let any one judge what 

kind of motion I found in my soul, when after having made a 

short excuse for his not coming, he showed me that his time 

had been employed on my account; that he had obtained a 

favourable report from the Recorder to the Secretary of State 

in my particular case, and, in short, that he had brought me 

a reprieve.



He used all the caution that he was able in letting me know 

a thing which it would have been a double cruelty to have 

concealed; and yet it was too much for me; for as grief had 

overset me before, so did joy overset me now, and I fell into

a much more dangerous swooning than I did at first, and it 

was not without a great difficulty that I was recovered at all.



The good man having made a very Christian exhortation to 

me, not to let the joy of my reprieve put the remembrance of 

my past sorrow out of my mind, and having told me that he 

must leave me, to go and enter the reprieve in the books, and 

show it to the sheriffs, stood up just before his going away, 

and in a very earnest manner prayed to God for me, that my 

repentance might be made unfeigned and sincere; and that 

my coming back, as it were, into life again, might not be a 

returning to the follies of life which I had made such solemn 

resolutions to forsake, and to repent of them.  I joined heartily 

in the petition, and must needs say I had deeper impressions 

upon my mind all that night, of the mercy of God in sparing 

my life, and a greater detestation of my past sins, from a sense 

of the goodness which I had tasted in this case, than I had in 

all my sorrow before.



This may be thought inconsistent in itself, and wide from the 

business of this book; particularly, I reflect that many of those 

who may be pleased and diverted with the relation of the wild 

and wicked part of my story may not relish this, which is 

really the best part of my life, the most advantageous to myself, 

and the most instructive to others.  Such, however, will, I hope, 

allow me the liberty to make my story complete.  It would be 

a severe satire on such to say they do not relish the repentance 

as much as they do the crime; and that they had rather the 

history were a complete tragedy, as it was very likely to have been.



But I go on with my relation.  The next morning there was a 

sad scene indeed in the prison.  The first thing I was saluted 

with in the morning was the tolling of the great bell at St. 

Sepulchre's, as they call it, which ushered in the day.  As soon 

as it began to toll, a dismal groaning and crying was heard 

from the condemned hole, where there lay six poor souls who 

were to be executed that day, some from one crime, some for 

another, and two of them for murder.



This was followed by a confused clamour in the house, among 

the several sorts of prisoners, expressing their awkward sorrows 

for the poor creatures that were to die, but in a manner extremely 

differing one from another.  Some cried for them; some huzzaed, 

and wished them a good journey; some damned and cursed those 

that had brought them to it--that is, meaning the evidence, or 

prosecutors--many pitying them, and some few, but very few, 

praying for them.



There was hardly room for so much composure of mind as 

was required for me to bless the merciful Providence that had, 

as it were, snatched me out of the jaws of this destruction.  I 

remained, as it were, dumb and silent, overcome with the 

sense of it, and not able to express what I had in my heart; for 

the passions on such occasions as these are certainly so agitated 

as not to be able presently to regulate their own motions.



All the while the poor condemned creatures were preparing 

to their death, and the ordinary, as they call him, was busy 

with them, disposing them to submit to their sentence--I say, 

all this while I was seized with a fit of trembling, as much as 

I could have been if I had been in the same condition, as to be 

sure the day before I expected to be; I was so violently agitated 

by this surprising fit, that I shook as if it had been in the cold 

fit of an ague, so that I could not speak or look but like one 

distracted.  As soon as they were all put into carts and gone, 

which, however, I had not courage enough to see--I say, as 

soon as they were gone, I fell into a fit of crying involuntarily, 

and without design, but as a mere distemper, and yet so violent, 

and it held me so long, that I knew not what course to take, 

nor could I stop, or put a check to it, no, not with all the 

strength and courage I had.



This fit of crying held me near two hours, and, as I believe, 

held me till they were all out of the world, and then a most 

humble, penitent, serious kind of joy succeeded; a real transport 

it was, or passion of joy and thankfulness, but still unable to 

give vent to it by words, and in this I continued most part of 

the day.



In the evening the good minister visited me again, and then 

fell to his usual good discourses.  He congratulated my having 

a space yet allowed me for repentance, whereas the state of 

those six poor creatures was determined, and they were now 

past the offers of salvation; he earnestly pressed me to retain 

the same sentiments of the things of life that I had when I had 

a view of eternity; and at the end of all told me I should not 

conclude that all was over, that a reprieve was not a pardon, 

that he could not yet answer for the effects of it; however, I 

had this mercy, that I had more time given me, and that it was 

my business to improve that time.



This discourse, though very seasonable, left a kind of sadness 

on my  heart, as if I might expect the affair would have a 

tragical issue still, which, however, he had no certainty of; 

and I did not indeed, at that time, question him about it, he 

having said that he would do his utmost to bring it to a good 

end, and that he hoped he might, but he would not have me 

be secure; and the consequence proved that he had reason for 

what he said.



It was about a fortnight after this that I had some just apprehensions 

that I should be included in the next dead warrant at the ensuing 

sessions; and it was not without great difficulty, and at last a 

humble petition for transportation, that I avoided it, so ill was 

I beholding to fame, and so prevailing was the fatal report of 

being an old offender; though in that they did not do me strict 

justice, for I was not in the sense of the law an old offender, 

whatever I was in the eye of the judge, for I had never been 

before them in a judicial way before; so the judges could not 

charge me with being an old offender, but the Recorder was 

pleased to represent my case as he thought fit.



I had now a certainty of life indeed, but with the hard conditions 

of being ordered for transportation, which indeed was hard 

condition in itself, but not when comparatively considered; 

and therefore I shall make no comments upon the sentence, 

nor upon the choice I was put to.  We shall all choose anything 

rather than death, especially when 'tis attended with an 

uncomfortable prospect beyond it, which was my case.



The good minister, whose interest, though a stranger to me, 

had obtained me the reprieve, mourned sincerely for this part.  

He was in hopes, he said, that I should have ended my days 

under the influence of good instruction, that I should not have 

been turned loose again among such a wretched crew as they 

generally are, who are thus sent abroad, where, as he said, I 

must have more than ordinary secret assistance from the grace 

of God, if I did not turn as wicked again as ever.



I have not for a good while mentioned my governess, who 

had during most, if not all, of this part been dangerously sick, 

and being in as near a view of death by her disease as I was 

by my sentence, was a great penitent--I say, I have not mentioned 

her, nor indeed did I see her in all this time; but being now 

recovering, and just able to come abroad, she came to see me.



I told her my condition, and what a different flux and reflux 

of tears and hopes I had been agitated with; I told her what I 

had escaped, and upon what terms; and she was present when 

the minister expressed his fears of my relapsing into wickedness 

upon my falling into the wretched companies that are generally 

transported.  Indeed I had a melancholy reflection upon it in 

my own mind, for I knew what a dreadful gang was always 

sent away together, and I said to my governess that the good 

minister's fears were not without cause.  'Well, well,' says  she, 

'but I hope you will not be tempted with such a horrid example 

as that.'  And as soon as the minister was gone, she told me she 

would not have me discouraged, for perhaps ways and means 

might be found out to dispose of me in a particular way, by 

myself, of which she would talk further to me afterward.



I looked earnestly at her, and I thought she looked more cheerful 

than she usually had done, and I entertained immediately a 

thousand notions of being delivered, but could not for my life 

image the methods, or think of one that was in the least feasible; 

but I was too much concerned in it to let her go from me without 

explaining herself, which, though she was very loth to do, yet 

my importunity prevailed, and, while I was still pressing, she 

answered me in a few words, thus:  'Why, you have money, 

have you not?  Did you ever know one in your life that was 

transported and had a hundred pounds in his pocket, I'll warrant 

you, child?'says she.



I understood her presently, but told her I would leave all that 

to her, but I saw no room to hope for anything but a strict 

execution of the order, and as it was a severity that was 

esteemed a mercy, there was no doubt but it would be strictly 

observed.  She said no more but this:  'We will try what can 

be done,' and so we parted for that night.



I lay in the prison near fifteen weeks after this order for 

transportation was signed.  What the reason of it was, I know 

not, but at the end of this time I was put on board of a ship in 

the Thames, and with me a gang of thirteen as hardened vile 

creatures as ever Newgate produced in my time; and it would 

really well take up a history longer than mine to describe the 

degrees of impudence and audacious villainy that those thirteen 

were arrived to, and the manner of their behaviour in the 

voyage; of which I have a very diverting account by me, which 

the captain of the ship who carried them over gave me the 

minutes of, and which he caused his mate to write down at large.



It may perhaps be thought trifling to enter here into a relation 

of all the little incidents which attended me in this interval of 

my circumstances; I mean, between the final order of my 

transporation and the time of my going on board the ship; and 

I am too near the end of my story to allow room for it; but 

something relating to me any my Lancashire husband I must 

not omit.



He had, as I have observed already, been carried from the 

master's side of the ordinary prison into the press-yard, with 

three of his comrades, for they found another to add to them 

after some time; here, for what reason I knew not, they were 

kept in custody without being brought to trial almost three 

months.  It seems they found means to bribe or buy off some 

of those who were expected to come in against them, and they 

wanted evidence for some time to convict them.  After some 

puzzle on this account, at first they made a shift to get proof 

enough against two of them to carry them off; but the other 

two, of which my Lancashire husband was one, lay still in 

suspense.  They had, I think, one positive evidence against 

each of them, but the law strictly obliging them to have two 

witnesses, they could make nothing of it.  Yet it seems they 

were resolved not to part with the men neither, not doubting 

but a further evidence would at last come in; and in order to 

this, I think publication was made, that such prisoners being 

taken, any one that had been robbed by them might come to 

the prison and see them.



I took this opportunity to satisfy my curiosity, pretending that 

I had been robbed in the Dunstable coach, and that I would go 

to see the two highwaymen.  But when I came into the press-yard, 

I so disguised myself, and muffled my face up so, that he could 

see little of me, and consequently knew nothing of who I was; 

and when I came back, I said publicly that I knew them very well.



Immediately it was rumoured all over the prison that Moll 

Flanders would turn evidence against one of the highwaymen, 

and that I was to come off by it from the sentence of transportation.



They heard of it, and immediately my husband desired to see 

this Mrs. Flanders that knew him so well, and was to be an 

evidence against him; and accordingly I had leave given to go 

to him.  I dressed myself up as well as the best clothes that I 

suffered myself ever to appear in there would allow me, and 

went to the press-yard, but had for some time a hood over my 

face.  He said little to me at first, but asked me if I knew him.  

I told him, Yes, very well; but as I concealed my face, so I 

counterfeited my voice, that he had not the least guess at who 

I was.  He asked me where I had seen him.  I told him between 

Dunstable and Brickhill; but turning to the keeper that stood 

by, I asked if I might not be admitted to talk with him alone.  

He said Yes, yes, as much as I pleased, and so very civilly 

withdrew.



As soon as he was gone, I had shut the door, I threw off my 

hood, and bursting out into tears, 'My dear,' says I, 'do you not 

know me?'  He turned pale, and stood speechless, like one 

thunderstruck, and, not able to conquer the surprise, said no 

more but this, 'Let me sit down'; and sitting down by a table, 

he laid his elbow upon the table, and leaning his head on his 

hand, fixed his eyes on the ground as one stupid.  I cried so 

vehemently, on the other hand, that it was a good while ere I 

could speak any more; but after I had given some vent to my 

passion by tears, I repeated the same words, 'My dear, do you 

not know me?'  At which he answered, Yes, and said no more 

a good while.



After some time continuing in the surprise, as above, he cast 

up his eyes towards me and said, 'How could you be so cruel?'  

I did not readily understand what he meant; and I answered, 

'How can you call me cruel?  What have I been cruel to you in?'  

'To come to me,' says he, 'in such a place as this, is it not to 

insult me?  I have not robbed you, at least not on the highway.'



I perceived by this that he knew nothing of the miserable 

circumstances I was in, and thought that, having got some 

intelligence of his being there, I had come to upbraid him 

with his leaving me.  But I had too much to say to him to be 

affronted, and told him in few words, that I was far from 

coming to insult him, but at best I came to condole mutually; 

that he would be easily satisfied that I had no such view, 

when I should tell him that my condition was worse than his, 

and that many ways.  He looked a little concerned at the 

general expression of my condition being worse than his, but, 

with a kind smile, looked a little wildly, and said, 'How can 

that be?  When you see me fettered, and in Newgate, and two 

of my companions executed already, can you can your condition 

is worse than mine?'



'Come, my dear,' says I, 'we have along piece of work to do, 

if I should be to related, or you to hear, my unfortunate history; 

but if you are disposed to hear it, you will soon conclude with 

me that my condition is worse than yours.'  'How is that possible,' 

says he again, 'when I expect to be cast for my life the very 

next sessions?'  'Yes, says I, ''tis very possible, when I shall 

tell you that I have been cast for my life three sessions ago, 

and am under sentence of death; is not my case worse than yours?' 



Then indeed, he stood silent again, like one struck dumb, and 

after a while he starts up.  'Unhappy couple!' says he.  'How 

can this be possible?'  I took him by the hand.  'Come, my 

dear,' said I, 'sit down, and let us compare our sorrows.  I am 

a prisoner in this very house, and in much worse circumstances 

than you, and you will be satisfied I do not come to insult you, 

when I tell you the particulars.'  Any with this we sat down 

together, and I told him so much of my story as I thought was 

convenient, bringing it at last to my being reduced to great 

poverty, and representing myself as fallen into some company 

that led me to relieve my distresses by way that I had been 

utterly unacquainted with, and that they making an attempt at 

a tradesman's house, I was seized upon for having been but 

just at the door, the maid-servant pulling me in; that I neither 

had broke any lock nor taken anything away, and that 

notwithstanding that, I was brought in guilty and sentenced 

to die; but that the judges, having been made sensible of the 

hardship of my circumstances, had obtained leave to remit the 

sentence upon my consenting to be transported.



I told him I fared the worse for being taken in the prison for 

one Moll Flanders, who was a famous successful thief, that 

all of them had heard of, but none of them had ever seen; but 

that, as he knew well, was none of my name.  But I placed all 

to the account of my ill fortune, and that under this name I 

was dealt with as an old offender, though this was the first 

thing they had ever known of me.  I gave him a long particular 

of things that had befallen me since I saw him, but I told him 

if I had seen him since he might thing I had, and then gave 

him an account how I had seen him at Brickhill; how furiously 

he was pursued, and how, by giving an account that I knew 

him, and that he was a very honest gentleman, one Mr.----, 

the hue-and-cry was stopped, and the high constable went 

back again.



He listened most attentively to all my story, and smiled at 

most of the particulars, being all of them petty matters, and 

infinitely below what he had been at the head of; but when I 

came to the story of Brickhill, he was surprised.  'And was it 

you, my dear,' said he, 'that gave the check to the mob that 

was at our heels there, at Brickhill?'  'Yes,' said I, 'it was I 

indeed.'  And then I told him the particulars which I had 

observed him there.  'Why, then,' said he, 'it was you that 

saved my life at that time, and I am glad I owe my life to you, 

for I will pay the debt to you now, and I'll deliver you from 

the present condition you are in, or I will die in the attempt.'



I told him, by no means; it was a risk too great, not worth his 

running the hazard of, and for a life not worth his saving.  

'Twas no matter for that, he said, it was a life worth all the 

world to him; a life that had given him a new life; 'for,' says 

he, 'I was never in real danger of being taken, but that time, 

till the last minute when I was taken.'  Indeed, he told me his 

danger then lay in his believing he had not been pursued that 

way; for they had gone from Hockey quite another way, and 

had come over the enclosed country into Brickhill, not by the 

road, and were sure they had not been seen by anybody.



Here he gave me a long history of his life, which indeed would 

make a very strange history, and be infinitely diverting.  He 

told me he took to the road about twelve years before he 

married me; that the woman which called him brother was not 

really his sister, or any kin to him, but one that belonged to 

their gang, and who, keeping correspondence with him, lived 

always in town, having good store of acquaintance; that she 

gave them a perfect intelligence of persons going out of town, 

and that they had made several good booties by her correspondence; 

that she thought she had fixed a fortune for him when she brought 

me to him, but happened to be disappointed, which he really 

could not blame her for; that if it had been his good luck that 

I had had the estate, which she was informed I had, he had 

resolved to leave off the road and live a retired, sober live but 

never to appear in public till some general pardon had been 

passed, or till he could, for money, have got his name into 

some particular pardon, that so he might have been perfectly 

easy; but that, as it had proved otherwise, he was obliged to 

put off his equipage and take up the old trade again.



He gave me a long account of some of his adventures, and 

particularly one when he robbed the West Chester coaches 

near Lichfield, when he got a very great booty; and after that, 

how he robbed five graziers, in the west, going to Burford Fair 

in Wiltshire to buy sheep.  He told me he got so much money 

on those two occasions, that if he had known where to have 

found me, he would certainly have embraced my proposal of 

going with me to Virginia, or to have settled in a plantation 

on some other parts of the English colonies in America.



He told me he wrote two or three letters to me, directed 

according to my order, but heard nothing from me.  This I 

indeed knew to be true, but the letters coming to my hand in 

the time of my latter husband, I could do nothing in it, and 

therefore chose to give no answer, that so he might rather 

believe they had miscarried.



Being thus disappointed, he said, he carried on the old trade 

ever since, though when he had gotten so much money, he 

said, he did not run such desperate risks as he did before.  

Then he gave me some account of several hard and desperate 

encounters which he had with gentlemen on the road, who 

parted too hardly with their money, and showed me some 

wounds he had received; and he had one or two very terrible 

wounds indeed, as particularly one by a pistol bullet, which 

broke his arm, and another with a sword, which ran him quite 

through the body, but that missing his vitals, he was cured 

again; one of his comrades having kept with him so faithfully, 

and so friendly, as that he assisted him in riding near eighty 

miles before his arm was set, and then got a surgeon in a 

considerable city, remote from that place where it was done, 

pretending they were gentlemen travelling towards Carlisle 

and that they had been attacked on the road by highwaymen, 

and that one of them had shot him into the arm and broke 

the bone.



This, he said, his friend managed so well, that they were not 

suspected at all, but lay still till he was perfectly cured.  He 

gave me so many distinct accounts of his adventures, that it 

is with great reluctance that I decline the relating them; but I 

consider that this is my own story, not his.



I then inquired into the circumstances of his present case at 

that time, and what it was he expected when he came to be 

tried.  He told me that they had no evidence against him, or 

but very little; for that of three robberies, which they were all 

charged with, it was his good fortune that he was but in one 

of them, and that there was but one witness to be had for that 

fact, which was not sufficient, but that it was expected some 

others would come in against him; that he thought indeed, 

when he first saw me, that I had been one that came of that 

errand; but that if somebody came in against him, he hoped 

he should be cleared; that he had had some intimation, that if 

he would submit to transport himself, he might be admitted 

to it without a trial, but that he could not think of it with any 

temper, and thought he could much easier submit to be hanged.



I blamed him for that, and told him I blamed him on two 

accounts; first, because if he was transported, there might be 

a hundred ways for him that was a gentleman, and a bold 

enterprising man, to find his way back again, and perhaps 

some ways and means to come back before he went.  He 

smiled at that part, and said he should like the last the best of 

the two, for he had a kind of horror upon his mind at his being 

sent over to the plantations, as Romans sent condemned 

slaves to work in the mines; that he thought the passage into 

another state, let it be what it would, much more tolerable at 

the gallows, and that this was the general notion of all the 

gentlemen who were driven by the exigence of their fortunes 

to take the road; that at the place of execution there was at 

least an end of all the miseries of the present state, and as for 

what was to follow, a man was, in his opinion, as likely to 

repent sincerely in the last fortnight of his life, under the 

pressures and agonies of a jail and the condemned hole, as he 

would ever be in the woods and wilderness of America; that 

servitude and hard labour were things gentlemen could never 

stoop to; that it was but the way to force them to be their own 

executioners afterwards, which was much worse; and that 

therefore he could not have any patience when he did but 

think of being transported.



I used the utmost of my endeavour to persuade him, and joined 

that known woman's rhetoric to it--I mean, that of tears.  I told 

him the infamy of a public execution was certainly a greater 

pressure upon the spirits of a gentleman than any of the 

mortifications that he could meet with abroad could be; that 

he had at least in the other a chance for his life, whereas here 

he had none at all; that it was the easiest thing in the world 

for him to manage the captain of a ship, who were, generally 

speaking, men of good-humour and some gallantry; and a 

small matter of conduct, especially if there was any money 

to be had, would make way for him to buy himself off when 

he came to Virginia.



He looked wistfully at me, and I thought I guessed at what he 

meant, that is to say, that he had no money; but I was mistaken, 

his meaning was another way.  'You hinted just now, my dear,' 

said he, 'that there might be a way of coming back before I 

went, by which I understood you that it might be possible to 

buy it off here.  I had rather give #200 to prevent going, than 

#100 to be set at liberty when I came there.'  'That is, my dear,' 

said I, 'because you do not know the place so well as I do.'  

'That may be,' said he; 'and yet I believe, as well as you know 

it, you would do the same, unless it is because, as you told 

me, you have a mother there.'



I told him, as to my mother, it was next to impossible but 

that she must be dead many years before; and as for any other 

relations that I might have there, I knew them not now; that 

since the misfortunes I had been under had reduced me to the 

condition I had been in for some years, I had not kept up any 

correspondence with them; and that he would easily believe, 

I should find but a cold reception from them if I should be 

put to make my first visit in the condition of a transported 

felon; that therefore, if I went thither, I resolved not to see 

them; but that I had many views in going there, if it should be 

my fate, which took off all the uneasy part of it; and if he 

found himself obliged to go also, I should easily instruct him 

how to manage himself, so as never to go a servant at all, 

especially since I found he was not destitute of money, which 

was the only friend in such a condition.



He smiled, and said he did not tell me he had money.  I took 

him up short, and told him I hoped he did not understand by 

my speaking, that I should expect any supply from him if he 

had money; that, on the other hand, though I had not a great 

deal, yet I did not want, and while I had any I would rather 

add to him than weaken him in that article, seeing, whatever 

he had, I knew in the case of transportation he would have 

occasion of it all.



He expressed himself in a most tender manner upon that head.  

He told me what money he had was not a great deal, but that 

he would never hide any of it from me if I wanted it, and that 

he assured me he did not speak with any such apprehensions; 

that he was only intent upon what I had hinted to him before 

he went; that here he knew what to do with himself, but that 

there he should be the most ignorant, helpless wretch alive.



I told him he frighted and terrified himself with that which 

had no terror in it; that if he had money, as I was glad to hear 

he had, he might not only avoid the servitude supposed to be 

the consequence of transportation, but begin the world upon 

a new foundation, and that such a one as he could not fail of 

success in, with the common application usual in such cases; 

that he could not but call to mind that is was what I had 

recommended to him many years before and had proposed it 

for our mutual subsistence and restoring our fortunes in the 

world; and I would tell him now, that to convince him both 

of the certainty of it and of my being fully acquainted with the 

method, and also fully satisfied in the probability of success, 

he should first see me deliver myself from the necessity of 

going over at all, and then that I would go with him freely, 

and of my own choice, and perhaps carry enough with me to 

satisfy him that I did not offer it for want of being able to live 

without assistance from him, but that I thought our mutual 

misfortunes had been such as were sufficient to reconcile us 

both to quitting this part of the world, and living where 

nobody could upbraid us with what was past, or we be in any 

dread of a prison, and without agonies of a condemned hole 

to drive us to it; this where we should look back on all our 

past disasters with infinite satisfaction, when we should 

consider that our enemies should entirely forget us, and that 

we should live as new people in a new world, nobody having 

anything to say to us, or we to them.



I pressed this home to him with so many arguments, and 

answered all his own passionate objections so effectually that 

he embraced me, and told me I treated him with such sincerity 

and affection as overcame him; that he would take my advice, 

and would strive to submit to his fate in hope of having the 

comfort of my assistance, and of so faithful a counsellor and 

such a companion in his misery.  But still he put me in mind 

of what I had mentioned before, namely, that there might be 

some way to get off before he went, and that it might be 

possible to avoid going at all, which he said would be much 

better.  I told him he should see, and be fully satisfied, that I 

would do my utmost in that part too, and if it did not succeed, 

yet that I would make good the rest.



We parted after this long conference with such testimonies of 

kindness and affection as I thought were equal, if not superior, 

to that at our parting at Dunstable; and now I saw more plainly 

than before, the reason why he declined coming at that time 

any farther with me toward London than Dunstable, and why, 

when we parted there, he told me it was not convenient for 

him to come part of the way to London to bring me going, as 

he would otherwise have done.  I have observed that the 

account of his life would have made a much more pleasing 

history than this of mine; and, indeed, nothing in it was more 

strange than this part, viz. that he carried on that desperate 

trade full five-and-twenty years and had never been taken, 

the success he had met with had been so very uncommon, and 

such that sometimes he had lived handsomely, and retired in 

place for a year or two at a time, keeping himself and a 

man-servant to wait on him, and had often sat in the 

coffee-houses and heard the very people whom he had robbed 

give accounts of their being robbed, and of the place and 

circumstances, so that he could easily remember that it was 

the same.



In this manner, it seems, he lived near Liverpool at the time 

he unluckily married me for a fortune.  Had I been the fortune 

he expected, I verily believe, as he said, that he would have 

taken up and lived honestly all his days.



He had with the rest of his misfortunes the good luck not to 

be actually upon the spot when the robbery was done which 

he was committed for, and so none of the persons robbed 

could swear to him, or had anything to charge upon him.  But 

it seems as he was taken with the gang, one hard-mouthed 

countryman swore home to him, and they were like to have 

others come in according to the publication they had made; 

so that they expected more evidence against him, and for that 

reason he was kept in hold.



However, the offer which was made to him of admitting him to 

transportation was made, as I understood, upon the intercession 

of some great person who pressed him hard to accept of it before 

a trial; and indeed, as he knew there were several that might 

come in against him, I thought his friend was in the right, and 

I lay at him night and day to delay it no longer.



At last, with much difficulty, he gave his consent; and as he 

was not therefore admitted to transportation in court, and on 

his petition, as I was, so he found himself under a difficulty 

to avoid embarking himself as I had said he might have done; 

his great friend, who was his intercessor for the favour of that 

grant, having given security for him that he should transport 

himself, and not return within the term.



This hardship broke all my measures, for the steps I took 

afterwards for my own deliverance were hereby rendered 

wholly ineffectual, unless I would abandon him, and leave 

him to go to America by himself; than which he protested he 

would much rather venture, although he were certain to go 

directly to the gallows.



I must now return to my case.  The time of my being transported 

according to my sentence was near at hand; my governess, who 

continued my fast friend, had tried to obtain a pardon, but it 

could not be done unless with an expense too heavy for my 

purse, considering that to be left naked and empty, unless I had 

resolved to return to my old trade again, had been worse than 

my transportation, because there I knew I could live, here I 

could not.  The good minister stood very hard on another 

account to prevent my being transported also; but he was 

answered, that indeed my life had been given me at his first 

solicitations, and therefore he ought to ask no more. He was 

sensibly grieved at my going, because, as he said, he feared I 

should lose the good impressions which a prospect of death 

had at first made on me, and which were since increased by 

his instructions; and the pious gentleman was exceedingly 

concerned about me on that account.



On the other hand, I really was not so solicitous about it as I 

was before, but I industriously concealed my reasons for it 

from the minister, and to the last he did not know but that I 

went with the utmost reluctance and affliction.



It was in the month of February that I was, with seven other 

convicts, as they called us, delivered to a merchant that traded 

to Virginia, on board a ship, riding, as they called it, in 

Deptford Reach.  The officer of the prison delivered us on 

board, and the master of the vessel gave a discharge for us.



We were for that night clapped under hatches, and kept so 

close that I thought I should have been suffocated for want 

of air; and the next morning the ship weighed, and fell down 

the river to a place they call Bugby's Hole, which was done, 

as they told us, by the agreement of the merchant, that all 

opportunity of escape should be taken from us.  However, 

when the ship came thither and cast anchor, we were allowed 

more liberty, and particularly were permitted to come up on 

the deck, but not up on the quarter-deck, that being kept 

particularly for the captain and for passengers.



When by the noise of the men over my head, and the motion 

of the ship, I perceived that they were under sail, I was at first 

greatly surprised, fearing we should go away directly, and that 

our friends would not be admitted to see us any more; but I 

was easy soon after, when I found they had come to an anchor 

again, and soon after that we had notice given by some of the 

men where we were, that the next morning we should have 

the liberty to come up on deck, and to have our friends come 

and see us if we had any.



All that night I lay upon the hard boards of the deck, as the 

passengers did, but we had afterwards the liberty of little 

cabins for such of us as had any bedding to lay in them, and 

room to stow any box or trunk for clothes and linen, if we 

had it (which might well be put in), for some of them had 

neither shirt nor shift or a rag of linen or woollen, but what 

was on their backs, or a farthing of money to help themselves; 

and yet I did not find but they fared well enough in the ship, 

especially the women, who got money from the seamen for 

washing their clothes, sufficient to  purchase any common 

things that they wanted.



When the next morning we had the liberty to come up on the 

deck, I asked one of the officers of the ship, whether I might 

not have the liberty to send a letter on shore, to let my friends 

know where the ship lay, and to get some necessary things 

sent to me.  This was, it seems, the boatswain, a very civil, 

courteous sort of man, who told me I should have that, or any 

other liberty that I desired, that he could allow me with safety. 

 I told him I desired no other; and he answered that the ship's 

boat would go up to London the next tide, and he would order 

my letter to be carried.




Accordingly, when the boat went off, the boatswain came to 

me and told me the boat was going off, and that he went in it 

himself, and asked me if my letter was ready he would take 

care of it.  I had prepared myself, you may be sure, pen, ink, 

and paper beforehand, and I had gotten a letter ready directed 

to my governess, and enclosed another for my fellow-prisoner, 

which, however, I did not let her know was my husband, not 

to the last.  In that to my governess, I let her know where the 

ship lay, and pressed her earnestly to send me what things I 

knew she had got ready for me for my voyage.



When I gave the boatswain the letter, I gave him a shilling 

with it, which I told him was for the charge of a messenger 

or porter, which I entreated him to send with the letter as 

soon as he came on shore, that if possible I might have an 

answer brought back by the same hand, that I might know 

what was become of my things; 'for sir,' says I, 'if the ship 

should go away before I have them on board, I am undone.'



I took care, when I gave him the shilling, to let him see that 

I had a little better furniture about me than the ordinary 

prisoners, for he saw that I had a purse, and in it a pretty deal 

of money; and I found that the very sight of it immediately 

furnished me with very different treatment from what I should 

otherwise have met with in the ship; for though he was very 

courteous indeed before, in a kind of natural compassion to 

me, as a woman in distress, yet he was more than ordinarily 

so afterwards, and procured me to be better treated in the ship 

than, I say, I might otherwise have been; as shall appear in 

its place.



He very honestly had my letter delivered to my governess's 

own hands, and brought me back an answer from her in writing; 

and when he gave me the answer, gave me the shilling again.  

'There,' says he, 'there's your shilling again too, for I delivered 

the letter myself.'  I could not tell what to say, I was so surprised 

at the thing; but after some pause, I said, 'Sir, you are too kind; 

it had been but reasonable that you had paid yourself coach-hire, 

then.'



'No, no,' says he, 'I am overpaid.  What is the gentlewoman?  

Your sister.'



'No, sir,' says I, 'she is no relation to me, but she is a dear 

friend, and all the friends I have in the world.'  'Well,' says 

he, 'there are few such friends in the world.  Why, she cried 

after you like a child,'  'Ay,' says I again, 'she would give a 

hundred pounds, I believe, to deliver me from this dreadful 

condition I am in.'



'Would she so?' says he.  'For half the money I believe I could 

put you in a way how to deliver yourself.'  But this he spoke 

softly, that nobody could hear.



'Alas! sir,' said I, 'but then that must be such a deliverance 

as, if I should be taken again, would cost me my life.'  'Nay,' 

said he, 'if you were once out of the ship, you must look to 

yourself afterwards; that I can say nothing to.'  So we dropped 

the discourse for that time.



In the meantime, my governess, faithful to the last moment, 

conveyed my letter to the prison to my husband, and got an 

answer to it, and the next day came down herself to the ship, 

bringing me, in the first place, a sea-bed as they call it, and 

all its furniture, such as was convenient, but not to let the 

people think it was extraordinary.  She brought with her a 

sea-chest--that is, a chest, such as are made for seamen, with 

all the conveniences in it, and filled with everything almost 

that I could want; and in one of the corners of the chest, where 

there was a private drawer, was my bank of money--this is to 

say, so much of it as I had resolved to carry with me; for I 

ordered a part of my stock to be left behind me, to be sent 

afterwards in such goods as I should want when I came to 

settle; for money in that country is not of much use where all 

things are brought for tobacco, much more is it a great loss 

to carry it from hence.



But my case was particular; it was by no means proper to me 

to go thither without money or goods, and for a poor convict, 

that was to be sold as soon as I came on shore, to carry with 

me a cargo of goods would be to have notice taken of it, and 

perhaps to have them seized by the public; so I took part of my 

stock with me thus, and left the other part with my governess.



My governess brought me a great many other things, but it 

was not proper for me to look too well provided in the ship, 

at least till I knew what kind of a captain we should have.  

When she came into the ship, I thought she would have died 

indeed; her heart sank at the sight of me, and at the thoughts 

of parting with me in that condition, and she cried so intolerably, 

I could not for a long time have any talk with her.



I took that time to read my fellow-prisoner's letter, which, 

however, greatly perplexed me.  He told me was determined 

to go, but found it would be impossible for him to be discharged 

time enough for going in the same ship, and which was more 

than all, he began to question whether they would give him 

leave to go in what ship he pleased, though he did voluntarily 

transport himself; but that they would see him put on board 

such a ship as they should direct, and that he would be charged 

upon the captain as other convict prisoners were; so that he 

began to be in despair of seeing me till he came to Virginia, 

which made him almost desperate; seeing that, on the other 

hand, if I should not be there, if any accident of the sea or of 

mortality should take me away, he should be the most undone 

creature there in the world.



This was very perplexing, and I knew not what course to take.  

I told my governess the story of the boatswain, and she was 

mighty eager with me treat with him; but I had no mind to it, 

till I heard whether my husband, or fellow-prisoner, so she 

called him, could be at liberty to go with me or no.  At last I 

was forced to let her into the whole matter, except only that 

of his being my husband.  I told her I had made a positive 

bargain or agreement with him to go, if he could get the liberty 

of going in the same ship, and that I found he had money.



Then I read a long lecture to her of what I proposed to do 

when we came there, how we could plant, settle, and, in short, 

grow rich without any more adventures; and, as a great secret, 

I told her that we were to marry as soon as he came on board.



She soon agreed cheerfully to my going when she heard this, 

and she made it her business from that time to get him out of 

the prison in time, so that he might go in the same ship with 

me, which at last was brought to pass, though with great 

difficulty, and not without all the forms of a transported 

prisoner-convict, which he really was not yet, for he had not 

been tried, and which was a great mortification to him.  As 

our fate was now determined, and we were both on board, 

actually bound to Virginia, in the despicable quality of 

transported convicts destined to be sold for slaves, I for five 

years, and he under bonds and security not to return to England 

any more, as long as he lived, he was very much dejected and 

cast down; the mortification of being brought on board, as he 

was, like a prisoner, piqued him very much, since it was first 

told him he should transport himself, and so that he might go 

as a gentleman at liberty.  It is true he was not ordered to be 

sold when he came there, as we were, and for that reason he 

was obliged to pay for his passage to the captain, which we 

were not; as to the rest, he was as much at a loss as a child 

what to do with himself, or with what he had, but by directions.



Our first business was to compare our stock.  He was very 

honest to me, and told me his stock was pretty good when he 

came into the prison, but the living there as he did in a figure 

like a gentleman, and, which was ten times as much, the 

making of friends, and soliciting his case, had been very 

expensive; and, in a word, all his stock that he had left was 

#108, which he had about him all in gold.



I gave him an account of my stock as faithfully, that is to say, 

of what I had taken to carry with me, for I was resolved, 

whatever should happen, to keep what I had left with my 

governess in reserve; that in case I should die, what I had with 

me was enough to give him, and that which was left in my 

governess's hands would be her own, which she had well 

deserved of me indeed.



My stock which I had with me was #246 some odd shillings; 

so that we had #354 between us, but a worse gotten estate was 

scarce ever put together to being the world with.



Our greatest misfortune as to our stock was that it was all in 

money, which every one knows is an unprofitable cargo to be 

carried to the plantations.  I believe his was really all he had 

left in the world, as he told me it was; but I, who had between 

#700 and #800 in bank when this disaster befell me, and who 

had one of the faithfullest friends in the world to manage it 

for me, considering she was a woman of manner of religious 

principles, had still #300 left in her hand, which I reserved as 

above; besides, some very valuable things, as particularly two 

gold watches, some small pieces of plate, and some rings--all

stolen goods.  The plate, rings, and watches were put in my 

chest with the money, and with this fortune, and in the 

sixty-first year of my age, I launched out into a new world, 

as I may call it, in the condition (as to what appeared) only 

of a poor, naked convict, ordered to be transported in respite 

from the gallows.  My clothes were poor and mean, but not 

ragged or dirty, and none knew in the whole ship that I had 

anything of value about me.



However, as I had a great many very good clothes and linen 

in abundance, which I had ordered to be packed up in two 

great boxes, I had them shipped on board, not as my goods, 

but as consigned to my real name in Virginia; and had the 

bills of loading signed by a captain in my pocket; and in these 

boxes was my plate and watches, and everything of value 

except my money, which I kept by itself in a private drawer 

in my chest, which could not be found, or opened, if found, 

with splitting the chest to pieces.



In this condition I lay for three weeks in the ship, not knowing 

whether I should have my husband with me or no, and therefore 

not resolving how or in what manner to receive the honest 

boatswain's proposal, which indeed he thought a little strange 

at first.



At the end of this time, behold my husband came on board.  

He looked with a dejected, angry countenance, his great heart 

was swelled with rage and disdain; to be dragged along with 

three keepers of Newgate, and put on board like a convict, 

when he had not so much as been brought to a trial.  He made 

loud complaints of it by his friends, for it seems he had some 

interest; but his friends got some check in their application, 

and were told he had had favour enough, and that they had 

received such an account of him, since the last grant of his 

transportation, that he ought to think himself very well treated 

that he was not prosecuted anew.  This answer quieted him at 

once, for he knew too much what might have happened, and 

what he had room to expect; and now he saw the goodness of 

the advice to him, which prevailed with him to accept of the 

offer of a voluntary transportation.  And after this his chagrin 

at these hell-hounds, as he called them, was a little over, he 

looked a little composed, began to be cheerful, and as I was 

telling him how glad I was to have him once more out of their 

hands, he took me in his arms, and acknowledged with great 

tenderness that I had given him the best advice possible.  'My 

dear,' says he, 'thou has twice saved my life; from henceforward 

it shall be all employed for you, and I'll always take your advice.'



The ship began now to fill; several passengers came on board, 

who were embarked on no criminal account, and these had 

accommodations assigned them in the great cabin, and other 

parts of the ship, whereas we, as convicts, were thrust down 

below, I know not where.  But when my husband came on 

board, I spoke to the boatswain, who had so early given me 

hints of his friendship in carrying my letter.  I told him he had 

befriended me in many things, and I had not made any suitable 

return to him, and with that I put a guinea into his hand.  I told 

him that my husband was now come on board; that though 

we were both under the present misfortune, yet we had been 

persons of a different character from the wretched crew that 

we came with, and desired to know of him, whether the captain 

might not be moved to admit us to some conveniences in the 

ship, for which we would make him what satisfaction he 

pleased, and that we would gratify him for his pains in procuring 

this for us.  He took the guinea, as I could see, with great 

satisfaction, and assured me of his assistance.



Then he told us he did not doubt but that the captain, who was 

one of the best-humoured gentlemen in the world, would be 

easily brought to accommodate us as well as we could desire, 

and, to make me easy, told me he would go up the next tide 

on purpose to speak to the captain about it.  The next morning, 

happening to sleep a little longer than ordinary, when I got up, 

and began to look abroad, I saw the boatswain among the men 

in his ordinary business.  I was a little melancholy at seeing 

him there, and going forward to speak to him, he saw me, and 

came towards me, but not giving him time to speak first, I said, 

smiling, 'I doubt, sir, you have forgot us, for I see you are very 

busy.'  He returned presently, 'Come along with me, and you 

shall see.'  So he took me into the great cabin, and there sat 

a good sort of a gentlemanly man for a seaman, writing, and 

with a great many papers before him.



'Here,' says the boatswain to him that was a-writing, 'is the 

gentlewoman that the captain spoke to you of'; and turning to 

me, he said, 'I have been so far from forgetting your business, 

that I have been up at the captain's house, and have represented 

faithfully to the captain what you said, relating to you being 

furnished with better conveniences for yourself and your 

husband; and the captain has sent this gentleman, who is made 

of the ship, down with me, on purpose to show you everything, 

and to accommodate you fully to your content, and bid me 

assure you that you shall not be treated like what you were at 

first expected to be, but with the same respect as other passengers 

are treated.'



The mate then spoke to me, and, not giving me time to thank 

the boatswain for his kindness, confirmed what the boatswain 

had said, and added that it was the captain's delight to show 

himself kind and charitable, especially to those that were 

under any misfortunes, and with that he showed me several 

cabins built up, some in the great cabin, and some partitioned 

off, out of the steerage, but opening into the great cabin on 

purpose for the accommodation of passengers, and gave me 

leave to choose where I would.  However, I chose a cabin 

which opened into the steerage, in which was very good 

conveniences to set our chest and boxes, and a table to eat on.



The mate then told me that the boatswain had given so good 

a character of me and my husband, as to our civil behaviour, 

that he had orders to tell me we should eat with him, if we 

thought fit, during the whole voyage, on the common terms 

of passengers; that we might lay in some fresh provisions, if 

we pleased; or if not, he should lay in his usual store, and we 

should have share with him.  This was very reviving news to 

me, after so many hardships and afflictions as I had gone 

through of late.  I thanked him, and told him the captain should 

make his own terms with us, and asked him leave to go and 

tell my husband of it, who was not very well, and was not yet 

out of his cabin.  Accordingly I went, and my husband, whose 

spirits were still so much sunk with the indignity (as he 

understood it) offered him, that he was scare yet himself, was 

so revived with the account that I gave him of the reception 

we were like to have in the ship, that he was quite another man, 

and new vigour and courage appeared in his very countenance.  

So true is it, that the greatest of spirits, when overwhelmed 

by their afflictions, are subject to the greatest dejections, and 

are the most apt to despair and give themselves up.



After some little pause to recover himself, my husband came 

up with me, and gave the mate thanks for the kindness, which 

he had expressed to us, and sent suitable acknowledgment by 

him to the captain, offering to pay him by advance, whatever 

he demanded for our passage, and for the conveniences he had 

helped us to.  The mate told him that the captain would be on 

board in the afternoon, and that he would leave all that till he 

came.  Accordingly, in the afternoon the captain came, and we 

found him the same courteous, obliging man that the boatswain 

had represented him to be; and he was so well pleased with 

my husband's conversation, that, in short, he would not let us 

keep the cabin we had chosen, but gave us one that, as I said 

before, opened into the great cabin.



Nor were his conditions exorbitant, or the man craving and 

eager to make a prey of us, but for fifteen guineas we had our 

whole passage and provisions and cabin, ate at the captain's 

table, and were very handsomely entertained.



The captain lay himself in the other part of the great cabin, 

having let his round house, as they call it, to a rich planter 

who went over with his wife and three children, who ate by 

themselves.  He had some other ordinary passengers, who 

quartered in the steerage, and as for our old fraternity, they 

were kept under the hatches while the ship lay there, and came 

very little on the deck.



I could not refrain acquainting my governess with what had 

happened; it was but just that she, who was so really concerned 

for me, should have part in my good fortune.  Besides, I wanted 

her assistance to supply me with several necessaries, which 

before I was shy of letting anybody see me have, that it might 

not be public; but now I had a cabin and room to set things in, 

I ordered abundance of good things for our comfort in the 

voyage, as brandy, sugar, lemons, etc., to make punch, and 

treat our benefactor, the captain; and abundance of things for 

eating and drinking in the voyage; also a larger bed, and bedding 

proportioned to it; so that, in a word, we resolved to want for 

nothing in the voyage.



All this while I had provided nothing for our assistance when 

we should come to the place and begin to call ourselves planters; 

and I was far from being ignorant of what was needful on that 

occasion; particularly all sorts of tools for the planter's work, 

and for building; and all kinds of furniture for our dwelling, 

which, if to be bought in the country, must necessarily cost 

double the price.



So I discoursed that point with my governess, and she went 

and waited upon the captain, and told him that she hoped ways 

might be found out for her two unfortunate cousins, as she 

called us, to obtain our freedom when we came into the country, 

and so entered into a discourse with him about the means and 

terms also, of which I shall say more in its place; and after 

thus sounding the captain, she let him know, though we were 

unhappy in the circumstances that occasioned our going, yet 

that we were not unfurnished to set ourselves to work in the 

country, and we resolved to settle and live there as planters, 

if we might be put in a way how to do it.  The captain readily 

offered his assistance, told her the method of entering upon 

such business, and how easy, nay, how certain it was for 

industrious people to recover their fortunes in such a manner.  

'Madam,' says he, ''tis no reproach to any many in that country 

to have been sent over in worse circumstances than I perceive 

your cousins are in, provided they do but apply with diligence 

and good judgment to the business of that place when they 

come there.'



She then inquired of him what things it was necessary we 

should carry over with us, and he, like a very honest as well 

as knowing man, told her thus:  'Madam, your cousins in the 

first place must procure somebody to buy them as servants, 

in conformity to the conditions of their transportation, and 

then, in the name of that person, they may go about what they 

will; they may either purchase some plantations already begun, 

or they may purchase land of the Government of the country, 

and begin where they please, and both will be done reasonably.'  

She bespoke his favour in the first article, which he promised 

to her to take upon himself, and indeed faithfully performed 

it, and as to the rest, he promised to recommend us to such as 

should give us the best advice, and not to impose upon us, 

which was as much as could be desired.



She then asked him if it would not be necessary to furnish us 

with a stock of tools and materials for the business of planting, 

and he said, 'Yes, by all means.'  And then she begged his 

assistance in it.  She told him she would furnish us with 

everything that was convenient whatever it cost her.  He 

accordingly gave her a long particular of things necessary for 

a planter, which, by his account, came to about fourscore or 

a hundred pounds.  And, in short, she went about as dexterously 

to buy them, as if she had been an old Virginia merchant; only 

that she bought, by my direction, above twice as much of 

everything as he had given her a list of.



These she put on board in her own name, took his bills of 

loading for them, and endorsed those bills of loading to my 

husband, insuring the cargo afterwards in her own name, by 

our order; so that we were provided for all events, and for 

all disasters.



I should have told you that my husband gave her all his whole 

stock of #108, which, as I have said, he had about him in gold, 

to lay out thus, and I gave her a good sum besides; sot that I 

did not break into the stock which I had left in her hands at 

all, but after we had sorted out our whole cargo, we had yet 

near #200 in money, which was more than enough for our 

purpose.



In this condition, very cheerful, and indeed joyful at being so 

happily accommodated as we were, we set sail from Bugby's

Hole to Gravesend, where the ship lay about ten more days, 

and where the captain came on board for good and all.  Here 

thecaptain offered us a civility, which indeed we had no reason 

to expect, namely, to let us go on shore and refresh ourselves, 

upon giving our words in a solemn manner that we would not 

go from him, and that we would return peaceably on board 

again.  This was such an evidence of his confidence in us, 

that it overcame my husband, who, in a mere principle of 

gratitude, told him, as he could not be in any capacity to make 

a suitable return for such a favour, so he could not think of 

accepting of it, nor could he be easy that the captain should 

run such a risk.  After some mutual civilities, I gave my 

husband a purse, in which was eighty guineas, and he put in 

into the captain's hand.  'There, captain,' says he, 'there's 

part of a pledge for our fidelity; if we deal dishonestly with 

you on any account, 'tis your own.'  And on this we went 

on shore.



Indeed, the captain had assurance enough of our resolutions 

to go, for that having made such provision to settle there, it 

did not seem rational that we would choose to remain here at 

the expense and peril of life, for such it must have been if we 

had been taken again.  In a word, we went all on shore with 

the captain, and supped together in Gravesend, where we were 

very merry, stayed all night, lay at the house where we supped, 

and came all very honestly on board again with him in the 

morning.  Here we bought ten dozen bottles of good beer, some 

wine, some fowls, and such things as we thought might be 

acceptable on board.



My governess was with us all this while, and went with us 

round into the Downs, as did also the captain's wife, with 

whom she went back.  I was never so sorrowful at parting 

with my own mother as I was at parting with her, and I never 

saw her more.  We had a fair easterly wind sprung up the third 

day after we came to the Downs, and we sailed from thence 

the 10th of April.  Nor did we touch any more at any place, 

till, being driven on the coast of Ireland by a very hard gale 

of wind, the ship came to an anchor in a little bay, near the 

mouth of a river, whose name I remember not, but they said 

the river came down from Limerick, and that it was the largest 

river in Ireland.



Here, being detained by bad weather for some time, the captain, 

who continued the same kind, good-humoured man as at 

first, took us two on shore with him again.  He id it now in 

kindness to my husband indeed, who bore the sea very ill, and 

was very sick, especially when it blew so hard.  Here we 

bought in again a store of fresh provisions, especially beef, 

pork, mutton, and fowls, and the captain stayed to pickle up 

five or six barrels of beef to lengthen out the ship's store.  We 

were here not above five days, when the weather turning mild, 

and a fair wind, we set sail again, and in two-and-forty days 

came safe to the coast of Virginia.



When we drew near to the shore, the captain called me to him, 

and told me that he found by my discourse I had some relations 

in the place, and that I had been there before, and so he supposed 

I understood the custom in their disposing the convict prisoners 

when they arrived.  I told him I did not, and that as to what 

relations I had in the place, he might be sure I would make 

myself known to none of them while I was in the circumstances 

of a prisoner, and that as to the rest, we left ourselves entirely 

to him to assist us, as he was pleased to promise us he would 

do.  He told me I must get somebody in the place to come and 

buy us as servants, and who must answer for us to the governor 

of the country, if he demanded us.  I told him we should do as 

she should direct; so he brought a planter to treat with him, as 

it were, for the purchase of these two servants, my husband 

and me, and there we were formally sold to him, and went 

ashore with him.  The captain went with us, and carried us to 

a certain house, whether it was to be called a tavern or not I 

know not, but we had a bowl of punch there made of rum, etc., 

and were very merry.  After some time the planter gave us a 

certificate of discharge, and an acknowledgment of having 

served him faithfully, and we were free from him the next 

morning, to go wither we would.



For this piece of service the captain demanded of us six 

thousand weight of tabacco, which he said he was accountable 

for to his freighter, and which we immediately bought for him, 

and made him a present of twenty guineas besides, with which 

he was abundantly satisfied.



It is not proper to enter here into the particulars of what part 

of the colony of Virginia we settled in, for divers reasons; it 

may suffice to mention that we went into the great river 

Potomac, the ship being bound thither; and there we intended 

to have settled first, though afterwards we altered our minds.



The first thing I did of moment after having gotten all our 

goods on shore, and placed them in a storehouse, or warehouse, 

which, with a lodging, we hired at the small place or village 

where we landed--I say, the first thing was to inquire after my 

mother, and after my brother (that fatal person whom I married 

as a husband, as I have related at large).  A little inquiry 

furnished me with information that Mrs.----, that is, my mother, 

was dead; that my brother (or husband) was alive, which I 

confess I was not very glad to hear; but which was worse, I 

found he was removed from the plantation where he lived 

formerly, and where I lived with him, and lived with one of 

his sons in a plantation just by the place where we landed, 

and where we had hired a warehouse. 



I was a little surprised at first, but as I ventured to satisfy 

myself that he could not know me, I was not only perfectly 

easy, but had a great mind to see him, if it was possible to so 

do without his seeing me.  In order to that I found out by 

inquiry the plantation where he lived, and with a woman of 

that place whom I got to help me, like what we call a chairwoman, 

I rambled about towards the place as if I had only a mind to 

see the country and look about me.  At last I came so near that 

I saw the dwellinghouse.  I asked the woman whose plantation 

that was; she said it belonged to such a man, and looking out 

a little to our right hands, 'there,' says she, is the gentleman 

that owns the plantation, and his father with him.'  'What are 

their Christian names?' said I.  'I know not,' says she, 'what 

the old gentleman's name is, but the son's name is Humphrey; 

and I believe,' says she, 'the father's is so too.'  You may 

guess, if you can, what a confused mixture of joy and fight 

possessed my thoughts upon this occasion, for I immediately 

knew that this was nobody else but my own son, by that father 

she showed me, who was my own brother.  I had no mask, 

but I ruffled my hood so about my face, that I depended upon 

it that after above twenty years' absence, and withal not 

expecting anything of me in that part of the world, he would 

not be able to know anything of me.  But I need not have used 

all that caution, for the old gentleman was grown dim-sighted 

by some distemper which had fallen upon his eyes, and could 

but just see well enough to walk about, and not run against a 

tree or into a ditch.  The woman that was with me had told me 

that by a mere accident, knowing nothing of what importance 

it was to me.  As they drew near to us, I said, 'Does he know 

you, Mrs. Owen?' (so they called the woman).  'Yes,' said 

she, 'if he hears me speak, he will know me; but he can't see 

well enough to know me or anybody else'; and so she told me 

the story of his sight, as I have related.  This made me secure, 

and so I threw open my hoods again, and let them pass by me.  

It was a wretched thing for a mother thus to see her own son, 

a handsome, comely young gentleman in flourishing 

circumstances, and durst not make herself known to him, and 

durst not take any notice of him.  Let any mother of children 

that reads this consider it, and but think with what anguish of 

mind I restrained myself; what yearnings of soul I had in me 

to embrace him, and weep over him; and how I thought all my 

entrails turned within me, that my very bowels moved, and I 

knew not what to do, as I now know not how to express those 

agonies!  When he went from me I stood gazing and trembling, 

and looking after him as long as I could see him; then sitting 

down to rest me, but turned from her, and lying on my face, 

wept, and kissed the ground that he had set his foot on.



I could not conceal my disorder so much from the woman but 

that she perceived it, and thought I was not well, which I was 

obliged to pretend was true; upon which she pressed me to rise, 

the ground being damp and dangerous, which I did accordingly, 

and walked away.



As I was going back again, and still talking of this gentleman 

and his son, a new occasion of melancholy offered itself thus.  

The woman began, as if she would tell me a story to divert me:  

'There goes,' says she, 'a very odd tale among the neighbours 

where this gentleman formerly live.'  'What was that?' said 

I.  'Why,' says she, 'that old gentleman going to England, 

when he was a young man, fell in love with a young lady there, 

one of the finest women that ever was seen, and married her, 

and brought her over hither to his mother who was then living.  

He liver here several years with her,' continued she, 'and had 

several children by her, of which the young gentleman that was 

with him now was one; but after some time, the old gentlewoman, 

his mother, talking to her of something relating to herself when 

she was in England, and of her circumstances in England, 

which were bad enough, the daughter-in-law began to be very 

much surprised and uneasy; and, in short, examining further 

into things, it appeared past all contradiction that the old 

gentlewoman was her own mother, and that consequently that 

son was his wife's own brother, which struck the whole family 

with horror, and put them into such confusion that it had almost 

ruined them all.  The young woman would not live with him; 

the son, her brother and husband, for a time went distracted; 

and at last the young woman went away for England, and has 

never been hears of since.'



It is easy to believe that I was strangely affected with this story, 

but 'tis impossible to describe the nature of my disturbance.  I 

seemed astonished at the story, and asked her a thousand 

questions about the particulars, which I found she was

thoroughly acquainted with.  At last I began to inquire into the 

circumstances of the family, how the old gentlewoman, I mean 

my mother, died, and how she left what she had; for my mother 

had promised me very solemnly, that when she died she would 

do something for me, and leave it so, as that, if I was living, I 

should one way or other come at it, without its being in the 

power of her son, my brother and husband, to prevent it.  She 

told me she did not know exactly how it was ordered, but she 

had been told that my mother had left a sum of money, and 

had tied her plantation for the payment of it, to be made good 

to the daughter, if ever she could be heard of, either in England 

or elsewhere; and that the trust was left with this son, who was 

the person that we saw with his father.



This was news too good for me to make light of, and, you 

may be sure, filled my heart with a thousand thoughts, what 

courseI should take, how, and when, and in what manner I 

should make myself known, or whether I should ever make 

myself know or no.



Here was a perplexity that I had not indeed skill to manage 

myself in, neither knew I what course to take.  It lay heavy 

upon my mind night and day.  I could neither sleep nor 

converse, sothat my husband perceived it, and wondered what 

ailed me, strove to divert me, but it was all to no purpose.  He 

pressed me to tell him what it was troubled me, but I put it off, 

till at last, importuning me continually, I was forced to form 

a story, which yet had a plain truth to lay it upon too.  It old 

him I was troubled because I found we must shift our quarters 

and alter our scheme of settling, for that I found I should be 

known if I stayed in that part of the country; for that my mother 

being dead, several of my relations were come into that part 

where we then was, and that I must either discover myself to 

them, which in our present circumstances was not proper on 

many accounts, or remove; and which to do I knew not, and 

that this it was that made me so melancholy and so thoughtful.



He joined with me in this, that it was by no means proper for 

me to make myself known to anybody in the circumstances 

inwhich we then were; and therefore he told me he would be 

willing to remove to any other part of the country, or even to 

any other country if I thought fit.  But now I had another 

difficulty,which was, that if I removed to any other colony, I 

put myself out of the way of ever making a due search after 

those effects which my mother had left.  Again I could never 

so much as think of breaking the secret of my former marriage 

to my new husband; it was not a story, as I thought, that would 

bear telling, nor could I tell what might be the consequences 

of it; and it was impossible to search into the bottom of the 

thing without making it public all over the country, as well 

who I was, as what I now was also.



In this perplexity I continued a great while, and this made my 

spouse very uneasy; for he found me perplexed, and yet thought

I was not open with him, and did not let him into every part 

of my grievance; and he would often say, he wondered what 

he had done that I would not trust him with whatever it was, 

especially if it was grievous and afflicting.  The truth is, he 

ought to have been trusted with everything, for no man in the 

world could deserve better of a wife; but this was a thing I 

knew not how to open to him, and yet having nobody to 

disclose any part of it to,the burthen was too heavy for my 

mind; for let them say whatthey please of our sex not being 

able to keep a secret, my life is a plain conviction to me of the 

contrary; but be it our sex, or the man's sex, a secret of moment 

should always have a confidant,a bosom friend, to whom we 

may communicate the joy of it, or the grief of it, be it which 

it will, or it will be a double weight upon the spirits, and 

perhaps become even insupportable in itself; and this I appeal 

to all human testimony for the truth of.



And this is the cause why many times men as well as women, 

and men of the greatest and best qualities other ways, yet have 

found themselves weak in this part, and have not been able to 

bear the weight of a secret joy or of a secret sorrow, but have 

been obliged to disclose it, even for the mere giving vent to 

themselves, and to unbend the mind oppressed with the load 

andweights which attended it.  Nor was this any token of folly 

orthoughtlessness at all, but a natural consequence of the thing;

and such people, had they struggled longer with the oppression, 

would certainly have told it in their sleep, and disclosed the 

secret, let it have been of what fatal nature soever, without 

regard to the person to whom it might be exposed.  This 

necessity of nature is a thing which works sometimes with 

such vehemence in the minds of those who are guilty of any 

atrocious villainy, such as secret murder in particular, that they 

have been obliged to discover it, though the consequence 

would necessarily be their own destruction.  Now, thought it 

may be true that the divine justice ought to have the glory of 

all those discoveries and confessions, yet 'tis as certain that 

Providence, which ordinarily works by the hands of nature, 

makes use here of the same naturalcauses to produce those 

extraordinary effects.



I could give several remarkable instances of this in my long 

conversation with crime and with criminals.  I knew one fellow 

that, while I was in prison in Newgate, was one of those they 

called then night-fliers.  I know not what other word they may 

have understood it by since, but he was one who by connivance 

was admitted to go abroad every evening, when he played his 

pranks, and furnished those honest people they call thief-catchers 

with business to find out the next day, and restore for a reward 

what they had stolen the evening before.  This fellow was as 

sure to tell in his sleep all that he had done, and every step he 

had taken, what he had stolen, and where, as sure as if he had 

engaged to tell it waking, and that there was no harm or danger 

in it, and therefore he was obliged, after he had been out, to 

lock himself up, or be locked up by some of the keepers that 

had him in fee, that nobody should hear him; but, on the other 

hand, if he had told all the particulars, and given a full account 

of his rambles and success, to any comrade, any brother thief, 

or to his employers, as I may justly call them, then all was 

well with him, and he slept as quietly as other people.



As the publishing this account of my life is for the sake of the 

just moral of very part of it, and for instruction, caution, 

warning, and improvement to every reader, so this will not 

pass, I hope, for an unnecessary digression concerning some 

people being obliged to disclose the greatest secrets either of 

their own or other people's affairs.



Under the certain oppression of this weight upon my mind, I 

laboured in the case I have been naming; and the only relief 

I found for it was to let my husband into so much of it as I 

thought would convince him of the necessity there was for us 

to think of settling in some other part of the world; and the 

next consideration before us was, which part of the English 

settlements we should go to.  My husband was a perfect stranger 

to the country, and had not yet so much as a geographical 

knowledge of the situation of the several places; and I, that, 

till I wrote this, did not know what the word geographical 

signified, had only a general knowledge from long conversation 

with people that came from or went to several places; but this 

I knew, that Maryland, Pennsylvania, East and West Jersey, 

New York, and New England lay all north of Virginia, and 

that they were consequently all colder climates, to which for 

that very reason, I had an aversion.  For that as I naturally 

loved warm weather, so now I grew into years I had a stronger 

inclination to shun a cold climate.  I therefore considered of 

going to Caroline, which is the only southern colony of the 

English on the continent of America, and hither I proposed to 

go; and the rather because I might with great ease come from 

thence at any time, when it might be proper to inquire after 

my mother's effects, and to make myself known enough to 

demand them.



With this resolution I proposed to my husband our going away 

from where we was, and carrying all our effects with us to 

Caroline, where we resolved to settle; for my husband readily 

agreed to the first part, viz. that was not at all proper to stay 

where we was, since I had assured him we should be known 

there, and the rest I effectually concealed from him.



But now I found a new difficulty upon me.  The main affair 

grew heavy upon my mind still, and I could not think of going 

out of the country without somehow or other making inquiry 

into the grand affair of what my mother had one for me; nor 

could I with any patience bear the thought of going away, and 

not make myself known to my old husband (brother), or to my 

child, his son; only I would fain have had this done without 

my new husband having any knowledge of it, or they having 

any knowledge of him, or that I had such a thing as a husband.



I cast about innumerable ways in my thoughts how this might 

be done.  I would gladly have sent my husband away to

Caroline with all our goods, and have come after myself, but 

this was impracticable; he would never stir without me, being 

himself perfectly unacquainted with the country, and with the 

methods of settling there or anywhere else.  Then I thought 

wewould both go first with part of our goods, and that when 

we were settled I should come back to Virginia and fetch the 

remainder; but even then I knew he would never part with me,

and be left there to go on alone.  The case was plain; he was 

bread a gentleman, and by consequence was not only 

unacquainted, but indolent, and when we did settle, would 

much rather go out into the woods with his gun, which they 

call there hunting, and which is the ordinary work of the 

Indians, and which they do as servants; I say, he would rather 

do that than attend the natural business of his plantation.



These were therefore difficulties insurmountable, and such as 

I knew not what to do in.  I had such strong impressions on 

mymind about discovering myself to my brother, formerly 

my husband, that I could not withstand them; and the rather, 

because it ran constantly in my thoughts, that if I did not do 

it while he lived, I might in vain endeavour to convince my 

son afterward that I was really the same person, and that I was 

his mother, and so might both lose the assistance and comfort 

of the relation, and the benefit of whatever it was my mother 

had leftme; and yet, on the other hand, I could never think it 

proper to discover myself to them in the circumstances I was 

in, as well relating to the having a husband with me as to my 

being brought over by a legal transportation as a criminal; on 

both which accounts it was absolutely necessary to me to 

remove from the place where I was, and come again to him, 

as from another place and in another figure.



Upon those considerations,  I went on with telling my husband 

the absolute necessity there was of our not settling in Potomac 

River, at least that we should be presently made public there; 

whereas if we went to any other place in the world, we should 

come in with as much reputation as any family that came to 

plant; that, as it was always agreeable to the inhabitants to 

have families come among them to plant, who brought substance 

with them, either to purchase plantations or begin new ones, 

so we should be sure of a kind, agreeable reception, and that 

without any possibility of a discovery of our circumstances.



I told him in general, too, that as I had several relations in the 

place where we was, and that I durst not now let myself be 

known to them, because they would soon come into a knowledge 

of the occasion and reason of my coming over, which would be 

to expose myself to the last degree, so I had reason to believe 

that my mother, who dies here, had left me something, and 

perhaps considerable, which it might be very well worth my 

while to inquire after; but that this too could not be done 

without exposing us publicly, unless we went from hence; and 

then, wherever we settled, I might come, as it were, to visit 

and to see my brother and nephews, make myself known to 

them, claim and inquire after what was my due, be received 

with respect, and at the same time have justice done me with 

cheerfulness and good will; whereas, if I did it now, I could 

expect nothing but with trouble, such as exacting it by force, 

receiving it with curses and reluctance, and with all kinds of 

affronts, which he would not perhaps bear to see; that in case 

of being obliged to legal proofs of being really her daughter, 

I might be at loss, be obliged to have recourse to England, and 

it may be to fail at last, and so lose it, whatever it might be.  

With these arguments, and having thus acquainted my husband 

with the whole secret so far as was needful of him, we resolved 

to go and seek a settlement in some other colony, and at first 

thoughts, Caroline was the place we pitched upon.



In order to this we began to make inquiry for vessels going to 

Carolina, and in a very little while got information, that on the 

other side the bay, as they call it, namely, in Maryland, there 

was a ship which came from Carolina, laden with rice and 

other goods, and was going back again thither, and from 

thence to Jamaica, with provisions.  On this news we hired a 

sloop to take in our goods, and taking, as it were, a final 

farewell of Potomac River, we went with all our cargo over 

to Maryland.



This was a long and unpleasant voyage, and my spouse said 

it was worse to him than all the voyage from England, because 

the weather was but indifferent, the water rough, and the 

vessel small and inconvenient.  In the next place, we were full 

a hundred miles up Potomac River, in a part which they call 

Westmoreland County, and as that river is by far the greatest 

in Virginia, and I have heard say it is the greatest river in the 

world that falls into another river, and not directly into the sea, 

so we had base weather in it, and were frequently in great 

danger; for though we were in the middle, we could not see 

land on either side for many leagues together.  Then we had 

the great river or bay of Chesapeake to cross, which is where 

the river Potomac falls intoit, near thirty miles broad, and we 

entered more great vast waters whose names I know not, so 

that our voyage was full two hundred miles, in a poor, sorry 

sloop, with all our treasure, and if any accident had happened 

to us, we might at last have been very miserable; supposing 

we had lost our goods and saved our lives only, and had then 

been left naked and destitute, and in a wild, strange place not 

having one friend or acquaintance in all that part of the world.  

The very thought of it gives me some horror, even since the 

danger is past.



Well, we came to the place in five days' sailing; I think they 

call it Philip's Point; and behold, when we came thither, the 

ship bound to Carolina was loaded and gone away but three 

days before.  This was a disappointment;; but, however, I, 

that was to be discouraged with nothing, told my husband 

that since we could not get passage to Caroline, and that the 

country we was in was very fertile and good, we would, if he 

liked of it, see if we could find out anything for our tune where 

we was, and that if he liked things we would settle here.



We immediately went on shore, but found no conveniences 

just at that place, either for our being on shore or preserving 

our goods on shore, but was directed by a very honest Quaker, 

whom we found there, to go to a place about sixty miles east; 

that is to say, nearer the mouth of the bay, where he said he 

lived, and where we should be accommodated, either to plant, 

or to wait for any other place to plant in that might be more 

convenient; and he invited us with so much kindness and 

simply honesty, that we agreed to go, and the Quaker himself 

went with us.



Here we bought us two servants, viz. an English woman-servant 

just come on shore from a ship of Liverpool, and a Negro 

man-servant, things absolutely necessary for all people that 

pretended to settle in that country.  This honest Quaker was 

very helpful to us, and when we came to the place that he 

proposed to us, found us out a convenient storehouse for our 

goods, and lodging for ourselves and our servants; and about 

two months or thereabouts afterwards, by his direction, we 

took up a large piece of land from the governor of that country, 

in order to form our plantation, and so we laid the thoughts 

of going to Caroline wholly aside, having been very well 

received here, and accommodated with a convenient lodging 

till we could prepare things, and have land enough cleared, 

and timber and materials provided for building us a house, all 

which we managed by the direction of the Quaker; so that in 

one year's time we had nearly fifty acres of land cleared, part 

of it enclosed, and some of it planted with tabacco, though 

not much; besides, we had garden ground and corn sufficient 

to help supply our servants with roots and herbs and bread.



And now I persuaded my husband to let me go over the bay 

again, and inquire after my friends.  He was the willinger to 

consent to it now, because he had business upon his hands 

sufficient to employ him, besides his gun to divert him, which 

they call hunting there, and which he greatly delighted in; and 

indeed we used to look at one another, sometimes with a great 

deal of pleasure, reflecting how much better that was, not than 

Newgate only, but than the most prosperous of our circumstances 

in the wicked trade that we had been both carrying on.



Our affair was in a very good posture; we purchased of the 

proprietors of the colony as much land for #35, paid in ready 

money, as would make a sufficient plantation to employ 

between fifty and sixty servants, and which, being well 

improved, would be sufficient to us as long as we could either 

of us live; and as for children, I was past the prospect of 

anything of that kind.



But out good fortune did not end here.  I went, as I have said, 

over the bay, to the place where my brother, once a husband, 

lived; but I did not go to the same village where I was before, 

but went up another great river, on the east side of the river 

Potomac, called Rappahannock River, and by this means 

came on the back of his plantation, which was large, and by 

the help of a navigable creek, or little river, that ran into the 

Rappahannock, I came very near it.



I was now fully resolved to go up point-blank to my brother 

(husband), and to tell him who I was; but not knowing what 

temper I might find him in, or how much out of temper rather, 

I might make him by such a rash visit, I resolved to write a 

letter to him first, to let him know who I was, and that I was 

come not to give him any trouble upon the old relation, which 

I hoped was entirely forgot, but that I applied to him as a sister 

to a brother, desiring his assistance in the case of that provision 

which our mother, at her decease, had left for my support, and 

which I did not doubt but he would do me justice in, especially 

considering that I was come thus far to look after it.



I said some very tender, kind things in the letter about his 

son, which I told him he knew to be my own child, and that 

as I was guilty of nothing in marrying him, any more than he 

was in marrying me, neither of us having then known our 

being at all related to one another, so I hoped he would allow 

me the most passionate desire of once seeing my one and only 

child, and of showing something of the infirmities of a mother 

in preserving a violent affect for him, who had never been 

able to retain any thought of me one way or other.



I did believe that, having received this letter, he would 

immediately give it to his son to read, I having understood 

his eyesbeing so dim, that he could not see to read it; but it 

fell out better than so, for as his sight was dim, so he had 

allowed his son to open all letters that came to his hand for 

him, and the old gentleman being from home, or out of the 

way when my messenger came, my letter came directly to my 

son's hand, and he opened and read it.



He called the messenger in, after some little stay, and asked 

him where the person was who gave him the letter.  The 

messengertold him the place, which was about seven miles 

off, so he bid him stay, and ordering a horse to be got ready, 

and two servants, away he came to me with the messenger.  

Let any one judge the consternation I was in when my 

messenger came back, and told me the old gentleman was not 

at home, but his son was come along with him, and was just 

coming up to me.  I was perfectly confounded, for I knew not 

whether it was peace or war, nor could I tell how to behave; 

however, I had but a very few moments to think, for my son 

was at the heels of the messenger, and coming up into my 

lodgings, asked the fellow at the door something.  I suppose 

it was, for I did not hear it so as to understand it, which was 

the gentlewoman that sent him; for the messenger said, 'There 

she is, sir'; at which he comes directly up to me, kisses me, 

took me in his arms, and embraced me with so much passion 

that he could not speak, but I could feel his breast heave and 

throb like a child, that cries, but sobs, and cannot cry it out.



I can neither express nor describe the joy that touched my very 

soul when I found, for it was easy to discover that part, that 

he came not as a stranger, but as a son to a mother, and indeed 

as a son who had never before known what a mother of his 

own was; in short, we cried over one another a considerable 

while, when at last he broke out first.  'My dear mother,' says 

he, 'are you still alive?  I never expected to have seen your 

face.'  As for me, I could say nothing a great while. 



After we had both recovered ourselves a little, and were able 

to talk, he told me how things stood. As to what I had written 

to his father, he told me he had not showed my letter to his 

father, or told him anything about it; that what his grandmother 

left me was in his hands, and that he would do me justice to 

my full satisfaction; that as to his father, he was old and infirm 

both in body and mind; that he was very fretful and passionate, 

almost blind, and capable of nothing; and he questioned 

whether he would know how to act in an affair which was of 

so nice a nature as this; and that therefore he had come himself, 

as well to satisfy himself in seeing me, which he could not 

restrain himself from, as also to put it into my power to make 

a judgment, after I had seen how things were, whether I would 

discover myself to his father or no.



This was really so prudently and wisely managed, that I found 

my son was a man of sense, and needed no direction from me.  

I told him I did not wonder that his father was as he had 

described him, for that his head was a little touched before I 

went away; and principally his disturbance was because I 

could not be persuaded to conceal our relation and to live with 

him as myhusband, after I knew that he was my brother; that 

as he knew better than I what his father's present condition 

was, I should readily join with him in such measure as he 

would direct; that I was indifferent as to seeing his father, 

since I had seen him first, and he could not have told me better 

news than to tell me that what his grandmother had left me 

was entrusted in his hands, who, I doubted not, now he knew 

who I was, would, as he said, do me justice.  I inquired then 

how long my mother had been dead, and where she died, and 

told so many particulars of the family, that I left him no room 

to doubt the truth of my being really and truly his mother.



My son then inquired where I was, and how I had disposed 

myself.  I told him I was on the Maryland side of the bay, at 

the plantation of a particular friend who came from England 

in the same ship with me; that as for that side of the bay where 

he was, I had no habitation.  He told me I should go home 

with him, and live with him, if I pleased, as long as I lived; 

that as to his father, he knew nobody, and would never so 

much as guess at me.  I considered of that a little, and told 

him, that though it was really no concern to me to live at a 

distance from him, yet I could not say it would be the most 

comfortable thing in the world to me to live in the house with 

him, and to have that unhappy object always before me, which 

had been such a blow to my peace before; that though I should 

be glad to have his company (my son), or to be as near him as 

possible while I stayed, yet I could not think of being in the 

house where I should be also under constant restraint for fear 

of betraying myself in my discourse, nor should I be able to 

refrain some expressions in my conversing with him as my 

son, that might discover the whole affair, which would by no 

means be convenient.



He acknowledged that I was right in all this.  'But then, dear 

mother,' says he, 'you shall be as near me as you can.'  So he 

took me with him on horseback to a plantation next to his own, 

and where I was as well entertained as I could have been in his 

own.  Having left me there he went away home, telling me we 

would talk of the main business the next day; and having first 

called me his aunt, and given a charge to the people, who it 

seems were his tenants, to treat me with all possible respect.  

About two hours after he was gone, he sent me a maid-servant 

and a Negro boy to wait on me, and provisions ready dressed 

for my supper; and thus I was as if I had been in a new world, 

and began secretly now to wish that I had not brought my 

Lancashire husband from England at all. 



However, that wish was not hearty neither, for I lived my 

Lancashire husband entirely, as indeed I had ever done from 

the beginning; and he merited from me as much as it was 

possible for a man to do; but that by the way.



The next morning my son came to visit me again almost as 

soon as I was up.  After a little discourse, he first of all pulled 

out a deerskin bag, and gave it me, with five-and-fifty Spanish 

pistoles in it, and told me that was to supply my expenses from 

England, for though it was not his business to inquire, yet he 

ought to think I did not bring a great deal of money out with 

me, it not being usual to bring much money into that country.  

Then he pulled out his grandmother's will, and read it over to 

me, whereby it appeared that she had left a small plantation, 

as he called it, on York River, that is, where my mother lived, 

to me, with the stock of servants and cattle upon it, and given 

it in trust to this son of mine for my use, whenever he should 

hear of my being alive, and to my heirs, if I had any children, 

and in default of heirs, to whomsoever I should by will dispose 

of it; but gave the income of it, till I should be heard of, or 

found, to my said son; and if I should not be living, then it was 

to him, and his heirs.



This plantation, though remote from him, he said he did not 

let out, but managed it by a head-clerk (steward), as he did 

another that was his father's, that lay hard by it, and went over 

himself three or four times a year to look after it.  I asked him 

what he thought the plantation might be worth.  He said, if I 

would let it out, he would give me about 60 a year for it; but 

if I would live on it, then it would be worth much more, and, 

he believed, would bring me in about #150 a year.  But seeing 

I was likely either to settle on the other side of the bay, or 

might perhaps have a mind to go back to England again, if I 

would let him be my steward he would manage it for me, as 

he had done for himself, and that he believed he should be 

able to send me as much tobacco to England from it as would 

yield me about #100 a year, sometimes more.



This was all strange news to me, and things I had not been 

used to; and really my heart began to look up more seriously 

than I think it ever did before, and to look with great thankfulness 

to the hand of Providence, which had done such wonders for 

me, who had been myself the greatest wonder of wickedness 

perhaps that had been suffered to live in the world.  And I must 

again observe, that not on this occasion only, but even on all 

other occasions of thankfulness, my past wicked and abominable 

life never looked so monstrous to me, and I never so completely 

abhorred it, and reproached myself with it, as when I had a 

sense upon me of Providence doing good to me, while I had 

been making those vile returns on my part.



But I leave the reader to improve these thoughts, as no doubt 

they will see cause, and I go on to the fact.  My son's tender 

carriage and kind offers fetched tears from me, almost all the 

while he talked with me.  Indeed, I could scarce discourse 

with him but in the intervals of my passion; however, at length 

I began, and expressing myself with wonder at my being so 

happy to have the trust of what I had left, put into the hands 

of my own child, I told him ,that as to the inheritance of it, I 

had no child but him in the world, and was now past having 

any if I should marry, and therefore would desire him to get 

a writing drawn, which I was ready to execute, by which I 

would, after me, give it wholly to him and to his heirs.  And 

in the meantime, smiling, I asked him what made him continue 

a bachelor so long.  His answer was kind and ready, that 

Virginia did not yield any great plenty of wives, and that since 

I talked of going back to England, I should send him a wife 

from London.



This was the substance of our first day's conversation, the 

pleasantest day that ever passed over my head in my life, and

which gave me the truest satisfaction.  He came every day 

after this, and spent great part of his time with me, and carried 

me about to several of his friends' houses, where I was 

entertained with great respect.  Also I dines several times at 

his own house, when he took care always to see his half-dead 

father so out of the way that I never saw him, or he me.  I 

made him one present, and it was all I had of value, and that 

was one of the gold watches, of which I mentioned above, 

that I had two in my chest, and this I happened to have with 

me, and I gave it him at his third visit.  I told him I had nothing 

of any value to bestow but that, and I desired he would now 

and then kiss it for my sake.  I did not indeed tell him that I 

had stole it from a gentlewoman's side, at a meeting-house in 

London.  That's by the way.



He stood a little while hesitating, as if doubtful whether to 

take it or no; but I pressed it on him, and made him accept it, 

and it was not much less worth than his leather pouch full of 

Spanish gold; no, though it were to be reckoned as if at London, 

whereas it was worth twice as much there, where I gave it him.  

At length he took it, kissed it, told me the watch should be a 

debt upon him that he would be paying as long as I lived.



A few days after he brought the writings of gift, and the 

scrivener with them, and I signed them very freely, and 

delivered them to him with a hundred kisses; for sure nothing 

ever passed between a mother and a tender, dutiful child with 

more affection.  The next day he brings me an obligation 

under his hand and seal, whereby he engaged himself to 

manage and improve the plantation for my account, and with 

his utmost skill, and to remit the produce to my order wherever 

I should be; and withal, to be obliged himself to make up the 

produce #100 a year to me.  When he had done so, he told me 

that as I came to demand it before the crop was off, I had a 

right to produce of the current year, and so he paid me #100 

in Spanish pieces of eight, and desired me to give him a receipt 

for it as in full for that year, ending at Christmas following; 

this being about the latter end of August.



I stayed here about five weeks, and indeed had much ado to 

get away then.  Nay, he would have come over the bay with 

me, but I would by no means allow him to it.  However, he 

would send me over in a sloop of his own, which was built 

like a yacht, and served him as well for pleasure as business.  

This I accepted of, and so, after the utmost expressions both 

of duty and affection, he let me come away, and I arrived safe 

in two days at my friend's the Quaker's.



I brought over with me for the use of our plantation, three 

horses, with harness and saddles, some hogs, two cows, and 

a thousand other things, the gift of the kindest and tenderest 

child that ever woman had.  I related to my husband all the 

particulars of this voyage, except that I called my son my 

cousin; and first I told him that I had lost my watch, which 

he seemed to take as a misfortune; but then I told him how 

kind my cousin had been, that my mother had left me such a 

plantation, and that he had preserved it for me, in hopes some 

time or other he should hear from me; then I told him that I 

had left it to his management, that he would render me a 

faithful account of its produce; and then I pulled him out the 

#100 in silver, as the first year's produce; and then pulling 

out the deerskin purse with the pistoles, 'And here, my dear,' 

says I, 'is the gold watch.'  My husband--so is Heaven's 

goodness sure to work the same effects in all sensible minds 

where mercies touch the heart--lifted up both hands, and with 

an ecstacy of joy, 'What is God a-doing,' says he, 'for such an 

ungrateful dog as I am!'  Then I let him know what I had 

brought over in the sloop, besides all this; I mean the horses, 

hogs, and cows, and other stores for our plantation; all which 

added to his surprise, and filled his heart with thankfulness; 

and from this time forward I believe he was as sincere a penitent, 

and as thoroughly a reformed man, as ever God's goodness 

brought back from a profligate, a highwayman, and a robber.  

I could fill a larger history than this with the evidence of this 

truth, and but that I doubt that part of the story will not be 

equally diverting as the wicked part, I have had thoughts of 

making a volume of it by itself.



As for myself, as this is to be my own story, not my husband's, 

I return to that part which related to myself.  We went on with 

our plantation, and managed it with the help and diversion of 

such friends as we got there by our obliging behaviour, and 

especially the honest Quaker, who proved a faithful, generous, 

and steady friend to us; and we had very good success, for 

having a flourishing stock to begin with, as I have said, and 

this being now increased by the addition of #150 sterling in 

money, we enlarged our number of servants, built us a very 

good house, and cured every year a great deal of land.  The 

second year I wrote to my old governess, giving her part with 

us of the joy of our success, and order her how to lay out the 

money I had left with her, which was #250 as above, and to 

send it to us in goods, which she performed with her usual 

kindness and fidelity, and this arrived safe to us.



Here we had a supply of all sorts of clothes, as well for my 

husband as for myself; and I took especial care to buy for 

him all those things that I knew he delighted to have; as two 

good long wigs, two silver-hilted swords, three or four fine 

fowling-pieces, a find saddle with holsters and pistols very 

handsome, with a scarlet cloak; and, in a word, everything I 

could think of to oblige him, and to make him appear, as he 

really was, a very fine gentleman.  I ordered a good quantity 

of such household stuff as we yet wanted, with linen of all 

sorts for us both.  As for myself, I wanted very little of clothes 

or linen, being very well furnished before.  The rest of my 

cargo consisted in iron-work of all sorts, harness for horses, 

tools, clothes for servants, and woollen cloth, stuffs, serges, 

stockings, shoes, hats, and the like, such as servants wear; 

and whole pieces also to make up for servants, all by direction 

of the Quaker; and all this cargo arrived safe, and in good 

condition, with three woman-servants, lusty wenches, which 

my old governess had picked for me, suitable enough to the 

place, and to the work we had for them to do; one of which 

happened to come double, having been got with child by one 

of the seamen in the ship, as she owned afterwards, before 

the ship got so far as Gravesend; so she brought us a stout 

boy, about seven months after her landing.



My husband, you may suppose, was a little surprised at the 

arriving of all this cargo from England; and talking with me 

after he saw the account of this particular, 'My dear,' says he, 

'what is the meaning of all this?  I fear you will run us too 

deep in debt:  when shall we be able to make return for it all?'  

I smiled, and told him that is was all paid for; and then I told 

him, that what our circumstances might expose us to, I had 

not taken my whole stock with me, that I had reserved so 

much in my friend's hands, which now we were come over 

safe, and was settled in a way to live, I had sent for, as he 

might see.



He was amazed, and stood a while telling upon his fingers, 

but said nothing.  At last he began thus:  'Hold, let's see,' says 

he, telling upon his fingers still, and first on his thumb; 'there's 

#246 in money at first, then two gold watches, diamond rings, 

and plate,' says he, upon the forefinger.  Then upon the next 

finger, 'Here's a plantation on York River, #100 a year, then 

#150 in money, then a sloop load of horses, cows, hogs, and 

stores'; and so on to the thumb again.  'And now,' says he, 'a 

cargo cost #250 in England, and worth here twice the money.'  

'Well,' says I, 'what do you make of all that?'  'Make of it?' 

says he; 'why, who says I was deceived when I married a wife 

in Lancashire?  I think I have married a fortune, and a very 

good fortune too,' says he.



In a word, we were now in very considerable circumstances, 

and every year increasing; for our new plantation grew upon 

our hands insensibly, and in eight years which we lived upon 

it, we brought it to such pitch, that the produce was at least 

#300 sterling a year; I mean, worth so much in England.



After I had been a year at home again, I went over the bay to 

see my son, and to receive another year's income of my 

plantation; and I was surprised to hear, just at my landing there, 

that my old husband was dead, and had not been buried above 

a fortnight.  This, I confess, was not disagreeable news, 

because now I could appear as I was, in a married condition; 

so I told my son before I came from him, that I believed I 

should marry a gentleman who had a plantation near mine; 

and though I was legally free to marry, as to any obligation 

that was on me before, yet that I was shy of it, lest the blot 

should some time or other be revived, and it might make a 

husband uneasy.  My son, the same kind, dutiful, and obliging 

creature as ever, treated me now at his own house, paid me 

my hundred pounds, and sent me home again loaded with presents.



Some time after this, I let my son know I was married, and 

invited him over to see us, and my husband wrote a very 

obliging letter to him also, inviting him to come and see him; 

and he came accordingly some months after, and happened to 

be there just when my cargo from England came in, which I 

let him believe belonged all to my husband's estate, not to me.



It must be observed that when the old wretch my brother 

(husband) was dead, I then freely gave my husband an account 

of all that affair, and of this cousin, as I had called him before, 

being my own son by that mistaken unhappy match.  He was 

perfectly easy in the account, and told me he should have 

been as easy if the old man, as we called him, had been alive.  

'For,' said he, 'it was no fault of yours, nor of his; it was a 

mistake impossible to be prevented.'  He only reproached him 

with desiring me to conceal it, and to live with him as a wife, 

after I knew that he was my brother; that, he said, was a vile 

part.  Thus all these difficulties were made easy, and we lived 

together with the greatest kindness and comfort imaginable.



We are grown old; I am come back to England, being almost 

seventy years of age, husband sixty-eight, having performed 

much more than the limited terms of my transportation; and 

now, notwithstanding all the fatigues and all the miseries we 

have both gone through, we have both gone through, we are 

both of us in good heart and health.  My husband remained 

there some time after me to settle our affairs, and at first I had 

intended to go back to him, but at his desire I altered that 

resolution, and he is come over to England also, where we 

resolve to spend the remainder of our years in sincere penitence 

for the wicked lives we have lived.



WRITTEN IN THE YEAR 1683







1

The bell at St. Sepulchre's, which tolls upon execution day.







End 


