



Part 2




Then he walked about the room, and taking me by the hand, 

I walked with him; and by and by, taking his advantage, he 

threw me down upon the bed, and kissed me there most 

violently; but, to give him his due, offered no manner of 

rudeness to me, only kissed a great while.  After this he 

thought he had heard somebody come upstairs, so got off from 

the bed, lifted me up, professing a great deal of love for me, 

but told me it was all an honest affection, and that he meant 

no ill to me; and with that he put five guineas into my hand, 

and went away downstairs.



I was more confounded with the money than I was before with 

the love, and began to be so elevated that I scarce knew the 

ground I stood on.  I am the more particular in this part, that 

if my story comes to be read by any innocent young body, they 

may learn from it to guard themselves against the mischiefs 

which attend an early knowledge of their own beauty.  If a 

young woman once thinks herself handsome, she never doubts 

the truth of any man that tells her he is in love with her; for if 

she believes herself charming enough to captivate him, 'tis 

natural to expect the effects of it.



This young gentleman had fired his inclination as much as he 

had my vanity, and, as if he had found that he had an opportunity 

and was sorry he did not take hold of it, he comes up again in 

half an hour or thereabouts, and falls to work with me again as 

before, only with a little less introduction.



And first, when he entered the room, he turned about and shut 

the door.  'Mrs. Betty,' said he, 'I fancied before somebody 

was coming upstairs, but it was not so; however,' adds he, 

'if they find me in the room with you, they shan't catch me 

a-kissing of you.' I told him I did not know who should be 

coming upstairs, for I believed there was nobody in the house 

but the cook and the other maid, and they never came up those 

stairs.  'Well, my dear,' says he, ''tis good to be sure, however'; 

and so he sits down, and we began to talk.  And now, though 

I was still all on fire with his first visit, and said little, he did 

as it were put words in my mouth, telling me how passionately 

he loved me, and that though he could not mention such a thing 

till he came to this estate, yet he was resolved to make me happy 

then, and himself too; that is to say, to marry me, and abundance 

of such fine things, which I, poor fool, did not understand the 

drift of, but acted as if there was no such thing as any kind of 

love but that which tended tomatrimony; and if he had spoke 

of that, I had no room, as well as no power, to have said no; 

but we were not come that length yet.



We had not sat long, but he got up, and, stopping my very 

breath with kisses, threw me upon the bed again; but then 

being both well warmed, he went farther with me than decency 

permits me to mention, nor had it been in my power to have 

denied him at that moment, had he offered much more than 

he did.



However, though he took these freedoms with me, it did not 

go to that which they call the last favour, which, to do him 

justice, he did not attempt; and he made that self-denial of his 

a plea for all his freedoms with me upon other occasions after 

this.  When this was over, he stayed but a little while, but he 

put almost a handful of gold in my hand, and left me, making 

a thousand protestations of his passion for me, and of his 

loving me above all the women in the world.



It will not be strange if I now began to think, but alas! it was 

but with very little solid reflection.  I had a most unbounded 

stock of vanity and pride, and but a very little stock of virtue.  

I did indeed case sometimes with myself what young master 

aimed at, but thought of nothing but the fine words and the 

gold; whether he intended to marry me, or not to marry me, 

seemed a matter of no great consequence to me; nor did my 

thoughts so much as suggest to me the necessity of making 

any capitulation for myself, till he came to make a kind of 

formal proposal to me, as you shall hear presently.



Thus I gave up myself to a readiness of being ruined without 

the least concern and am a fair memento to all young women 

whose vanity prevails over their virtue.  Nothing was ever so 

stupid on both sides.  Had I acted as became me, and resisted 

as virtue and honour require, this gentleman had either desisted 

his attacks, finding no room to expect the accomplishment of 

his design, or had made fair and honourable proposals of 

marriage; in which case, whoever had blamed him, nobody 

could have blamed me.  In short, if he had known me, and 

how easy the trifle he aimed at was to be had, he would have 

troubled his head no farther, but have given me four or five 

guineas, and have lain with me the next time he had come at me.  

And if I had known his thoughts, and how hard he thought I 

would be to be gained, I might have made my own terms with 

him; and if I had not capitulated for an immediate marriage, 

I might for a maintenance till marriage, and might have had 

what I would; for he was already rich to excess, besides what 

he had in expectation; but I seemed wholly to have abandoned 

all such thoughts as these, and was taken up only with the pride 

of my beauty, and of being beloved by such a gentleman.  As 

for the gold, I spent whole hours in looking upon it; I told the 

guineas over and over a thousand times a day.  Never poor 

vain creature was so wrapt up with every part of the story as 

I was, not considering what was before me, and how near my 

ruin was at the door; indeed, I think I rather wished for that 

ruin than studied to avoid it.



In the meantime, however, I was cunning enough not to give 

the least room to any in the family to suspect me, or to imagine 

that I had the least correspondence with this young gentleman.  

I scarce ever looked towards him in public, or answered if he 

spoke to me when anybody was near us; but for all that, we 

had every now and then a little encounter, where we had room 

for a word or two, an now and then a kiss, but no fair opportunity 

for the mischief intended; and especially considering that he 

made more circumlocution than, if he had known by thoughts, 

he had occasion for; and the work appearing difficult to him, 

he really made it so.



But as the devil is an unwearied tempter, so he never fails to 

find opportunity for that wickedness he invites to.  It was one

 evenine that I was in the garden, with his two younger sisters 

and himself, and all very innocently merry, when he found 

means to convey a note into my hand, by which he directed 

me to understand that he would to-morrow desire me publicly 

to go of an errand for him into the town, and that I should see 

him somewhere by the way.



Accordingly, after dinner, he very gravely says to me, his 

sisters being all by, 'Mrs. Betty, I must ask a favour of you.'  

'What's that?' says his second sister.  'Nay, sister,' says he 

very gravely, 'if you can't spare Mrs. Betty to-day, any other 

time will do.'  Yes, they said, they could spare her well enough, 

and the sister begged pardon for asking, which they did but of 

mere course, without any meaning.  'Well, but, brother,' says 

the eldest sister, 'you must tell Mrs. Betty what it is; if it be 

any private business that we must not hear, you may call her 

out.  There she is.'  'Why, sister,' says the gentleman very 

gravely, 'what do you mean?  I only desire her to do into the 

High Street' (and then he pulls out a turnover), 'to such a shop'; 

and then he tells them a long story of two fine neckcloths he 

had bid money for, and he wanted to have me go and make an 

errand to buy a neck to the turnover that he showed, to see if 

they would take my money for the neckcloths; to bid a shilling 

more, and haggle with them; and then he made more errands, 

and so continued to have such petty business to do, that I should 

be sure to stay a good while.



When he had given me my errands, he told them a long story 

of a visit he was going to make to a family they all knew, and 

where was to be such-and-such gentlemen, and how merry 

they were to be, and very formally asks his sisters to go with 

him, and they as formally excused themselves, because of 

company that they had notice was to come and visit them that 

afternoon; which, by the way, he had contrived on purpose.



He had scarce done speaking to them, and giving me my 

errand, but his man came up to tell him that Sir W---- H----'s 

coach stopped at the door; so he runs down, and comes up 

again immediately.  'Alas!' says he aloud, 'there's all my 

mirth spoiled at once; sir W---- has sent his coach for me, 

and desires to speak with me upon some earnest business.'  

It seems this Sir W--- was a gentleman who lived about three 

miles out of town, to whom he had spoken on purpose the day 

before, to lend him his chariot for a particular occasion, and 

had appointed it to call for him, as it did, about three o'clock.



Immediately he calls for his best wig, hat, and sword, and 

ordering his man to go to the other place to make his excuse--

that was to say, he made an excuse to send his man away--he 

prepares to go into the coach.  As he was going, he stopped a 

while, and speaks mighty earnestly to me about his business, 

and finds an opportunity to say very softly to me, 'Come away, 

my dear, as soon as ever you can.'  I said nothing, but made a 

curtsy, as if I had done so to what he said in public.  In about 

a quarter of an hour I went out too; I had no dress other than 

before, except that I had a hood, a mask, a fan, and a pair of 

gloves in my pocket; so that there was not the least suspicion 

in the house.  He waited for me in the coach in a back-lane, 

which he knew I must pass by, and had directed the coachman 

whither to go, which was to a certain place, called Mile End, 

where lived a confidant of his, where we went in, and where 

was all the convenience in the world to be as wicked as we 

pleased.



When we were together he began to talk very gravely to me, 

and to tell me he did not bring me there to betray me; that his 

passion for me would not suffer him to abuse me; that he 

resolved to marry me as soon as he came to his estate; that in 

the meantime, if I would grant his request, he would maintain 

me very honourably; and made me a thousand protestations 

of his sincerity and of his affection to me; and that he would 

never abandon me, and as I may say, made a thousand more 

preambles than he need to have done.



However, as he pressed me to speak, I told him I had no 

reason to question the sincerity of his love to me after so many 

protestations, but--and there I stopped, as if I left him to 

guess the rest.  'But what, my dear?' says he.  'I guess what 

you mean:  what if you should be with child?  Is not that it?  

Why, then,' says he, 'I'll take care of you and provide for you, 

and the child too; and that you may see I am not in jest,' says 

he, 'here's an earnest for you,' and with that he pulls out a silk 

purse, with an hundred guineas in it, and gave it me.  'And I'll 

give you such another,' says he, 'every year till I marry you.'



My colour came and went, at the sight of the purse and with 

the fire of his proposal together, so that I could not say a word, 

and he easily perceived it; so putting the purse into my bosom,

I made no more resistance to him, but let him do just what he

pleased, and as often as he pleased; and thus I finished my 

own destruction at once, for from this day, being forsaken of 

my virtue and my modesty, I had nothing of value left to 

recommend me, either to God's blessing or man's assistance.



But things did not end here.  I went back to the town, did the 

business he publicly directed me to, and was at home before 

anybody thought me long.  As for my gentleman, he stayed 

out, as he told me he would, till late at night, and there was 

not the least suspicion in the family either on his account or 

on mine.



We had, after this, frequent opportunities to repeat our crime 

--chiefly by his contrivance--especially at home, when his 

mother and the young ladies went abroad a-visiting, which he 

watched so narrowly as never to miss; knowing always 

beforehand when they went out, and then failed not to catch 

me all alone, and securely enough; so that we took our fill of 

our wicked pleasure for near half a year; and yet, which was 

the most to my satisfaction, I was not with child.



But before this half-year was expired, his younger brother, of 

whom I have made some mention in the beginning of the story, 

falls to work with me; and he, finding me along in the garden 

one evening, begins a story of the same kind to me, made 

good honest professions of being in love with me, and in short, 

proposes fairly and honourably to marry me, and that before 

he made any other offer to me at all.



I was now confounded, and driven to such an extremity as 

the like was never known; at least not to me.  I resisted the 

proposal with obstinacy; and now I began to arm myself with 

arguments.  I laid before him the inequality of the match; the 

treatment I should meet with in the family; the ingratitude it 

would be to his good father and mother, who had taken me 

into their house upon such generous principles, and when I 

was in such a low condition; and, in short, I said everything 

to dissuade him from his design that I could imagine, except 

telling him the truth, which would indeed have put an end to 

It all, but that I durst not think of mentioning.



But here happened a circumstance that I did not expect 

indeed, which put me to my shifts; for this young gentleman, 

as he was plain and honest, so he pretended to nothing with 

me but what was so too; and, knowing his own innocence, he 

was not so careful to make his having a kindness for Mrs. Betty 

a secret I the house, as his brother was.  And though he did 

not let them know that he had talked to me about it, yet he 

said enough to let his sisters perceive he loved me, and his 

mother saw it too, which, though they took no notice of it to 

me, yet they did to him, an immediately I found their carriage 

to me altered, more than ever before.



I saw the cloud, though I did not foresee the storm.  It was 

easy, I say, to see that their carriage to me was altered, and 

that it grew worse and worse every day; till at last I got 

information among the servants that I should, in a very little 

while, be desired to remove.



I was not alarmed at the news, having a full satisfaction that 

I should be otherwise provided for; and especially considering 

that I had reason every day to expect I should be with child, 

and that then I should be obliged to remove without any 

pretences for it.



After some time the younger gentleman took an opportunity 

to tell me that the kindness he had for me had got vent in the 

family.  He did not charge me with it, he said, for he know 

well enough which way it came out.  He told me his plain way 

of  talking had been the occasion of it, for that he did not make 

his respect for me so much a secret as he might have done, 

and the reason was, that he was at a point, that if I would 

consent to have him, he would tell them all openly that he 

loved me, and that he intended to marry me; that it was true 

his father and mother might resent it, and be unkind, but that 

he was now in a way to live, being bred to the law, and he did 

not fear maintaining me agreeable to what I should expect; 

and that, in short, as he believed I would not be ashamed of 

him, so he was resolved not to be ashamed of me, and that he 

scorned to be afraid to own me now, whom he resolved to 

own after I was his wife, and therefore I had nothing to do but 

to give him my hand, and he would answer for all the rest.



I was now in a dreadful condition indeed, and now I repented 

heartily my easiness with the eldest brother; not from any 

reflection of conscience, but from a view of the happiness I 

might have enjoyed, and had now made impossible; for though 

I had no great scruples of conscience, as I have said, to struggle 

with, yet I could not think of being a whore to one brother and 

a wife to the other.  But then it came into my thoughts that the 

first brother had promised to made me his wife when he came 

to his estate; but I presently remembered what I had often 

thought of, that he had never spoken a word of having me for 

a wife after he had conquered me for a mistress; and indeed, 

till now, though I said I thought of it often, yet it gave me no 

disturbance at all, for as he did not seem in the least to lessen 

his affection to me, so neither did he lessen his bounty, though 

he had the discretion himself to desire me not to lay out a 

penny of what he gave me in clothes, or to make the least show 

extraordinary, because it would necessarily give jealousy in 

the family, since everybody know I could come at such things 

no manner of ordinary way, but by some private friendship, 

which they would presently have suspected.



But I was now in a great strait, and knew not what to 

do.  The main difficulty was this:  the younger brother not 

only laid close siege to me, but suffered it to be seen.  He 

would come into his sister's room, and his mother's room, 

and sit down, and talk a thousand kind things of me, and to 

me, even before their faces, and when they were all there.  

This grew so public that the whole house talked of it, and his 

mother reproved him for it, and their carriage to me appeared 

quite altered.  In short, his mother had let fall some speeches, 

as if she intended to put me out of the family; that is, in 

English, to turn me out of doors.  Now I was sure this could 

not be a secret to his brother, only that he might not think, as 

indeed nobody else yet did, that the youngest brother had made 

any proposal to me about it; but as I easily could see that it 

would go farther, so I saw likewise there was an absolute 

necessity to speak of it to him, or that he would speak of it to 

me, and which to do first I knew not; that is, whether I should 

break it to him or let it alone till he should break it to me.



Upon serious consideration, for indeed now I began to consider 

things very seriously, and never till now; I say, upon serious 

consideration, I resolved to tell him of it first; and it was not 

long before I had an opportunity, for the very next day his 

brother went to London upon some business, and the family 

being out a-visiting, just as it had happened before, and as 

indeed was often the case, he came according to his custom, 

to spend an hour or two with Mrs. Betty.



When he came had had sat down a while, he easily perceived 

there was an alteration in my countenance, that I was not so 

free and pleasant with him as I used to be, and particularly, 

that I had been a-crying; he was not long before he took notice 

of it, and asked me in very kind terms what was the matter, 

and if  anything troubled me.  I would have put it off if I could, 

but it was not to be concealed; so after suffering many 

importunities to draw that out of me which I longed as much 

as possible to disclose, I told him that it was true something 

did trouble me, and something of such a nature that I could 

not conceal from him, and yet that I could not tell how to tell 

him of it neither; that it was a thing that not only surprised me, 

but greatly perplexed me, and that I knew not what course to 

take, unless he would direct me.  He told me with great 

tenderness, that let it be what it would, I should not let it 

trouble me, for he would protect me from all the world.



I then began at a distance, and told him I was afraid the ladies 

had got some secret information of our correspondence; for 

that it was easy to see that their conduct was very much 

changed towards me for a great while, and that now it was 

come to that pass that they frequently found fault with me, 

and sometimes fell quite out with me, though I never gave 

them the least occasion; that whereas I used always to lie 

with the eldest sister, I was lately put to lie by myself, or with 

one of the maids; and that I had overheard them several times 

talking very unkindly about me; but that which confirmed it 

all was, that one of the servants had told me that she had heard 

I  was to be turned out, and that it was not safe for the family 

that I should be any longer in the house.



He smiled when he herd all this, and I asked him how he 

could make so light of it, when he must needs know that if 

there was any discovery I was undone for ever, and that even 

it would hurt him, though not ruin him as it would me.  I 

upbraided him, that he was like all the rest of the sex, that, 

when they had the character and honour of a woman at their 

mercy, oftentimes made it their jest, and at least looked upon 

it as a trifle, and counted the ruin of those they had had their 

will of as a thing of no value.



He saw me warm and serious, and he changed his style 

immediately; he told me he was sorry I should have such a 

thought of him; that he had never given me the least occasion 

for it, but had been as tender of my reputation as he could be 

of his own; that he was sure our correspondence had been 

managed with so much address, that not one creature in the 

family had so much as a suspicion of it; that if he smiled when 

I told him my thoughts, it was at the assurance he lately 

received, that our understanding one another was not so much 

as known or guessed at; and that when he had told me how 

much reason he had to be easy, I should smile as he did, for 

he was very certain it would give me a full satisfaction.



'This is a mystery I cannot understand,' says I, 'or how it 

should be to my satisfaction that I am to be turned out of 

doors; for if our correspondence is not discovered, I know 

not what else I have done to change the countenances of the 

whole family to me, or to have them treat me as they do now, 

who formerly used me with so much tenderness, as if I had 

been one of their own children.'



'Why, look you, child,' says he, 'that they are uneasy about 

you, that is true; but that they have the least suspicion of the 

case as it is, and as it respects you and I, is so far from being 

true, that they suspect my brother Robin; and, in short, they 

are fully persuaded he makes love to you; nay, the fool has 

put it into their heads too himself, for he is continually bantering 

them about it, and making a jest of himself.  I confess I think 

he is wrong to do so, because he cannot but see it vexes them, 

and makes them unkind to you; but 'tis a satisfaction to me, 

because of the assurance it gives me, that they do not suspect 

me in the least, and I hope this will be to your satisfaction too.' 



'So it is,' says I, 'one way; but this does not reach my case at 

all, nor is this the chief thing that troubles me, though I have 

been concerned about that too.'  'What is it, then?' says he.  

With which I fell to tears, and could say nothing to him at all.  

He strove to pacify me all he could, but began at last to be 

very pressing upon me to tell what it was.  At last I answered 

that I thought I ought to tell him too, and that he had some 

right to know it; besides, that I wanted his direction in the case, 

for I was in such perplexity that I knew not what course to take, 

and then I related the whole affair to him.  I told him how 

imprudently his brother had managed himself, in making 

himself so public; for that if he had kept it a secret, as such a 

thing out to have been, I could but have denied him positively, 

without giving any reason for it, and he would in time have 

ceased his solicitations; but that he had the vanity, first, to 

depend upon it that I would not deny him, and then had taken 

the freedom to tell his resolution of having me to the whole house.



I told him how far I had resisted him, and told him how sincere 

and honourable his offers were.  'But,' says I, 'my case will 

be doubly hard; for as they carry it ill to me now, because he 

desires to have me, they'll carry it worse when they shall find 

I have denied him; and they will presently say, there's something 

else in it, and then out it comes that I am married already to 

somebody else, or that I would never refuse a match so much 

above me as this was.'



This discourse surprised him indeed very much.  He told me 

that it was a critical point indeed for me to manage, and he 

did not see which way I should get out of it; but he would 

consider it, and let me know next time we met, what resolution 

he was come to about it; and in the meantime desired I would 

not give my consent to his brother, nor yet give him a flat 

denial, but that I would hold him in suspense a while.



I seemed to start at his saying I should not give him my 

consent.  I told him he knew very well I had no consent to 

give; that he had engaged himself to marry me, and that my 

consent was the same time engaged to him; that he had all 

along told me I was his wife, and I looked upon myself as 

effectually so as if the ceremony had passed; and that it was 

from his own mouth that I did so, he having all along persuaded 

me to call myself his wife.



'Well, my dear,' says he, 'don't be concerned at that now; 

if I am not your husband, I'll be as good as a husband to you; 

and do not let those things trouble you now, but let me look 

a little farther into this affair, and I shall be able to say more 

next time we meet.'



He pacified me as well as he could with this, but I found he 

was very thoughtful, and that though he was very kind to me 

and  kissed me a thousand times, and more I believe, and gave 

me money too, yet he offered no more all the while we were 

together, which was above two hours, and which I much 

wondered at indeed at that time, considering how it used to be, 

and what opportunity we had.



His brother did not come from London for five or six days, 

and it was two days more before he got an opportunity to talk 

with him; but then getting him by himself he began to talk 

very close to him about it, and the same evening got an 

opportunity (for we had a long conference together) to repeat 

all their discourse to me, which, as near as I can remember, 

was to the purpose following.  He told him he heard strange 

news of him since he went, viz. that he made love to Mrs. 

Betty.  'Well, says his brother a little angrily, 'and so I do.  

And what then?  What has anybody to do with that?'  'Nay,' 

says his brother, 'don't be angry, Robin; I don't pretend to 

have anything to do with it; nor do I pretend to be angry with 

you about it.  But I find they do concern themselves about it, 

and that they have used the poor girl ill about it, which I should 

take as done to myself.'  'Whom do you mean by THEY?' 

says Robin.  'I mean my mother and the girls,' says the elder 

brother.  'But hark ye,' says his brother, 'are you in earnest?  

Do you really love this girl?  You may be free with me, you 

know.'  'Why, then,' says Robin, 'I will be free with you; I do 

love her above all the women in the world, and I will have her, 

let them say and do what they will.  I believe the girl will not 

deny me.'



It struck me to the heart when he told me this, for though 

it was most rational to think I would not deny him, yet I knew 

in my own conscience I must deny him, and I saw my ruin in 

my being obliged to do so; but I knew it was my business to 

talk otherwise then, so I interrupted him in his story thus.



'Ay!,' said I, 'does he think I cannot deny him?  But he shall 

find I can deny him, for all that.'



'Well, my dear,' says he, 'but let me give you the whole story 

as it went on between us, and then say what you will.'



Then he went on and told me that he replied thus:  'But, 

brother, you know she has nothing, and you may have several 

ladies with good fortunes.' 



''Tis no matter for that,' said Robin; 'I love the girl, and I will 

never please my pocket in marrying, and not please my fancy.'  

'And so, my dear,' adds he, 'there is no opposing him.'



'Yes, yes,' says I, 'you shall see I can oppose him; I have 

learnt to say No, now though I had not learnt it before; if the 

best lord in the land offered me marriage now, I could very 

cheerfully say No to him.'



'Well, but, my dear,' says he, 'what can you say to him?  You 

know, as you said when we talked of it before, he well ask 

you many questions about it, and all the house will wonder 

what the meaning of it should be.'



'Why,' says I, smiling, 'I can stop all their mouths at one clap 

by telling him, and them too, that I am married already to his 

elder brother.'



He smiled a little too at the word, but I could see it startled 

him, and he could not hide the disorder it put him into.  

However, he returned, 'Why, though that may be true in some 

sense, yet I suppose you are but in jest when you talk of 

giving such an answer as that; it may not be convenient on 

many accounts.' 



'No, no,' says I pleasantly, 'I am not so fond of letting the 

secret come out without your consent.'



'But what, then, can you say to him, or to them,' says he, 

'when they find you positive against a match which would 

be apparently so much to your advantage?'

 

'Why,' says I, 'should I be at a loss?  First of all, I am not 

obliged to give me any reason at all; on the other hand, I may 

tell them I am married already, and stop there, and that will 

be a full stop too to him, for he can have no reason to ask one 

question after it.'



'Ay,' says he; 'but the whole house will tease you about that, 

even to father and mother, and if you deny them positively, 

they will be disobliged at you, and suspicious besides.'



'Why,' says I, 'what can I do?  What would have me do?  I 

was in straight enough before, and as I told you, I was in 

perplexity before, and acquainted you with the circumstances, 

that I might have your advice.'



'My dear,' says he, 'I have been considering very much upon 

it, you may be sure, and though it is a piece of advice that has 

a great many mortifications in it to me, and may at first seem 

strange to you, yet, all things considered, I see no better way 

for you than to let him go on; and if you find him hearty and 

in earnest, marry him.'



I gave him a look full of horror at those words, and, turning 

pale as death, was at the very point of sinking down out of the 

chair I sat in; when, giving a start, 'My dear,' says he aloud, 

'what's the matter with you?  Where are you a-going?' and a 

great many such things; and with jogging and called to me, 

fetched me a little to myself, though it was a good while before 

I fully recovered my senses, and was not able to speak for 

several minutes more.



When I was fully recovered he began again.  'My dear,' says 

he, 'what made you so surprised at what I said?  I would have 

you consider seriously of it?  You may see plainly how the 

family stand in this case, and they would be stark mad if it 

was my case, as it is my brother's; and for aught I see, it 

would be my ruin and yours too.'



'Ay!' says I, still speaking angrily; 'are all your protestations 

and vows to be shaken by the dislike of the family?  Did I not 

always object that to you, and you made light thing of it, as 

what you were above, and would value; and is it come to 

this now?' said I.  'Is this your faith and honour, your love, 

and the solidity of your promises?'



He continued perfectly calm, notwithstanding all my reproaches, 

and I was not sparing of them at all; but he replied at last, 

'My dear, I have not broken one promise with you yet; I did 

tell you I would marry you when I was come to my estate; but 

you see my father is a hale, healthy man, and may live these 

thirty years still, and not be older than several are round us in 

town; and you never proposed my marrying you sooner, 

because you knew it might be my ruin; and as to all the rest, I 

have not failed you in anything, you have wanted for nothing.'



I could not deny a word of this, and had nothing to say to it 

in general.  'But why, then,' says I, 'can you persuade me to 

such a horrid step as leaving you, since you have not left me?  

Will you allow no affection, no love on my side, where there 

has been so much on your side?  Have I made you no returns?  

Have I given no testimony of my sincerity and of my passion?  

Are the sacrifices I have made of honour and modesty to you 

no proof of my being tied to you in bonds too strong to be 

broken?'



'But here, my dear,' says he, 'you may come into a safe station, 

and appear with honour and with splendour at once, and the 

remembrance of what we have done may be wrapt up in an 

eternal silence, as if it had never happened; you shall always 

have my respect, and my sincere affection, only then it shall 

be honest, and perfectly just to my brother; you shall be my 

dear sister, asnow you are my dear----' and there he stopped.



'Your dear whore,' says I, 'you would have said if you had 

gone on, and you might as well have said it; but I understand 

you.  However, I desire you to remember the long discourses 

you have had with me, and the many hours' pains you have 

taken to persuade me to believe myself an honest woman; 

that I was your wife intentionally, though not in the eyes of 

the world, and that it was as effectual a marriage that had 

passed between us as is we had been publicly wedded by the 

parson of the parish.  You know and cannot but remember 

that these have been your own words to me.'



I found this was a little too close upon him, but I made it up 

in what follows.  He stood stock-still for a while and said 

nothing, and I went on thus:  'You cannot,' says I, 'without 

the highest injustice, believe that I yielded upon all these 

persuasions without a love not to be questioned, not to be 

shaken again by anything that could happen afterward.  If you 

have such dishonourable thoughts of me, I must ask you what 

foundation in any of my behaviour have I given for such a 

suggestion?



'If, then, I have yielded to the importunities of my affection, 

and if I have been persuaded to believe that I am really, and 

in the essence of the thing, your wife, shall I now give the lie 

to all those arguments and call myself your whore, or mistress, 

which is the same thing?  And will you transfer me to your 

brother?  Canyou transfer my affection?  Can you bid me 

cease loving you, and bid me love him?  It is in my power, 

think you, to make such a change at demand?  No, sir,' said I, 

'depend upon it 'tis impossible, and whatever the change of 

your side may be, I will ever be true; and I had much rather, 

since it is come that unhappy length, be your whore than your 

brother's wife.'



He appeared pleased and touched with the impression of this 

last discourse, and told me that he stood where he did before; 

that he had not been unfaithful to me in any one promise he 

had ever made yet, but that there were so many terrible things 

presented themselves to his view in the affair before me, and 

that on my account in particular, that he had thought of the 

other as a remedy so effectual as nothing could come up to it.  

That he thought this would not be entire parting us, but we 

might love as friends all our days, and perhaps with more 

satisfaction than we should in the station we were now in, 

as things might happen; that he durst say, I could not apprehend 

anything from him as to betraying a secret, which could not 

but be the destruction of us both, if it came out; that he had 

but one question to ask of me that could lie in the way of it, 

and if that question was answered in the negative, he could 

not but think still it was the only step I could take.



I guessed at his question presently, namely, whether I was 

sure I was not with child?  As to that, I told him he need not 

be concerned about it, for I was not with child.  'Why, then, 

my dear,' says he, 'we have no time to talk further now.  

Consider of it, and think closely about it; I cannot but be of 

the opinion still, that it will be the best course you can take.'  

And with this he took his leave, and the more hastily too, his 

mother and sisters ringing at the gate, just at the moment that 

he had risen up to go.



He left me in the utmost confusion of  thought; and he easily 

perceived it the next day, and all the rest of the week, for it 

was but Tuesday evening when we talked; but he had no 

opportunity to come at me all that week, till the Sunday after, 

when I, being indisposed, did not go to church, and he, making 

some excuse for the like, stayed at home.



And now he had me an hour and a half again by myself, and 

we fell into the same arguments all over again, or at least so 

near the same, as it would be to no purpose to repeat them.  

At last I asked him warmly, what opinion he must have of my 

modesty, that he could suppose I should so much as entertain 

a thought of lying with two brothers, and assured him it could 

never be.  I added, if he was to tell me that he would never 

see me more, than which nothing but death could be more 

terrible, yet I could never entertain a thought so dishonourable 

to myself, and so base to him; and therefore, I entreated him, 

if he had one grain of respect or affection left for me, that he 

would speak no more of it to me, or that he would pull his 

sword out and kill me.  He appeared surprised at my obstinacy, 

as he called it; told me I was unkind to myself, and unkind to 

him in it; that it was a crisis unlooked for upon us both, and 

impossible for either of us to foresee, but that he did not see 

any other way to save us both from ruin, and therefore he 

thought it the more unkind; but that if he must say no more 

of it to me, he added with an unusual coldness, that he did 

not know anything else we had to talk of; and so he rose up to 

take his leave.  I rose up too, as if with the same indifference; 

but when he came to give me as it were a parting kiss, I burst 

out into such a passion of crying, that though I would have spoke, 

I could not, and only pressing his hand, seemed to give him the 

adieu, but cried vehemently.



He was sensibly moved with this; so he sat down again, and 

said a great many kind things to me, to abate the excess of my 

passion, but still urged the necessity of what he had proposed;  

all the while insisting, that if I did refuse, he would notwith- 

standing provide for me; but letting me plainly see that he 

would decline me in the main point--nay, even as a mistress; 

making it a point of honour not to lie with the woman that, 

for aught he knew, might come to be his brother's wife.



The bare loss of him as a gallant was not so much my affliction 

as the loss of his person, whom indeed I loved to distraction; 

and the loss of all the expectations I had, and which I always 

had built my hopes upon, of having him one day for my 

husband.  These things oppressed my mind so much, that, in 

short, I fell very ill; the agonies of my mind, in a word, threw

 me into a high fever, and long it was, that none in the family 

expected my life.



I was reduced very low indeed, and was often delirious and 

light-headed; but nothing lay so near me as the fear that, when 

I was light-headed, I should say something or other to his 

prejudice.  I was distressed in my mind also to see him, and 

so he was to see me, for he really loved me most passionately; 

but it could not be; there was not the least room to desire it 

on one side or other, or so much as to make it decent.



It was near five weeks that I kept my bed and though the 

violence of my fever abated in three weeks, yet it several 

times returned; and the physicians said two or three times, 

they could do no more for me, but that they must leave nature 

and the distemper to fight it out, only strengthening the first 

with cordials to maintain the struggle.  After the end of five 

weeks I grew better, but was so weak, so altered, so melancholy, 

and recovered so slowly, that they physicians apprehended I 

should go into a consumption; and which vexed me most, 

they gave it as their opinion that my mind was oppressed, 

that something troubled me, and, in short, that I was in love.  

Upon this, the whole house was set upon me to examine me, 

and to press me to tell whether I was in love or not, and with 

whom; but as I well might, I denied my being in love at all.



They had on this occasion a squabble one day about me at  

table, that had like to have put the whole family in an uproar, 

and for some time did so.  They happened to be all at table but 

the father; as for me, I was ill, and in my chamber.  At the 

beginning of the talk, which was just as they had finished 

their dinner, the old gentlewoman, who had sent me somewhat 

to eat, called her maid to go up and ask me if I would have any 

more; but the maid brought down word I had not eaten half 

what she had sent me already.



'Alas, says the old lady, 'that poor girl!  I am afraid she will 

never be well.'



'Well!' says the elder brother, 'how should Mrs. Betty be well?  

They say she is in love.'



'I believe nothing of it,' says the old gentlewoman.



'I don't know,' says the eldest sister, 'what to say to it; 

they have made such a rout about her being so handsome, and 

so charming, and I know not what, and that in her hearing too, 

that has turned the creature's head, I believe, and who knows 

what possessions may follow such doings?  For my part, I 

don't know what to make of it.'



'Why, sister, you must acknowledge she is very handsome,' 

says the elder brother.'



'Ay, and a great deal handsomer than you, sister,' says Robin, 

'and that's your mortification.'



'Well, well, that is not the question,' says his sister; 'that girl 

is well enough, and she knows it well enough; she need not 

be told of it to make her vain.'



'We are not talking of her being vain,' says the elder brother, 

'but of her being in love; it may be she is in love with herself; 

it seems my sisters think so.'



'I would she was in love with me,' says Robin; 'I'd quickly 

put her out of her pain.'



'What d'ye mean by that, son,' says the old lady; 'how can 

you talk so?'



'Why, madam,' says Robin, again, very honestly, 'do you 

think I'd let the poor girl die for love, and of one that is near 

at hand to be had, too?'



'Fie, brother!', says the second sister, 'how can you talk so? 

Would you take a creature that has not a groat in the world?' 



'Prithee, child,' says Robin, 'beauty's a portion, and good-

humour with it is a double portion; I wish thou hadst half her 

stock of both for thy portion.'  So there was her mouth stopped.



'I find,' says the eldest sister, 'if Betty is not in love, my 

brother is.  I wonder he has not broke his mind to Betty; I 

warrant she won't say No.'



'They that yield when they're asked,' says Robin, 'are one 

step before them that were never asked to yield, sister, and 

two steps before them that yield before they are asked; and 

that's an answer to you, sister.'



This fired the sister, and she flew into a passion, and said, 

things were some to that pass that it was time the wench, 

meaning me, was out of the family; and but that she was not 

fit to be turned out, she hoped her father and mother would 

consider of it as soon as she could be removed.



Robin replied, that was business for the master and mistress 

of the family, who where not to be taught by one that had so 

little judgment as his eldest sister.



It ran up a great deal farther; the sister scolded, Robin rallied 

and bantered, but poor Betty lost ground by it extremely in 

the family.  I heard of it, and I cried heartily, and the old lady 

came up to me, somebody having told her that I was so much 

concerned about it.  I complained to her, that it was very hard 

the doctors should pass such a censure upon me, for which 

they had no ground; and that it was still harder, considering 

the circumstances I was under in the family; that I hoped I 

had done nothing to lessen her esteem for me, or given any 

occasion for the bickering between her sons and daughters, 

and I had more need to think of a coffin than of being in love, 

and begged she would not let me suffer in her opinion for 

anybody's mistakes but my own.



She was sensible of the justice of what I said, but told me, 

since there had been such a clamour among them, and that her 

younger son talked after such a rattling way as he did, she 

desired I would be so faithful to her as to answer her but one 

question sincerely.  I told her I would, with all my heart, and 

with the utmost plainness and sincerity.  Why, then, the 

question was, whether there way anything between her son 

Robert and me.  I told her with all the protestations of sincerity 

that I was able to make, and as I might well, do, that there was 

not, nor every had been; I told her that Mr. Robert had rattled 

and jested, as she knew it was his way, and that I took it always, 

as I supposed he meant it, to be a wild airy way of discourse 

that had no signification in it; and again assured her, that there 

was not the least tittle of what she understood by it between 

us; and that those who had suggested it had done me a great 

deal of wrong, and Mr. Robert no service at all.



The old lady was fully satisfied, and kissed me, spoke 

cheerfully to me, and bid me take care of my health and want 

for nothing, and so took her leave.  But when she came down 

she found the brother and all his sisters together by the ears; 

they were angry, even to passion, at his upbraiding them with 

their being homely, and having never had any sweethearts, 

never having been asked the question, and their being so 

forward as almost to ask first.  He rallied them upon the 

subject of Mrs. Betty; how pretty, how good-humoured, how 

she sung better then they did, and danced better, and how 

much handsomer she was; and in doing this he omitted no 

ill-natured thing that could vex them, and indeed, pushed too 

hard upon them.  The old lady came down in the height of it, 

and to put a stop it to, told them all the discourse she had had 

with me, and how I answered, that there was nothing between 

Mr. Robert and I.



'She's wrong there,' says Robin, 'for if there was not a great 

deal between us, we should be closer together than we are.  

I told her I lover her hugely,' says he, 'but I could never make 

the jade believe I was in earnest.'  'I do not know how you 

should,' says his mother; 'nobody in their senses could believe 

you were in earnest, to talk so to a poor girl, whose circumstances 

you know so well.



'But prithee, son,' adds she, 'since you tell me that you could 

not make her believe you were in earnest, what must we 

believe about it?  For you ramble so in your discourse, that 

nobody knows whether you are in earnest or in jest; but as I 

find the girl, by your own confession, has answered truly, I 

wish you would do so too, and tell me seriously, so that I may 

depend upon it.  Is there anything in it or no?  Are you in 

earnest or no?  Are you distracted, indeed, or are you not?  

'Tis a weighty question, and I wish you would make us easy 

about it.'



'By my faith, madam,' says Robin, ''tis in vain to mince the 

matter or tell any more lies about it; I am in earnest, as much 

as a man is that's going to be hanged.  If Mrs. Betty would 

say she loved me, and that she would marry me, I'd have her 

tomorrow morning fasting, and say, 'To have and to hold,' 

instead of eating my breakfast.'



'Well,' says the mother, 'then there's one son lost'; and she 

said it in a very mournful tone, as one greatly concerned at it.



'I hope not, madam,' says Robin; 'no man is lost when a good 

wife has found him.'



'Why, but, child,' says the old lady, 'she is a beggar.'



'Why, then, madam, she has the more need of charity,' says 

Robin; 'I'll take her off the hands of the parish, and she and 

I'll beg together.'



'It's bad jesting with such things,' says the mother.



'I don't jest, madam,' says Robin.  'We'll come and beg your 

pardon, madam; and your blessing, madam, and my father's.'



'This is all out of the way, son,' says the mother.  'If you are 

in earnest you are undone.'



'I am afraid not,' says he, 'for I am really afraid she won't 

have me; after all my sister's huffing and blustering, I believe 

I shall never be able to persuade her to it.'



'That's a fine tale, indeed; she is not so far out of her senses 

neither.  Mrs. Betty is no fool,' says the younger sister.  'Do 

you think she has learnt to say No, any more than other people?'



'No, Mrs. Mirth-wit,' says Robin, 'Mrs. Betty's no fool; but 

Mrs. Betty may be engaged some other way, and what then?'



'Nay,' says the eldest sister, 'we can say nothing to that.  Who 

must it be to, then?  She is never out of the doors; it must be 

between you.'



'I have nothing to say to that,' says Robin.  'I have been 

examined enough; there's my brother.  If it must be between 

us, go to work with him.'



This stung the elder brother to the quick, and he concluded

that Robin had discovered something.  However, he kept 

himself from appearing disturbed.  'Prithee,' says he, 'don't 

go to shame your stories off upon me; I tell you, I deal in no 

such ware; I have nothing to say to Mrs. Betty, nor to any of 

the Mrs. Bettys in the parish'; and with that he rose up and 

brushed off.



'No,' says the eldest sister, 'I dare answer for my brother; he 

knows the world better.'



Thus the discourse ended, but it left the elder brother quite 

confounded.  He concluded his brother had made a full 

discovery, and he began to doubt whether I had been concerned 

in it or not; but with all his management he could not bring 

it about to get at me.  At last he was so perplexed that he was 

quite desperate, and resolved he would come into my chamber 

and see me, whatever came of it.  In order to do this, he 

contrived it so, that one day after dinner, watching his eldest 

sister till he could see her go upstairs, he runs after her.  'Hark 

ye, sister,' says he, 'where is this sick woman?  May not a 

body see her?'  'Yes,' says the sister, 'I believe you may; but 

let me go first a little, and I'll tell you.'  So she ran up to the 

door and gave me notice, and presently called to him again.  

'Brother,' says she, 'you may come if you please.'  So in he 

came, just in the same kind of rant.  'Well,' says he at the door 

as he came in, 'where is this sick body that's in love?  How 

do ye do, Mrs. Betty?'  I would have got up out of my chair, 

but was so weak I could not for a good while; and he saw it, 

and his sister to, and she said, 'Come, do not strive to stand 

up; my brother desires no ceremony, especially now you are 

so weak.'  'No, no, Mrs. Betty, pray sit still,' says he, and so 

sits himself down in a chair over against me, and appeared as 

if he was mighty merry.



He talked a lot of rambling stuff to his sister and to me, 

sometimes of one thing, sometimes of another, on purpose 

to amuse his sister, and every now and then would turn it 

upon the old story, directing it to me.  'Poor Mrs. Betty,' says 

he, 'it is a sad thing to be in love; why, it has reduced you 

sadly.'  At last I spoke a little.  'I am glad to see you so merry, 

sir,' says I; 'but I think the doctor might have found something 

better to do than to make his game at his patients.  If I had 

been ill of no other distemper, I know the proverb too well to 

have let him come to me.'  'What proverb?' says he, 'Oh!  I 

remember it now.  What--

     "Where love is the case,

     The doctor's an ass."



Is not that it, Mrs. Betty?'  I smiled and said nothing.  'Nay,' 

says he, 'I think the effect has proved it to be love, for it 

seems the doctor has been able to do you but little service; 

you mend very slowly, they say.  I doubt there's somewhat in 

it, Mrs. Betty; I doubt you are sick of the incurables, and that 

is love.'  I smiled and said, 'No, indeed, sir, that's none of my 

distemper.'



We had a deal of such discourse, and sometimes others that 

signified as little.  By and by he asked me to sing them a song, 

at which I smiled, and said my singing days were over.  At last 

he asked me if he should play upon his flute to me; his sister 

said she believe it would hurt me, and that my head could 

not bear it.  I bowed, and said, No, it would not hurt me.  

'And, pray, madam.' said I, 'do not hinder it; I love the music 

of the flute very much.'  Then his sister said, 'Well, do, then, 

brother.'  With that he pulled out the key of his closet.  'Dear 

sister,' says he, 'I am very lazy; do step to my closet and fetch 

my flute; it lies in such a drawer,' naming a place where he 

was sure it was not, that she might be a little while a-looking 

for it.



As soon as she was gone, he related the whole story to me 

of the discourse his brother had about me, and of his pushing 

it at him, and his concern about it, which was the reason of 

his contriving this visit to me.  I assured him I had never 

opened my mouth either to his brother or to anybody else.  

I told him the dreadful exigence I was in; that my love to him, 

and his offering to have me forget that affection and remove 

it to another, had thrown me down; and that I had a thousand 

times wished I might die rather than recover, and to have the 

same circumstances to struggle with as I had before, and that 

his backwardness to life had been the great reason of the 

slowness of my recovering.  I added that I foresaw that as soon 

as I was well, I must quit the family, and that as for marrying 

his brother, I abhorred the thoughts of it after what had been 

my case with him, and that he might depend upon it I would 

never see his brother again upon that subject; that if he would 

break all his vows and oaths and engagements with me, be 

that between his conscience and his honour and himself; but 

he should never be able to say that I, whom he had persuaded 

to call myself his wife, and who had given him the liberty to 

use me as a wife, was not as faithful to him as a wife ought to 

be, whatever he might be to me.



He was going to reply, and had said that he was sorry I could 

not be persuaded, and was a-going to say more, but he heard 

his sister a-coming, and so did I; and yet I forced out these 

few words as a reply, that I could never be persuaded to love 

one brother and marry another.  He shook his head and said, 

'Then I am ruined,' meaning himself; and that moment his 

sister entered the room and told him she could not find the 

flute. 'Well,' says he merrily, 'this laziness won't do'; so he 

gets up and goes himself to go to look for it, but comes back 

without it too; not but that he could have found it, but because 

his mind was a little disturbed, and he had no mind to play; 

and, besides, the errand he sent his sister on was answered 

another way; for he only wanted an opportunity to speak to 

me, which he gained, though not much to his satisfaction.



I had, however, a great deal of satisfaction in having spoken 

my mind to him with freedom, and with such an honest 

plainness, as I have related; and though it did not at all work 

the way I desired, that is to say, to oblige the person to me 

the more, yet it took from him all possibility of quitting me 

but by a downright breach of honour, and giving up all the 

faith of a gentleman to me, which he had so often engaged by, 

never to abandon me, but to make me his wife as soon as he 

came to his estate.



It was not many weeks after this before I was about the house 

again, and began to grow well; but I continued melancholy, 

silent, dull, and retired, which amazed the whole family, except 

he that knew the reason of it; yet it was a great while before 

he took any notice of it, and I, as backward to speak as he, 

carried respectfully to him, but never offered to speak a word 

to him that was particular of any kind whatsoever; and this 

continued for sixteen or seventeen weeks; so that, as I expected 

every day to be dismissed the family, on account of what 

distaste they had taken another way, in which I had no guilt, 

so I expected to hear no more of this gentleman, after all his 

solemn vows and protestations, but to be ruined and abandoned.



At last I broke the way myself in the family for my removing; 

for being talking seriously with the old lady one day, about 

my own circumstances in the world, and how my distemper 

had left a heaviness upon my spirits, that I was not the same 

thing I was before, the old lady said, 'I am afraid, Betty, what 

I have said to you about my son has had some influence upon 

you, and that you are melancholy on his account; pray, will 

you let me know how the matter stands with you both, if it 

may not be improper?  For, as for Robin, he does nothing but 

rally and banter when I speak of it to him.'  'Why, truly, 

madam,' said I 'that matter stands as I wish it did not, and I 

shall be very sincere with you in it, whatever befalls me for it.  

Mr. Robert has several times proposed marriage to me, which 

is what I had no reason to expect, my poor circumstances 

considered; but I have always resisted him, and that perhaps 

in terms more positive than became me, considering the regard 

that I ought to have for every branch of your family; but,' said 

I, 'madam, I could never so far forget my obligation to you 

and all your house, to offer to consent to a thing which I know 

must needs be disobliging to you, and this I have made my 

argument to him, and have positively told him that I would 

never entertain a though of that kind unless I had your consent, 

and his father's also, to whom I was bound by so many 

invincible obligations.'



'And is this possible, Mrs. Betty?' says the old lady.  'Then 

you have been much juster to us than we have been to you; 

for we have all looked upon you as a kind of snare to my son, 

and I had a proposal to make to you for your removing, for 

fear of it; but I had not yet mentioned it to you, because I 

thought you were not thorough well, and I was afraid of 

grieving you too much, lest it should throw you down again; 

for we have all a respect for you still, though not so much as 

to have it be the ruin of my son; but if it be as you say, we have 

all wronged you very much.'



'As to the truth of what I say, madam,' said I, 'refer you to 

your son himself; if he will do me any justice, he must tell you 

the story just as I have told it.'





End of Part 2
