



Part 4




It was not long, you may be sure, before we had a second 

conference upon the same subject; when, as if she had been 

willing to forget the story she had told me of herself, or to 

suppose that I had forgot some of the particulars, she began 

to tell them with alterations and omissions; but I refreshed her 

memory and set her to rights in many things which I supposed 

she had forgot, and then came in so opportunely with the 

whole history, that it was impossible for her to go from it; and 

then she fell into her rhapsodies again, and exclamations at the 

severity of her misfortunes.  When these things were a little 

over with her, we fell into a close debate about what should 

be first done before we gave an account of the matter to my 

husband.  But to what purpose could be all our consultations?  

We could neither of us see our way through it, nor see how it 

could be safe to open such a scene to him.  It was impossible 

to make any judgment, or give any guess at what temper he 

would receive it in, or what measures he would take upon it; 

and if he should have so little government of himself as to make 

it public, we easily foresaw that it would be the ruin of the 

whole family, and expose my mother and me to the last degree; 

and if at last he should take the advantage the law would give 

him, he might put me away with disdain and leave me to sue 

for the little portion that I had, and perhaps waste it all in the 

suit, and then be a beggar; the children would be ruined too, 

having no legal claim to any of his effects; and thus I should 

see him, perhaps, in the arms of another wife in a few months, 

and be myself the most miserable creature alive.



My mother was as sensible of this as I; and, upon the whole, 

we knew not what to do.  After some time we came to more 

sober resolutions, but then it was with this misfortune too, that 

my mother's opinion and mine were quite different from one 

another, and indeed inconsistent with one another; for my 

mother's opinion was, that I should bury the whole thing 

entirely, and continue to live with him as my husband till some 

other event should make the discovery of it more convenient; 

and that in the meantime she would endeavour to reconcile us 

together again, and restore our mutual comfort and family 

peace; that we might lie as we used to do together, and so let 

the whole matter remain a secret as close as death.  'For, child,' 

says she, 'we are both undone if it comes out.'



To encourage me to this, she promised to make me easy in my 

circumstances, as far as she was able, and to leave me what 

she could at her death, secured for me separately from my 

husband; so that if it should come out afterwards, I should not 

be left destitute, but be able to stand on my own feet and 

procure justice from him.



This proposal did not agree at all with my judgment of the 

thing, though it was very fair and kind in my mother; but my 

thoughts ran quite another way.



As to keeping the thing in our own breasts, and letting it all 

remain as it was, I told her it was impossible; and I asked her 

how she could think I could bear the thoughts of lying with 

my own brother.  In the next place, I told her that her being 

alive was the only support of the discovery, and that while she 

owned me for her child, and saw reason to be satisfied that I 

was so, nobody else would doubt it; but that if she should die 

before the discovery, I should be taken for an impudent creature 

that had forged such a thing to go away from my husband, or 

should be counted crazed and distracted.  Then I told her how 

he had threatened already to put me into a madhouse, and what 

concern I had been in about it, and how that was the thing that 

drove me to the necessity of discovering it to her as I had done.



From all which I told her, that I had, on the most serious 

reflections I was able to make in the case, come to this resolution, 

which I hoped she would like, as a medium between both, viz. 

that she should use her endeavours with her son to give me 

leave to go to England, as I had desired, and to furnish me with 

a sufficient sum of money, either in goods along with me, or 

in bills for my support there, all along suggesting that he might 

one time or other think it proper to come over to me.



That when I was gone, she should then, in cold blood, and 

after first obliging him in the solemnest manner possible to 

secrecy, discover the case to him, doing it gradually, and as 

her own discretion should guide her, so that he might not be 

surprised with it, and fly out into any passions and excesses 

on my account, or on hers; and that she should concern herself 

to prevent his slighting the children, or marrying again, unless 

he had a certain account of my being dead.



This was my scheme, and my reasons were good; I was really 

alienated from him in the consequences of these things; indeed, 

I mortally hated him as a husband, and it was impossible to 

remove that riveted aversion I had to him.  At the same time, 

it being an unlawful, incestuous living, added to that aversion, 

and though I had no great concern about it in point of 

conscience, yet everything added to make cohabiting with him 

the most nauseous thing to me in the world; and I think verily 

it was come to such a height, that I could almost as willingly 

have embraced a dog as have let him offer anything of that 

kind to me, for which reason I could not bear the thoughts of 

coming between the sheets with him.  I cannot say that I was 

right in point of policy in carrying it such a length, while at the 

same time I did not resolve to discover the thing to him; but I 

am giving an account of what was, not of what ought or ought 

not to be.



In their directly opposite opinion to one another my mother 

and I continued a long time, and it was impossible to reconcile 

our judgments; many disputes we had about it, but we could 

never either of us yield our own, or bring over the other.



I insisted on my aversion to lying with my own brother, and 

she insisted upon its being impossible to bring him to consent 

to my going from him to England; and in this uncertainty we 

continued, not differing so as to quarrel, or anything like it, 

but so as not to be able to resolve what we should do to make 

up that terrible breach that was before us.



At last I resolved on a desperate course, and told my mother 

my resolution, viz. that, in short, I would tell him of it myself.  

My mother was frighted to the last degree at the very thoughts 

of it; but I bid her be easy, told her I would do it gradually 

and softly, and with all the art and good-humour I was mistress 

of, and time it also as well as I could, taking him in good-humour 

too.  I told her I did not question but, if I could be hypocrite 

enough to feign more affection to him than I really had, I should 

succeed in all my design, and we might part by consent, and 

with a good agreement, for I might live him well enough for 

a brother, though I could not for a husband.



All this while he lay at my mother to find out, if possible, what 

was the meaning of that dreadful expression of mine, as he 

called it, which I mentioned before:  namely, that I was not his 

lawful wife, nor my children his legal children.  My mother put 

him off, told him she could bring me to no explanations, but 

found there was something that disturbed me very much, and 

she hoped she should get it out of me in time, and in the 

meantime recommended to him earnestly to use me more 

tenderly, and win me with his usual good carriage; told him 

of his  terrifying and affrighting me with his threats of sending 

me to a madhouse, and the like, and advised him not to make 

a woman desperate on any account whatever.



He promised her to soften his behaviour, and bid her assure 

me that he loved me as well as ever, and that he had so such 

design as that of sending me to a madhouse, whatever he might 

say in his passion; also he desired my mother to use the same 

persuasions to me too, that our affections might be renewed, 

and we might lie together in a good understanding as we used 

to do.



I found the effects of this treaty presently.  My husband's 

conduct was immediately altered, and he was quite another 

man to me; nothing could be kinder and more obliging than he 

was to me upon all occasions; and I could do no less than 

make some return to it, which I did as well as I could, but it 

was but in an awkward manner at best, for nothing was more 

frightful to me than his caresses, and the apprehensions of being 

with child again by him was ready to throw me into fits; and 

this made me see that there was an absolute necessity of breaking 

the case to him without any more delay, which, however, I did 

with all the caution and reserve imaginable.



He had continued his altered carriage to me near a month,

and we began to live a new kind of life with one another; and 

could I have satisfied myself to have gone on with it, I believe 

it might have continued as long as we had continued alive 

together.  One evening, as we were sitting and talking very 

friendly together under a little awning, which served as an 

arbour at the entrance from our house into the garden, he was 

in a very pleasant, agreeable humour, and said abundance of 

kind things to me relating to the pleasure of our present good 

agreement, and the disorders of our past breach, and what a 

satisfaction it was to him that we had room to hope we should 

never have any more of it.



I fetched a deep sigh, and told him there was nobody in the 

world could be more delighted than I was in the good agreement 

we had always kept up, or more afflicted with the breach of it, 

and should be so still; but I was sorry to tell him that there was 

an unhappy circumstance in our case, which lay too close to 

my heart, and which I knew not how to break to him, that 

rendered my part of it very miserable, and took from me all the 

comfort of the rest.



He importuned me to tell him what it was.  I told him I could 

not tell how to do it; that while it was concealed from him 

I alone was unhappy, but if he knew it also, we should be both 

so; and that, therefore, to keep him in the dark about it was 

the kindest thing that I could do, and it was on that account 

alone that I kept a secret from him, the very keeping of which, 

I thought, would first or last be my destruction.



It is impossible to express his surprise at this relation, and the 

double importunity which he used with me to discover it to him.  

He told me I could not be called kind to him, nay, I could not 

be faithful to him if I concealed it from him.  I told him I thought 

so too, and yet I could not do it.  He went back to what I had 

said before to him, and told me he hoped it did not relate to 

what I had said in my passion, and that he had resolved to 

forget all that as the effect of a rash, provoked spirit.  I told 

him I wished I could forget it all too, but that it was not to be 

done, the impression was too deep, and I could not do it:  it 

was impossible.



He then told me he was resolved not to differ with me in 

anything, and that therefore he would importune me no more 

about it, resolving to acquiesce in whatever I did or said; only 

begged I should then agree, that whatever it was, it should no 

more interrupt our quiet and our mutual kindness.



This was the most provoking thing he could have said to me, 

for I really wanted his further importunities, that I might be 

prevailed with to bring out that which indeed it was like death 

to me to conceal; so I answered him plainly that I could not 

say I was glad not to be importuned, thought I could not tell 

how to comply.  'But come, my dear,' said I, 'what conditions 

will you make with me upon the opening this affair to you?' 



'Any conditions in the world,' said he, 'that you can in reason 

desire of me.'  'Well,' said I, 'come, give it me under your 

hand, that if you do not find I am in any fault, or that I am 

willingly concerned in the causes of the misfortune that is to 

follow, you will not blame me, use me the worse, do my any 

injury, or make me be the sufferer for that which is not my fault.'



'That,' says he, 'is the most reasonable demand in the world: 

not to blame you for that which is not your fault.  Give me a 

pen and ink,' says he; so I ran in and fetched a pen, ink, and 

paper, and he wrote the condition down in the very words I 

had proposed it, and signed it with his name.  "Well,' says  he, 

'what is next, my dear?'



'Why,' says I, 'the next is, that you will not blame me for not 

discovering the secret of it to you before I knew it.'



'Very just again,' says he; 'with all my heart'; so he wrote 

down that also, and signed it.



'Well, my dear,' says I, 'then I have but one condition more 

to make with you, and that is, that as there is nobody concerned 

in it but you and I, you shall not discover it to any person in 

the world, except your own mother; and that in all the measures 

you shall take upon the discovery, as I am equally concerned 

in it with you, though as innocent as yourself, you shall do 

nothing in a passion, nothing to my prejudice or to your 

mother's prejudice, without my knowledge and consent.'



This a little amazed him, and he wrote down the words distinctly, 

but read them over and over before he signed them, 

hesitating at them several times, and repeating them:  "My 

mother's prejudice! and your prejudice!  What mysterious thing 

can this be?'  However, at last he signed it.



'Well, says I, 'my dear, I'll ask you no more under your hand; 

but as you are to hear the most unexpected and surprising thing 

that perhaps ever befell any family in the world, I beg you to 

promise me you will receive it with composure and a presence 

of mind suitable to a man of sense.' 



'I'll do my utmost,' says he, 'upon condition you will keep me 

no longer in suspense, for you terrify me with all these 

preliminaries.'



"Well, then,' says I, 'it is this:  as I told you before in a heat, 

that I was not your lawful wife, and that our children were not 

legal children, so I must let you know now in calmness and in 

kindness, but with affliction enough, that I am your own sister, 

and you my own brother, and that we are both the children of 

our mother now alive, and in the house, who is convinced of 

the truth of it, in a manner not to be denied or contradicted.' 



I saw him turn pale and look wild; and I said, 'Now remember 

your promise, and receive it with presence of mind; for who 

could have said more to prepare you for it than I have done? 

However, I called a servant, and got him a little glass of rum 

(which is the usual dram of that country), for he was just 

fainting away.  When he was a little recovered, I said to him, 

'This story, you may be sure, requires a long explanation, and 

therefore, have patience and compose your mind to hear it out, 

and I'll make it as short as I can'; and with this, I told him 

what I thought was needful of the fact, and particularly how 

my mother came to discover it to me, as above.  'And now, 

my dear,' says I, 'you will see reason for my capitulations, 

and that I neither have been the cause of this matter, nor could 

be so, and that I could know nothing of it before now.'



'I am fully satisfied of that,' says he, 'but 'tis a dreadful surprise 

to me; however, I know a remedy for it all, and a remedy 

that shall put an end to your difficulties, without your going to 

England.'  'That would be strange,' said I, 'as all the rest.'  

'No, no,' says he, 'I'll make it easy; there's nobody in the way 

of it but myself.'  He looked a little disordered when he said 

this, but I did not apprehend anything from it at that time, 

believing, as it used to be said, that they who do those things 

never talk of them, or that they who talk of such things never 

do them.



But things were not come to their height with him, and I 

observed he became pensive and melancholy; and in a word, 

as I thought, a little distempered in his head.  I endeavoured 

to talk him into temper, and to reason him into a kind of scheme 

for our government in the affair, and sometimes he would be 

well, and talk with some courage about it; but the weight of 

it lay too heavy upon his thoughts, and, in short, it went so far 

that he made attempts upon himself, and in one of them had 

actually strangled himself and had not his mother come into 

the room in the very moment, he had died; but with the help 

of a Negro servant she cut him down and recovered him.



Things were now come to a lamentable height in the family.  

My pity for him now began to revive that affection which at 

first I really had for him, and I endeavoured sincerely, by all 

the kind carriage I could, to make up the breach; but, in short, 

it had gotten too great a head, it preyed upon his spirits, and 

it threw him into a long, lingering consumption, though it 

happened not to be mortal.  In this distress I did not know 

what to do, as his life was apparently declining, and I might 

perhaps have married again there, very much to my advantage; 

it had been certainly my business to have stayed in the country, 

but my mind was restless too, and uneasy; I hankered after 

coming to England, and nothing would satisfy me without it.



In short, by an unwearied importunity, my husband, who was 

apparently decaying, as I observed, was at last prevailed with; 

and so my own fate pushing me on, the way was made clear 

for me, and my mother concurring, I obtained a very good 

cargo for my coming to England.



When I parted with my brother (for such I am now to call 

him), we agreed that after I arrived he should pretend to have 

an account that I was dead in England, and so might marry 

again when he would.  He promised, and engaged to me to 

correspond with me as a sister, and to assist and support me 

as long as I lived; and that if he died before me, he would leave 

sufficient to his mother to take care of me still, in the name of 

asister, and he was in some respects careful of me, when he 

heard of me; but it was so oddly managed that I felt the 

disappointments very sensibly afterwards, as you shall hear in 

its time.



I came away for England in the month of August, after I had 

been eight years in that country; and now a new scene of  

misfortunes attended me, which perhaps few women have 

gone through the life of.



We had an indifferent good voyage till we came just upon the 

coast of England, and where we arrived in two-and-thirty days, 

but were then ruffled with two or three storms, one of which 

drove us away to the coast of Ireland, and we put in at Kinsdale.  

We remained there about thirteen days, got some refreshment 

on shore, and put to sea again, though we met with very bad 

weather again, in which the ship sprung her mainmast, as they 

called it, for I knew not what they meant.  But we got at last 

into Milford Haven, in Wales, where, though it was remote 

from our port, yet having my foot safe upon the firm ground 

of my native country, the isle of Britain, I resolved to venture 

it no more upon the waters, which had been so terrible to me; 

so getting my clothes and money on shore, with my bills of 

loading and other papers, I resolved to come for London, and 

leave the ship to get to her port as she could; the port whither 

she was bound was to Bristol, where my brother's chief 

correspondent lived.



I got to London in about three weeks, where I heard a little 

while after that the ship was arrived in Bristol, but at the same 

time had the misfortune to know that by the violent weather 

she had been in, and the breaking of her mainmast, she had 

great damage on board, and that a great part of her cargo was 

spoiled.



I had now a new scene of life upon my hands, and a dreadful 

appearance it had.  I was come away with a kind of final 

farewell.  What I brought with me was indeed considerable, 

had it come safe, and by the help of it, I might have married 

again tolerably well; but as it was, I was reduced to between 

two or three hundred pounds in the whole, and this without 

any hope of recruit.  I was entirely without friends, nay, even 

so much as without acquaintance, for I found it was absolutely 

necessary not to revive former acquaintances; and as for my 

subtle friend that set me up formerly for a fortune, she was 

dead, and her husband also; as I was informed, upon sending 

a person unknown to inquire.



The looking after my cargo of goods soon after obliged me to 

take a journey to Bristol, and during my attendance upon that 

affair I took the diversion of going to the Bath, for as I was 

still far from being old, so my humour, which was always gay, 

continued so to an extreme; and being now, as it were, a 

woman of fortune though I was a woman without a fortune, 

I expected something or other might happen in my way that 

might mend my circumstances, as had been my case before.



The Bath is a place of gallantry enough; expensive, and full 

of snares.  I went thither, indeed, in the view of taking anything 

that might offer, but I must do myself justice, as to protest I 

knew nothing amiss; I meant nothing but in an honest way, nor 

had I any thoughts about me at first that looked the way which 

afterwards I suffered them to be guided.



Here I stayed the whole latter season, as it is called there, 

and contracted some unhappy acquaintances, which rather 

prompted the follies I fell afterwards into than fortified me 

against them.  I lived pleasantly enough, kept good company, 

that is to say, gay, fine company; but had the discouragement 

to find this way of living sunk me exceedingly, and that as I 

had no settled income, so spending upon the main stock was 

but a certain kind of bleeding to death; and this gave me many 

sad reflections in the interval of my other thoughts.  However, 

I shook them off, and still flattered myself that something or 

other might offer for my advantage.



But I was in the wrong place for it.  I was not now at Redriff, 

where, if I had set myself tolerably up, some honest sea captain 

or other might have talked with me upon the honourable terms 

of matrimony; but I was at the Bath, where men find a mistress 

sometimes, but very rarely look for a wife; and consequently 

all the particular acquaintances a woman can expect to make 

there must have some tendency that way.



I had spent the first season well enough; for though I had 

contracted some acquaintance with a gentleman who came to 

the Bath for his diversion, yet I had entered into no felonious 

treaty, as it might be called.  I had resisted some casual offers 

of gallantry, and had managed that way well enough.  I was 

not wicked enough to come into the crime for the mere vice 

of it, and I had no extraordinary offers made me that tempted 

me with the main thing which I wanted.



However, I went this length the first season, viz. I contracted 

an acquaintance with a woman in whose house I lodged, who, 

though she did not keep an ill house, as we call it, yet had none 

of the best principles in herself.  I had on all occasions behaved 

myself so well as not to get the least slur upon my reputation 

on any account whatever, and all the men that I had conversed 

with were of so good reputation that I had not given the least 

reflection by conversing with them; nor did any of them seem 

to think there was room for a wicked correspondence, if they 

had any of them offered it; yet there was one gentleman, as 

above, who always singled me out for the diversion of my 

company, as he called it, which, as he was pleased to say, was 

very agreeable to him, but at that time there was no more in it.



I had many melancholy hours at the Bath after the company 

was gone; for though I went to Bristol sometime for the 

disposing my effects, and for recruits of money, yet I chose to 

come back to Bath for my residence, because being on good 

terms with the woman in whose house I lodged in the summer, 

I found that during the winter I lived rather cheaper there than 

I could do anywhere else.  Here, I say, I passed the winter as 

heavily as I had passed the autumn cheerfully; but having 

contracted a nearer intimacy with the said woman in whose 

house I lodged, I could not avoid communicating to her 

something of what lay hardest upon my mind and particularly 

the narrowness of my circumstances, and the loss of my fortune 

by the damage of my goods at sea.  I told her also, that I had 

a mother and a brother in Virginia in good circumstances; and 

as I had really written back to my mother in particular to 

represent my condition, and the great loss I had received, 

which indeed came to almost #500, so I did not fail to let my 

new friend know that I expected a supply from thence, and so 

indeed I did; and as the ships went from Bristol to York River, 

in Virginia, and back again generally in less time from London, 

and that my brother corresponded chiefly at Bristol, I thought 

it was much better for me to wait here for my returns than to 

go to London, where also I had not the least acquaintance.



My new friend appeared sensibly affected with my condition, 

and indeed was so very kind as to reduce the rate of my living 

with her to so low a price during the winter, that she convinced 

me she got nothing by me; and as for lodging, during the winter 

I paid nothing at all.



When the spring season came on, she continued to be as king 

to me as she could, and I lodged with her for a time, till it was 

found necessary to do otherwise.  She had some persons of 

character that frequently lodged in her house, and in particular 

the gentleman who, as I said, singled me out for his companion 

the winter before; and he came down again with another 

gentleman in his company and two servants, and lodged in the 

same house.  I suspected that my landlady had invited him 

thither, letting him know that I was still with her; but she denied 

it, and protested to me that she did not, and he said the same.



In a word, this gentleman came down and continued to single 

me out for his peculiar confidence as well as conversation.  

He was a complete gentleman, that must be confessed, and 

his company was very agreeable to me, as mine, if I might 

believe him, was to him.  He made no professions to be but 

of an extraordinary respect, and he had such an opinion of my 

virtue, that, as he often professed, he believed if he should offer 

anything else, I should reject him with contempt.  He soon 

understood from me that I was a widow; that I had arrived at 

Bristol from Virginia by the last ships; and that I waited at Bath 

till the next Virginia fleet should arrive, by which I expected 

considerable effects.  I understood by him, and by others of 

him, that he had a wife, but that the lady was distempered in 

her head, and was under the conduct of her own relations, 

which he consented to, to avoid any reflections that might (as 

was not unusual in such cases) be cast on him for mismanaging 

her cure; and in the meantime he came to the Bath to divert his 

thoughts from the disturbance of such a melancholy circumstance 

as that was.



My landlady, who of her own accord encouraged the 

correspondence on all occasions, gave me an advantageous 

 character of him, as a man of honour and of virtue, as well 

as of great estate.  And indeed I had a great deal of reason to 

say so of him too; for though we lodged both on a floor, and 

he had frequently come into my chamber, even when I was in 

bed, and I also into his when he was in bed, yet he never offered 

anything to me further than a kiss, or so much as solicited me 

to anything till long after, as you shall hear.



I frequently took notice to my landlady of his exceeding 

modesty, and she again used to tell me, she believed it was so 

from the beginning; however, she used to tell me that she 

thought I ought to expect some gratification from him for my 

company, for indeed he did, as it were, engross me, and I was 

seldom from him.  I told her I had not given him the least 

occasion to think I wanted it, or that I would accept of it from 

him.  She told me she would take that part upon her, and she 

did so, and managed it so dexterously, that the first time we 

were together alone, after she had talked with him, he began 

to inquire a little into my circumstances, as how I had subsisted 

myself since I came on shore, and whether I did not want money.  

I stood off very boldly.  I told him that though my cargo of 

tobacco was damaged, yet that it was not quite lost; that the 

merchant I had been consigned to had so honestly managed 

for me that I had not wanted, and that I hoped, with frugal 

management, I should make it hold out till more would come, 

which I expected by the next fleet; that in the meantime I had 

retrenched my expenses, and whereas I kept a maid last season, 

now I lived without; and whereas I had a chamber and a 

dining-room then on the first floor, as he knew, I now had but 

one room, two pair of stairs, and the like.  'But I live,' said I, 

'as well satisfied now as I did then'; adding, that his company 

had been a means to make me live much more cheerfully than 

otherwise I should have done, for which I was much obliged 

to him; and so I put off all room for any offer for the present.  

However, it was not long before he attacked me again, and 

told me he found that I was backward to trust him with the 

secret of my circumstances, which he was sorry for; assuring 

me that he inquired into it with no design to satisfy his own 

curiosity, but merely to assist me, if there was any occasion; 

but since I would not own myself to stand in need of any 

assistance, he had but one thing more to desire of me, and that 

was, that I would promise him that when I was any way straitened, 

or like to be so, I would frankly tell him of it, and that I would 

make use of him with the same freedom that he made the offer; 

adding, that I should always find I had a true friend, though 

perhaps I was afraid to trust him. 



I omitted nothing that was fit to be said by one infinitely 

obliged, to let him know that I had a due sense of his kindness; 

and indeed from that time I did not appear so much reserved 

to him as I had done before, though still within the bounds of 

the strictest virtue on both sides; but how free soever our 

conversation was, I could not arrive to that sort of freedom 

which he desired, viz. to tell him I wanted money, though I 

was secretly very glad of his offer.



Some weeks passed after this, and still I never asked him for 

money; when my landlady, a cunning creature, who had often 

pressed me to it, but found that I could not do it, makes a 

story of her own inventing, and comes in bluntly to me when 

we were together.  'Oh, widow!' says she, 'I have bad news 

to tell you this morning.'  'What is that?' said I; 'are the 

Virginia ships taken by the French?'--for that was my fear.  

'No, no,' says she, 'but the man you sent to Bristol yesterday 

for money is come back, and says he has brought none.'



Now I could by no means like her project; I though it looked 

too much like prompting him, which indeed he did not want, 

and I clearly that I should lose nothing by being backward to 

ask, so I took her up short.  'I can't image why he should say 

so to you,' said I, 'for I assure you he brought me all the 

money I sent him for, and here it is,' said I (pulling out my 

purse with about twelve guineas in it); and added, 'I intend 

you shall have most of it by and by.'



He seemed distasted a little at her talking as she did at first, 

as well as I, taking it, as I fancied he would, as something 

forward of her; but when he saw me give such an answer, he 

came immediately to himself again.  The next morning we 

talked of it again, when I found he was fully satisfied, and, 

smiling, said he hoped I would not want money and not tell 

him of it, and that I had promised him otherwise.  I told him 

I had been very much dissatisfied at my landlady's talking so 

publicly the day before of  what she had nothing to do with; 

but I supposed she wanted what I owed her, which was about 

eight guineas, which I had resolved to give her, and had 

accordingly given it her the same night she talked so foolishly.



He was in a might good humour when he heard me say I had 

paid her, and it went off into some other discourse at that time.  

But the next morning, he having heard me up about my room 

before him, he called to me, and I answering, he asked me to 

come into his chamber.  He was in bed when I came in, and 

he made me come and sit down on his bedside, for he said he 

had something to say to me which was of some moment.  

After some very kind expressions, he asked me if I would be 

very honest to him, and give a sincere answer to one thing he 

would desire of me.  After some little cavil at the word 'sincere,' 

and asking him if I had ever given him any answers which were 

not sincere, I promised him I would.  Why, then, his request 

was, he said, to let him see my purse.  I immediately put my 

hand into my pocket, and, laughing to him, pulled it out, and 

there was in it three guineas and a half.  Then he asked me if 

there was all the money I had.  I told him No, laughing again, 

not by a great deal.



Well, then, he said, he would have me promise to go and 

fetch him all the money I had, every farthing.  I told him I 

would, and I went into my chamber and fetched him a little 

private drawer, where I had about six guineas more, and some 

silver, and threw it all down upon the bed, and told him there 

was all my wealth, honestly to a shilling.  He looked a little 

at it, but did not tell it, and huddled it all into the drawer again, 

and then reaching his pocket, pulled out a key, and bade me 

open a little walnut-tree box he had upon the table, and bring 

him such a drawer, which I did.  In which drawer there was a 

great deal of money in gold, I believe near two hundred guineas, 

but I knew not how much.  He took the drawer, and taking my 

hand, made me put it in and take a whole handful.  I was 

backward at that, but he held my hand hard in his hand, and 

put it into the drawer, and made me take out as many guineas 

almost as I could well take up at once.



When I had done so, he made me put them into my lap, 

and took my little drawer, and poured out all my money among 

his, and bade me get me gone, and carry it all home into my 

own chamber.



I relate this story the more particularly because of the 

good-humour there was in it, and to show the temper with 

which we conversed.  It was not long after this but he began 

every day to find fault with my clothes, with my laces and 

headdresses, and, in a word, pressed me to buy better; which, 

by the way, I was willing enough to do, though I did not seem 

to be so, for I loved nothing in the world better than fine clothes.  

I told him I must housewife the money he had lent me, or else 

I should not be able to pay him again.  He then told me, in a 

few words, that as he had a sincere respect for me, and knew 

my circumstances, he had not lent me that money, but given 

it me, and that he thought I had merited it from him by giving 

him my company so entirely as I had done.  After this he made 

me take a maid, and keep house, and his friend that come with 

him to Bath being gone, he obliged me to diet him, which I did 

very willingly, believing, as it appeared, that I should lose 

nothing by it, not did the woman of the house fail to find her 

account in it too.




We had lived thus near three months, when the company 

beginning to wear away at the Bath, he talked of going away, 

and fain he would have me to go to London with him.  I was 

not very easy in that proposal, not knowing what posture I 

was to live in there, or how he might use me.  But while this 

was in debate he fell very sick; he had gone out to a place in  

Somersetshire, called Shepton, where he had some business 

and was there taken very ill, and so ill that he could not travel; 

so he sent his man back to Bath, to beg me that I would hire 

a coach and come over to him.  Before he went, he had left 

all his money and other things of value with me, and what to 

do with them I did not know, but I secured them as well as I 

could, and locked up the lodgings and went to him, where I 

found him very ill indeed; however, I persuaded him to be 

carried in a litter to the Bath, where there was more help and 

better advice to be had.



He consented, and I brought him to the Bath, which was about 

fifteen miles, as I remember.  Here he continued very ill of a 

fever, and kept his bed five weeks, all which time I nursed him 

and tended him myself, as much and as carefully as if I had 

been his wife; indeed, if I had been his wife I could not have 

done more.  I sat up with him so much and so often, that at 

last, indeed, he would not let me sit up any longer, and then I 

got a pallet-bed into his room, and lay in it just at his bed's 

feet.



I was indeed sensibly affected with his condition, and with the 

apprehension of losing such a friend as he was, and was like to 

be to me, and I used to sit and cry by him many hours together.  

However, at last he grew better, and gave hopes that he would 

recover, as indeed he did, though very slowly.



Were it otherwise than what I am going to say, I should not 

be backward to disclose it, as it is apparent I have done in 

other cases in this account; but I affirm, that through all this 

conversation, abating the freedom of coming into the chamber 

when I or he was in bed, and abating the necessary offices of 

attending him night and day when he was sick, there had not 

passed the least immodest word or action between us.  Oh 

that it had been so to the last!



After some time he gathered strength and grew well apace, 

and I would have removed my pallet-bed, but he would not 

let me, till he was able to venture himself without anybody to 

sit up with him, and then I removed to my own chamber.



He took many occasions to express his sense of my tenderness 

and concern for him; and when he grew quite well, he made me 

a present of fifty guineas for my care and, as he called it, for 

hazarding my life to save his.



And now he made deep protestations of a sincere inviolable 

affection for me, but all along attested it to be with the utmost 

reserve for my virtue and his own.  I told him I was fully 

satisfied of it.  He carried it that length that he protested to me, 

that if he was naked in bed with me, he would as sacredly 

preserve my virtue as he would defend if if I was assaulted by 

a ravisher.  I believed him, and told him I did so; but this did 

not satisfy him, he would, he said, wait for some opportunity 

to give me an undoubted testimony of it.



It was a great while after this that I had occasion, on my own 

business, to go to Bristol, upon which he hired me a coach, 

and would go with me, and did so; and now indeed our intimacy 

increased.  From Bristol he carried me to Gloucester, which 

was merely a journey of pleasure, to take the air; and here it 

was our hap to have no lodging in the inn but in one large 

chamber with two beds in it.  The master of the house going 

up with us to show his rooms, and coming into that room, 

said very frankly to him, 'Sir, it is none of my business to inquire 

whether the lady be your spouse or no, but if not, you may lie 

as honestly in these two beds as if you were in two chambers,' 

and with that he pulls a great curtain which drew quite across 

the room and effectually divided the beds.  'Well,' says my 

friend, very readily, 'these beds will do, and as for the rest, we 

are too near akin to lie together, though we may lodge near 

one another'; and this put an honest face on the thing too.  

When we came to go to bed, he decently went out of the room 

till I was in bed, and then went to bed in the bed on his own 

side of the room, but lay there talking to me a great while.



At last, repeating his usual saying, that he could lie naked in 

the bed with me and not offer me the least injury, he starts out 

of his bed.  'And now, my dear,' says he, 'you shall see how 

just I will be to you, and that I can keep my word,' and away 

he comes to my bed.



I resisted a little, but I must confess I should not have resisted 

him much if he had not made those promises at all; so after a 

little struggle, as I said, I lay still and let him come to bed.  

When he was there he took me in his arms, and so I lay all 

night with him, but he had no more to do with me, or offered 

anything to me, other than embracing me, as I say, in his arms, 

no, not the whole night, but rose up and dressed him in the 

morning, and left me as innocent for him as I was the day I 

was born.



This was a surprising thing to me, and perhaps may be so to 

others, who know how the laws of nature work; for he was a 

strong, vigorous, brisk person; nor did he act thus on a principle 

of religion at all, but of mere affection; insisting on it, that 

though I was to him to most agreeable woman in the world, 

yet, because he loved me, he could not injure me.



I own it was a noble principle, but as it was what I never 

understood before, so it was to me perfectly amazing.  We 

traveled the rest of the journey as we did before, and came 

back to the Bath, where, as he had opportunity to come to 

me when he would, he often repeated the moderation, and I 

frequently lay with him, and he with me, and although all the 

familiarities between man and wife were common to us, yet 

he never once offered to go any farther, and he valued himself 

much upon it.  I do not say that I was so wholly pleased with 

it as he thought I was, for I own much wickeder than he, as 

you shall hear presently.



We lived thus near two years, only with this exception, that 

he went three times to London in that time, and once he 

continued there four months; but, to do him justice, he always 

supplied me with money to subsist me very handsomely.



Had we continued thus, I confess we had had much to boast 

of; but as wise men say, it is ill venturing too near the brink of 

a command, so we found it; and here again I must do him the 

justice to own that the first breach was not on his part.  It was 

one night that we were in bed together warm and merry, and 

having drunk, I think, a little more wine that night, both of us, 

than usual, although not in the least to disorder either of us, 

when, after some other follies which I cannot name, and being 

clasped close in his arms, I told him (I repeat it with shame 

and horror of soul) that I could find in my heart to discharge 

him of his engagement for one night and no more.



He took me at my word immediately, and after that there was 

no resisting him; neither indeed had I any mind to resist him 

any more, let what would come of it.



Thus the government of our virtue was broken, and I 

exchanged the place of friend for that unmusical, harsh-sounding 

title of whore.  In the morning we were both at our penitentials; 

I cried very heartily, he expressed himself very sorry; but that 

was all either of us could do at that time, and the way being 

thus cleared, and the bars of virtue and conscience thus removed, 

we had the less difficult afterwards to struggle with.



It was but a dull kind of conversation that we had together 

for all the rest of that week; I looked on him with blushes, and 

every now and then started that melancholy objection, 'What 

if I should be with child now?  What will become of me then?'  

He encouraged me by telling me, that as long as I was true to 

him, he would be so to me; and since it was gone such a length 

(which indeed he never intended), yet if I was with child, he 

would take care of that, and of me too.  This hardened us both.  

I assured him if I was with child, I would die for want of a 

midwife rather than name him as the father of it; and he assured 

me I should never want if I should be with child.  These mutual 

assurances hardened us in the thing, and after this we repeated 

the crime as often as we pleased, till at length, as I had feared,

so it came to pass, and I was indeed with child.



After I was sure it was so, and I had satisfied him of it too,

we began to think of taking measures for the managing it, and 

I proposed trusting the secret to my landlady, and asking her 

advice, which he agreed to.  My landlady, a woman (as I found) 

used to such things, made light of it; she said she knew it would 

come to that at last, and made us very merry about it.  As I said 

above, we found her an experienced old lady at such work; she 

undertook everything, engaged to procure a midwife and a nurse, 

to satisfy all inquiries, and bring us off with reputation, and she 

did so very dexterously indeed.



When I grew near my time she desired my gentleman to go 

away to London, or make as if he did so.  When he was gone, 

she acquainted the parish officers that there was a lady ready 

to lie in at her house, but that she knew her husband very well, 

and gave them, as she pretended, an account of his name, which 

she called Sir Walter Cleve; telling them he was a very worthy 

gentleman, and that she would answer for all inquiries, and the 

like.  This satisfied the parish officers presently, and I lay in 

with as much credit as I could have done if I had really been 

my Lady Cleve, and was assisted in my travail by three or four 

of the best citizens' wives of Bath who lived in the neighbourhood, 

which, however, made me a little the more expensive to him.  

I often expressed my concern to him about it, but he bid me not 

be concerned at it.



As he had furnished me very sufficiently with money for the 

extraordinary expenses of my lying in, I had everything very 

handsome about me, but did not affect to be gay or extravagant 

neither; besides, knowing my own circumstances, and knowing 

the world as I had done, and that such kind of things do not 

often last long, I took care to lay up as much money as I could 

for a wet day, as I called it; making him believe it was all spent 

upon the extraordinary appearance of things in my lying in.



By this means, and including what he had given me as above, 

I had at the end of my lying in about two hundred guineas by 

me, including also what was left of my own.



I was brought to bed of a fine boy indeed, and a charming 

child it was; and when he heard of it he wrote me a very kind, 

obliging letter about it, and then told me, he thought it would 

look better for me to come away for London as soon as I was 

up and well; that he had provided apartments for me at 

Hammersmith, as if I came thither only from London; and that 

after a little while I should go back to the Bath, and he would 

go with me.



I liked this offer very well, and accordingly hired a coach on 

purpose, and taking my child, and a wet-nurse to tend and 

suckle it, and a maid-servant with me, away I went for London.



He met me at Reading in his own chariot, and taking me into 

that, left the servant and the child in the hired coach, and so 

he brought me to my new lodgings at Hammersmith; with 

which I had abundance of reason to be very well pleased, for 

they were very handsome rooms, and I was very well 

accommodated.



And now I was indeed in the height of what I might call my 

prosperity, and I wanted nothing but to be a wife, which, 

however, could not be in this case, there was no room for it; 

and therefore on all occasions I studied to save what I could, 

as I have said above, against a time of scarcity, knowing well 

enough that such things as these do not always continue; that 

men that keep mistresses often change them, grow weary of 

them, or jealous of them, or something or other happens to 

make them withdraw their bounty; and sometimes the ladies 

that are thus well used are not careful by a prudent conduct 

to preserve the esteem of their persons, or the nice article of 

their fidelity, and then they are justly cast off with contempt.



But I was secured in this point, for as I had no inclination 

to change, so I had no manner of acquaintance in the whole 

house, and so no temptation to look any farther.  I kept no 

company but in the family when I lodged, and with the 

clergyman's lady at next door; so that when he was absent I 

visited nobody, nor did he every find me out of my chamber 

or parlour whenever he came down; if I went anywhere to 

take the air, it was always with him.



The living in this manner with him, and his with me, was 

certainly the most undesigned thing in the world; he often 

protested to me, that when he became first acquainted with 

me, and even to the very night when we first broke in upon 

our rules, he never had the least design of lying with me; that 

he always had a sincere affection for me, but not the least real 

inclination to do what he had done.  I assured him I never 

suspected him; that if I had I should not so easily have yielded 

to the freedom which brought it on, but that it was all a surprise, 

and was owing to the accident of our having yielded too far to 

our mutual inclinations that night; and indeed I have often 

observed since, and leave it as a caution to the readers of this 

story, that we ought to be cautious of gratifying our inclinations 

in loose and lewd freedoms, lest we find our resolutions of 

virtue fail us in the junction when their assistance should be 

most necessary.



It is true, and I have confessed it before, that from the first 

hour I began to converse with him, I resolved to let him lie 

with me, if he offered it; but it was because I wanted his help 

and assistance, and I knew no other way of securing him than 

that.  But when were that night together, and, as I have said, 

had gone such a length, I found my weakness; the inclination 

was not to be resisted, but I was obliged to yield up all even 

before he asked it.



However, he was so just to me that he never upbraided me 

with that; nor did he ever express the least dislike of my 

conduct on any other occasion, but always protested he was 

as much delighted with my company as he was the first hour 

we came together:  I mean, came together as bedfellows.



It is true that he had no wife, that is to say, she was as no 

wife to him, and so I was in no danger that way, but the just 

reflections of conscience oftentimes snatch a man, especially 

a man of sense, from the arms of a mistress, as it did him at 

last, though on another occasion.



On the other hand, though I was not without secret reproaches 

of my own conscience for the life I led, and that even in the 

greatest height of the satisfaction I ever took, yet I  had the 

terrible prospect of poverty and starving, which lay on me as 

a frightful spectre, so that there was no looking behind me.  

But as poverty brought me into it, so fear of poverty kept me 

in it, and I frequently resolved to leave it quite off, if I could 

but come to lay up money enough to maintain me.  But these 

were thoughts of no weight, and whenever he came to me they 

vanished; for his company was so delightful, that there was no 

being melancholy when he was there; the reflections were all 

the subject of those hours when I was alone. 



I lived six years in this happy but unhappy condition, in which 

time I brought him three children, but only the first of them 

lived; and though I removed twice in those six years, yet I came

 back the sixth year to my first lodgings at Hammersmith.  

Here it was that I was one morning surprised with a kind but 

melancholy letter from my gentleman, intimating that he was 

very ill, and was afraid he should have another fit of sickness, 

but that his wife's relations being in the house with him, it 

would not be practicable to have me with him, which, however, 

he expressed his great dissatisfaction in, and that he wished I 

could be allowed to tend and nurse him as I did before.



I was very much concerned at this account, and was very 

impatient to know how it was with him.  I waited a fortnight 

or thereabouts, and heard nothing, which surprised me, and I 

began to be very uneasy indeed.  I think, I may say, that for 

the next fortnight I was near to distracted.  It was my particular 

difficulty that I did not know directly when he was; for I 

understood at first he was in the lodgings of his wife's mother; 

but having removed myself to London, I soon found, by the 

help of the direction I had for writing my letters to him, how 

to inquire after him, and there I found that he was at a house 

in Bloomsbury, whither he had, a little before he fell sick, 

removed his whole family; and that his wife and wife's mother 

were in the same house, though the wife was not suffered to 

know that she was in the same house with her husband.



Here I also soon understood that he was at the last extremity, 

which made me almost at the last extremity too, to have a true 

account.  One night I had the curiosity to disguise myself like 

a servant-maid, in a round cap and straw hat, and went to the 

door, as sent by a lady of his neighbourhood, where he lived 

before, and giving master and mistress's service, I said I was 

sent to know how Mr. ---- did, and how he had rested that night.  

In delivering this message I got the opportunity I desired; for, 

speaking with one of the maids, I held a long gossip's tale with 

her, and had all the particulars of his illness, which I found was 

a pleurisy, attended with a cough and a fever.  She told me also 

who was in the house, and how his wife was, who, by her 

relation, they were in some hopes might recover her understanding; 

but as to the gentleman himself, in short she told me the doctors 

said there was very little hopes of him, that in the morning 

they thought he had been dying, and that he was but little better 

then, for they did not expect that he could live over the next 

night.



This was heavy news for me, and I began now to see an end 

of my prosperity, and to see also that it was very well I had 

played to good housewife, and secured or saved something 

while he was alive, for that now I had no view of my own 

living before me.



It lay very heavy upon my mind, too, that I had a son, a fine 

lovely boy, about five years old, and no provision made for it, 

at least that I knew of.  With these considerations, and a sad 

heart, I went home that evening, and began to cast with myself 

how I should live, and in what manner to bestow myself, for 

the residue of my life.



You may be sure I could not rest without inquiring again very 

quickly what was become of him; and not venturing to go 

myself, I sent several sham messengers, till after a fortnight's 

waiting longer, I found that there was hopes of his life, though 

he was still very ill; then I abated my sending any more to the 

house, and in some time after I learned in the neighbourhood 

that he was about house, and then that he was abroad again.



I made no doubt then but that I should soon hear of him, 

and began to comfort myself with my circumstances being, as 

I thought, recovered. I waited a week, and two weeks, and 

with much surprise and amazement I waited near two months 

and heard nothing, but that, being recovered, he was gone into 

the country for the air, and for the better recovery after his 

distemper.  After this it was yet two months more, and then I 

understood he was come to his city house again, but still I 

heard nothing from him.



I had written several letters for him, and directed them as 

usual, and found two or three of them had been called for, but 

not the rest.  I wrote again in a more pressing manner than 

ever, and in one of them let him know, that I must be forced 

to wait on him myself, representing my circumstances, the rent 

of lodgings to pay, and the provision for the child wanting, and 

my own deplorable condition, destitute of subsistence for his 

most solemn engagement to take care of and provide for me.  

I took a copy of this letter, and finding it lay at the house near 

a month and was not called for, I found means to have the copy 

of it put into his own hands at a coffee-house, where I had by 

inquiry found he used to go.



This letter forced an answer from him, by which, though I 

found I was to be abandoned, yet I found he had sent a letter 

to me some time before, desiring me to go down to the Bath 

again.  Its contents I shall come to presently.



It is true that sick-beds are the time when such correspondences 

as this are looked on with different countenances, and seen 

with other eyes than we saw them with, or than they appeared 

with before.  My lover had been at the gates of death, and at 

the very brink of eternity; and, it seems, had been struck with 

a due remorse, and with sad reflections upon his past life of 

gallantry and levity; and among the rest, criminal correspondence 

with me, which was neither more nor less than a long-continued 

life of adultery, and represented itself as it really was, not as 

it had been formerly thought by him to be, and he looked upon 

it now with a just and religious abhorrence.



I cannot but observe also, and leave it for the direction of my 

sex in such cases of pleasure, that whenever sincere repentance 

succeeds such a crime as this, there never fails to attend a 

hatred of the object; and the more the affection might seem to 

be before, the hatred will be the more in proportion.  It will 

always be so, indeed it can be no otherwise; for there cannot 

be a true and sincere abhorrence of the offence, and the love 

to the cause of it remain; there will, with an abhorrence of the 

sin, be found a detestation of the fellow-sinner; you can expect 

no other.



I found it so here, though good manners and justice in this 

gentleman kept him from carrying it on to any extreme but the 

short history of his part in this affair was thus:  he perceived 

by my last letter, and by all the rest, which he went for after, 

that I was not gone to Bath, that his first letter had not come 

to my hand; upon which he write me this following:--





'MADAM,--I am surprised that my letter, dated the 8th of last 

month, did not come to your hand; I give you my word it was 

delivered at your lodgings, and to the hands of your maid.



'I need not acquaint you with what has been my condition 

for some time past; and how, having been at the edge of the 

grave, I am, by the unexpected and undeserved mercy of 

Heaven, restored again.  In the condition I have been in, it 

cannot be strange to you that our unhappy correspondence 

had not been the least of the burthens which lay upon my 

conscience.  I need say no more; those things that must be 

repented of, must be also reformed.



I wish you would thing of going back to the Bath.  I enclose 

you here a bill for #50 for clearing yourself at your lodgings, 

and carrying you down, and hope it will be no surprise to you 

to add, that on this account only, and not for any offence given 

me on your side, I can see you no more.  I will take due care 

of the child; leave him where he is, or take him with you, as 

you please.  I wish you the like reflections, and that they may 

be to your advantage.--I am,' etc.





I was struck with this letter as with a thousand wounds, such 

as I cannot describe; the reproaches of my own conscience were 

such as I cannot express, for I was not blind to my own crime; 

and I reflected that I might with less offence have continued 

with my brother, and lived with him as a wife, since there was

 no crime in our marriage on that score, neither of us knowing it.



But I never once reflected that I was all this while a married 

woman, a wife to Mr. ---- the linen-draper, who, though he 

had left me by the necessity of his circumstances, had no power 

to discharge me from the marriage contract which was between 

us, or to give me a legal liberty to marry again; so that I had 

been no less than a whore and an adulteress all this while.  I 

then reproached myself with the liberties I had taken, and how 

I had been a snare to this gentleman, and that indeed I was 

principal in the crime; that now he was mercifully snatched out 

of the gulf by a convincing work upon his mind, but that I was 

left as if I was forsaken of God's grace, and abandoned by 

Heaven to a continuing in my wickedness.



Under these reflections I continued very pensive and sad for 

near month, and did not go down to the Bath, having no 

inclination to be with the woman whom I was with before; 

lest, as I thought, she should prompt me to some wicked 

course of life again, as she had done; and besides, I was very 

loth she should know I was cast off as above.



And now I was greatly perplexed about my little boy.  It was 

death to me to part with the child, and yet when I considered 

the danger of being one time or other left with him to keep 

without a maintenance to support him, I then resolved to leave 

him where he was; but then I concluded also to be near him 

myself too, that I then might have the satisfaction of seeing 

him, without the care of providing for him.



I sent my gentleman a short letter, therefore, that I had obeyed 

his orders in all things but that of going back to the Bath, 

which I could not think of for many reasons; that however 

parting from him was a wound to me that I could never recover, 

yet that I was fully satisfied his reflections were just, and would 

be very far from desiring to obstruct his reformation or repentance.



Then I represented my own circumstances to him in the most 

moving terms that I was able.  I told him that those unhappy 

distresses which first moved him to a generous and an honest 

friendship for me, would, I hope, move him to a little concern 

for me now, though the criminal part of our correspondence, 

which I believed neither of us intended to fall into at the time, 

was broken off; that I desired to repent as sincerely as he had 

done, but entreated him to put me in some condition that I 

might not be exposed to the temptations which the devil never 

fails to excite us to from the frightful prospect of poverty and 

distress; and if he had the least apprehensions of my being 

troublesome to him, I begged he would put me in a posture 

to go back to my mother in Virginia, from when he knew I 

came, and that would put an end to all his fears on that account.  

I concluded, that if he would send me #50 more to facilitate 

my going away, I would send him back a general release, and 

would promise never to disturb him more with any importunities; 

unless it was to hear of the well-doing of the child, whom, if 

I found my mother living and my circumstances able, I would 

send for to come over to me, and take him also effectually off 

his hands.



This was indeed all a cheat thus far, viz. that I had no intention 

to go to Virginia, a the account of my former affairs there may 

convince anybody of; but the business was to get this last #50 

of him, if possible, knowing well enough it would be the last 

penny I was ever to expect.



However, the argument I used, namely, of giving him a general 

release, and never troubling him any more, prevailed effectually 

with him, and he sent me a bill for the money by a person who 

brought with him a general release for me to sign, and which 

I frankly signed, and received the money; and thus, though full 

sore against my will, a final end was put to this affair.



And here I cannot but reflect upon the unhappy consequence 

of too great freedoms between persons stated as we were, 

upon the pretence of innocent intentions, love of friendship, 

and the like; for the flesh has generally so great a share in those 

friendships, that is great odds but inclination prevails at last 

over the most solemn resolutions; and that vice breaks in at 

the breaches of decency, which really innocent friendship ought 

to preserve with the greatest strictness.  But I leave the readers 

of these things to their own just reflections, which they will be 

more able to make effectual than I, who so soon forgot myself, 

and am therefore but a very indifferent monitor.



I was now a single person again, as I may call myself; I was 

loosed from all the obligations either of wedlock or mistress-ship 

in the world, except my husband the linen-draper, whom, I having 

not now heard from in almost fifteen years, nobody could 

blame me for thinking myself entirely freed from; seeing also he 

had at his going away told me, that if I did not hear frequently 

from him, I should conclude he was dead, and I might freely 

marry again to whom I pleased.



I now began to cast up my accounts.  I had by many letters 

and much importunity, and with the intercession of my mother 

too, had a second return of some goods from my brother (as I 

now call him) in Virginia, to make up the damage of the cargo 

I brought away with me, and this too was upon the condition 

of my sealing a general release to him, and to send it him by 

his correspondent at Bristol, which, though I thought hard of, 

yet I was obliged to promise to do.  However, I managed so 

well in this case, that I got my goods away before the release 

was signed, and then I always found something or other to say 

to evade the thing, and to put off the signing it at all; till at 

length I pretended I must write to my brother, and have his 

answer, before I could do it.



Including this recruit, and before I got the last #50, I found 

my strength to amount, put all together, to about #400, so 

that with that I had about #450.  I had saved above #100 more, 

but I met with a disaster with that, which was this--that a 

goldsmith in whose hands I had trusted it, broke, so I lost #70

of my money, the man's composition not making above #30 

out of his #100.  I had a little plate, but not much, and was 

well enough stocked with clothes and linen.



With this stock I had the world to begin again; but you are to 

consider that I was not now the same woman as when I lived 

at Redriff; for, first of all, I was near twenty years older, and 

did not look the better for my age, nor for my rambles to 

Virginia and back again; and though I omitted nothing that 

might set me out to advantage, except painting, for that I never 

stooped to, and had pride enough to think I did not want it, yet 

there would always be some difference seen between five-and-twenty 

and two-and-forty.



I cast about innumerable ways for my future state of life, and 

began to consider very seriously what I should do, but nothing 

offered.  I took care to make the world take me for something 

more than I was, and had it given out that I was a fortune, and 

that my estate was in my own hands; the last of which was 

very true, the first of it was as above.  I had no acquaintance, 

which was one of my worst misfortunes, and the consequence 

of that was, I had no adviser, at least who could assist and 

advise together; and above all, I had nobody to whom I could 

in  confidence commit the secret of my circumstances to, and 

could depend upon for their secrecy and fidelity; and I found 

by experience, that to be friendless in the worst condition, 

next to being in want that a woman can be reduced to:  I say 

a woman, because 'tis evident men can be their own advisers, 

and their own directors, and know how to work themselves 

out of difficulties and into business better than women; but if 

a woman has no friend to communicate her affairs to, and to 

advise and assist her, 'tis ten to one but she is undone; nay, 

and the more money she has, the more danger she is in of being 

wronged and deceived; and this was my case in the affair of 

the #100 which I left in the hands of the goldsmith, as above, 

whose credit, it seems, was upon the ebb before, but I, that 

had no knowledge of things and nobody to consult with, knew 

nothing of it, and so lost my money.



In the next place, when a woman is thus left desolate and void 

of counsel, she is just like a bag of money or a jewel dropped 

on the highway, which is a prey to the next comer; if a man of 

virtue and upright principles happens to find it, he will have it 

cried, and the owner may come to hear of it again; but how 

many times shall such a thing fall into hands that will make no 

scruple of seizing it for their own, to once that it shall come 

into good hands?



This was evidently my case, for I was now a loose, unguided 

creature, and had no help, no assistance, no guide for my 

conduct; I knew what I aimed at and what I wanted, but knew 

nothing how to pursue the end by direct means.  I wanted to 

be placed in a settle state of living, and had I happened to meet 

with a sober, good husband, I should have been as faithful and 

true a wife to him as virtue itself could have formed.  If I had 

been otherwise, the vice came in always at the door of necessity, 

not at the door of inclination; and I understood too well, by 

the want of it, what the value of a settled life was, to do 

anything to forfeit the felicity of it; nay, I should have made 

the better wife for all the difficulties I had passed through, by 

a great deal; nor did I in any of the time that I had been a wife 

give my husbands the least uneasiness on account of my 

behaviour.



But all this was nothing; I found no encouraging prospect.  I 

waited; I lived regularly, and with as much frugality as became 

my circumstances, but nothing offered, nothing presented, and 

the main stock wasted apace.  What to do I knew not; the 

terror of approaching poverty lay hard upon my spirits.  I had 

some money, but where to place it I knew not, nor would the 

interest of it maintain me, at least not in London.



At length a new scene opened.  There was in the house where 

I lodged a north-country woman that went for a gentlewoman, 

and nothing was more frequent in her discourse than her account 

of the cheapness of provisions, and the easy way of living in 

her country; how plentiful and how cheap everything was, what 

good company they kept, and the like; till at last I told her she 

almost tempted me to go and live in her country; for I that 

was a widow, though I had sufficient to live on, yet had no 

way of increasing it; and that I found I could not live here 

under #100 a year, unless I kept no company, no servant, made 

no appearance, and buried myself in privacy, as if I was obliged 

to it by necessity.



I should have observed, that she was always made to believe,

as everybody else was, that I was a great fortune, or at least 

that I had three or four thousand pounds, if not more, and all 

in my own hands; and she was mighty sweet upon me when 

she thought me inclined in the least to go into her country.  

She said she had a sister lived near Liverpool, that her brother 

was a considerable gentleman there, and had a great estate 

also in Ireland; that she would go down there in about two 

months, and if I would give her my company thither, I should 

be as welcome as herself for a month or more as I pleased, 

till I should see how I liked the country; and if I thought fit to 

live there, she would undertake they would take care, though 

they did not entertain lodgers themselves, they would recommend 

me to some agreeable family, where I should be placed to my 

content.



If this woman had known my real circumstances, she would 

never have laid so many snares, and taken so many weary steps 

to catch a poor desolate creature that was good for little when 

it was caught; and indeed I, whose case was almost desperate, 

and thought I could not be much worse, was not very anxious 

about what might befall me, provided they did me no personal 

injury; so I suffered myself, though not without a great deal 

of invitation and great professions of sincere friendship and 

real kindness--I say, I suffered myself to be prevailed upon to 

go with her, and accordingly I packed up my baggage, and put 

myself in a posture for a journey, though I did not absolutely 

know whither I was to go.



And now I found myself in great distress; what little I had 

in the world was all in money, except as before, a little plate, 

some linen, and my clothes; as for my household stuff, I had 

little or none, for I had lived always in lodgings; but I had not 

one friend in the world with whom to trust that little I had, or 

to direct me how to dispose of it, and this perplexed me night 

and day.  I thought of the bank, and of the other companies in 

London, but I had no friend to commit the management of it 

to, and keep and carry about with me bank bills, tallies, orders, 

and such things, I looked upon at as unsafe; that if they were 

lost, my money was lost, and then I was undone; and, on the 

other hand, I might be robbed and perhaps murdered in a strange 

place for them.  This perplexed me strangely, and what to do I 

knew not.



It came in my thoughts one morning that I would go to the 

bank myself, where I had often been to receive the interest of 

some bills I had, which had interest payable on them, and where 

I had found a clerk, to whom I applied myself, very honest and 

just to me, and particularly so fair one time that when I had 

mistold my money, and taken less than my due, and was coming 

away, he set me to rights and gave me the rest, which he might 

have put into his own pocket.



I went to him and represented my case very plainly, and asked 

if he would trouble himself to be my adviser, who was a poor 

friendless widow, and knew not what to do.  He told me, if 

I desired his opinion of anything within the reach of his business, 

he would do his endeavour that I should not be wronged, but 

that he would also help me to a good sober person who was 

a grave man of his acquaintance, who was a clerk in such 

business too, though not in their house, whose judgment was 

good, and whose honesty I might depend upon.  'For,' added 

he, 'I will answer for him, and for every step he takes; if he 

wrongs you, madam, of one farthing, it shall lie at my door, I 

will make it good; and he delights to assist people in such 

cases--he does it as an act of charity.'



I was a little at a stand in this discourse; but after some pause 

I told him I had rather have depended upon him, because I had 

found him honest, but if that could not be, I would take his 

recommendation sooner than any one's else.  'I dare say, 

madam,' says he, 'that you will be as well satisfied with my 

friend as with me, and he is thoroughly able to assist you, 

which I am not.'  It seems he had his hands full of the business 

of the bank, and had engaged to meddle with no other business 

that that of his office, which I heard afterwards, but did not 

understand then.  He added, that his friend should take nothing 

of me for his advice or assistance, and this indeed encouraged 

me very much.



He appointed the same evening, after the bank was shut and 

business over, for me to meet him and his friend.  And indeed 

as soon as I saw his friend, and he began but to talk of the 

affair, I was fully satisfied that I had a very honest man to deal 

with; his countenance spoke it, and his character, as I heard 

afterwards, was everywhere so good, that I had no room for 

any more  doubts upon me.



After the first meeting, in which I only said what I had said 

before, we parted, and he appointed me to come the next day 

to him, telling me I might in the meantime satisfy myself of 

him by inquiry, which, however, I knew not how well to do, 

having no acquaintance myself.



Accordingly I met him the next day, when I entered more 

freely with him into my case.  I told him my circumstances at 

large:  that I was a widow come over from American, perfectly 

desolate and friendless; that I had a little money, and but a 

little, and was almost distracted for fear of losing it, having no 

friend in the world to trust with the management of it; that I 

was going into the north of England to live cheap, that my 

stock might not waste; that I would willingly lodge my money 

in the bank, but that I durst not carry the bills about me, and 

the like, as above; and how to correspond about it, or with 

whom, I knew not.



He told me I might lodge the money in the bank as an account, 

and its being entered into the books would entitle me to the 

money at any time, and if I was in the north I might draw bills 

on the cashier and receive it when I would; but that then it 

would be esteemed as running cash, and the bank would give 

no interest for it; that I might buy stock with it, and so it would 

lie in store for me, but that then if I wanted to dispose if it, I 

must come up to town on purpose to transfer it, and even it 

would be with some difficulty I should receive the half-yearly 

dividend, unless I was here in person, or had some friend I 

could trust with having the stock in him name to do it for me, 

and that would have the same difficulty in it as before; and 

with that he looked hard at me and smiled a little.  At last, says 

he, 'Why do you not get a head steward, madam, that may take 

you and your money together into keeping, and then you would 

have the trouble taken off your hands?'  'Ay, sir, and the money 

too, it may be,' said I; 'for truly I find the hazard that way is as 

much as 'tis t'other way'; but I remember I said secretly to myself, 

'I wish you would ask me the question fairly, I would consider 

very seriously on it before I said No.'



He went on a good way with me, and I thought once or twice 

he was in earnest, but to my real affliction, I found at last he 

had a wife; but when he owned he had a wife he shook his head, 

and said with some concern, that indeed he had a wife, and no 

wife.  I began to think he had been in the condition of my late 

lover, and that his wife had been distempered or lunatic, or 

some such thing.  However, we had not much more discourse 

at that time, but he told me he was in too much hurry of 

business then, but that if I would come home to his house after 

their business was over, he would by that time consider what 

might be done for me, to put my affairs in a posture of security.  

I told him I would come, and desired to know where he lived.  

He gave me a direction in writing, and when he gave it me he 

read it to me, and said, 'There 'tis, madam, if you dare trust 

yourself with me.'  'Yes, sir,' said I, 'I believe I may venture 

to trust you with myself, for you have a wife, you say, and I 

don't want a husband; besides, I dare trust you with my money, 

which is all I have in the world, and if that were gone, I may 

trust myself anywhere.'



He said some things in jest that were very handsome and 

mannerly, and would have pleased me very well if they had 

been in earnest; but that passed over, I took the directions, 

and appointed to attend him at his house at seven o'clock the 

same evening.



When I came he made several proposals for my placing my 

money in the bank, in order to my having interest for it; but 

still some difficult or other came in the way, which he objected 

as not safe; and I found such a sincere disinterested honesty 

in him, that I began to muse with myself, that I had certainly 

found the honest man I wanted, and that I could never put 

myself into better hands; so I told him with a great deal of 

frankness that I had never met with a man or woman yet that 

I could trust, or in whom I could think myself safe, but that I 

saw he was so disinterestedly concerned for my safety, that I 

said I would freely trust him with the management of that little 

I had, if he would accept to be steward for a poor widow that 

could give him no salary.



He smiled and, standing up, with great respect saluted me.  

He told me he could not but take it very kindly that I had so 

good an opinion of him; that he would not deceive me, that 

he would do anything in his power to serve me, and expect 

no salary; but that he could not by any means accept of a trust, 

that it might bring him to be suspected of self-interest, and that 

if I should die he might have disputes with my executors, which 

he should be very loth to encumber himself with.



I told him if those were all his objections I would soon remove 

them, and convince him that there was not the least room for 

any difficulty; for that, first, as for suspecting him, if ever I 

should do it, now is the time to suspect him, and not put the 

trust into his hands, and whenever I did suspect him, he could 

but throw it up then and refuse to go any further.  Then, as to 

executors, I assured him I had no heirs, nor any relations in 

England, and I should alter my condition before I died, and 

then his trust and trouble should cease together, which, 

however, I had no prospect of yet; but I told him if I died as 

I was, it should be all his own, and he would deserve it by 

being so faithful to me as I was satisfied he would be.



He changed his countenance at this discourse, and asked me 

how I came to have so much good-will for him; and, looking 

very much pleased, said he might very lawfully wish he was 

a single man for my sake.  I smiled, and told him as he was 

not, my offer could have no design upon him in it, and to wish, 

ashe did, was not to be allowed, 'twas criminal to his wife.



He told me I was wrong.  'For,' says he, 'madam, as I said 

before, I have a wife and no wife, and 'twould be no sin to me 

to wish her hanged, if that were all.'  'I know nothing of your 

circumstances that way, sir,' said I; 'but it cannot be innocent 

to wish your wife dead.'  'I tell you,' says he again, 'she is a 

wife and no wife; you don't know what I am, or what she is.'



'That's true,' said I; 'sir, I do not know what you are, but I 

believe you to be an honest man, and that's the cause of all 

my confidence in you.'



'Well, well,' says he, 'and so I am, I hope, too.  but I am 

something else too, madam; for,' says he, 'to be plain with you, 

I am a cuckold, and she is a whore.'  He spoke it in a kind of 

jest, but it was with such an awkward smile, that I perceived 

it was what struck very close to him, and he looked dismally 

when he said it.



'That alters the case indeed, sir,' said I, 'as to that part you 

were speaking of; but a cuckold, you know, may be an honest 

man; it does not alter that case at all.  Besides, I think,' said 

I, 'since your wife is so dishonest to you, you are too honest 

to her to own her for your wife; but that,' said I, 'is what I 

have nothing to do with.'



'Nay,' says he, 'I do not think to clear my hands of her; for, 

to be plain with you, madam,' added he, 'I am no contended 

cuckold neither:  on the other hand, I assure you it provokes 

me the highest degree, but I can't help myself; she that will 

be a whore, will be a whore.'





End of Part 4
