





CHAPTER X





Thereupon Nana became a smart woman, mistress of all that is foolish 

and filthy in man, marquise in the ranks of her calling.  It was a 

sudden but decisive start, a plunge into the garish day of gallant 

notoriety and mad expenditure and that daredevil wastefulness 

peculiar to beauty.  She at once became queen among the most 

expensive of her kind.  Her photographs were displayed in 

shopwindows, and she was mentioned in the papers.  When she drove in 

her carriage along the boulevards the people would turn and tell one 

another who that was with all the unction of a nation saluting its 

sovereign, while the object of their adoration lolled easily back in 

her diaphanous dresses and smiled gaily under the rain of little 

golden curls which ran riot above the blue of her made-up eyes and 

the red of her painted lips.  And the wonder of wonders was that the 

great creature, who was so awkward on the stage, so very absurd the 

moment she sought to act the chaste woman, was able without effort 

to assume the role of an enchantress in the outer world.  Her 

movements were lithe as a serpent's, and the studied and yet 

seemingly involuntary carelessness with which she dressed was really 

exquisite in its elegance.  There was a nervous distinction in all 

she did which suggested a wellborn Persian cat; she was an 

aristocrat in vice and proudly and rebelliously trampled upon a 

prostrate Paris like a sovereign whom none dare disobey.  She set 

the fashion, and great ladies imitated her.



Nana's fine house was situated at the hangingscorner of the Rue Cardinet, in 

the Avenue de Villiers.  The avenue was part of the luxurious 

quarter at that time springing up in the vague district which had 

once been the Plaine Monceau.  The house had been built by a young 

painter, who was intoxicated by a first success, and had been 

perforce resold almost as soon as it was habitable.  It was in the 

palatial Renaissance manner and had fantastic interior arrangements 

which consisted of modern conveniences framed in a setting of 

somewhat artificial originality.  Count Muffat had bought the house 

ready furnished and full of hosts of beautiful objects--lovely 

Eastern hangings, old credences, huge chairs of the Louis XIII 

epoch.  And thus Nana had come into artistic surroundings of the 

choicest kind and of the most extravagantly various dates.  But 

since the studio, which occupied the central portion of the house, 

could not be of any use to her, she had upset existing arrangements, 

establishing a small drawing room on the first floor, next to her 

bedroom and dressing room, and leaving a conservatory, a large 

drawing room and a dining room to look after themselves underneath.  

She astonished the architect with her ideas, for, as became a 

Parisian workgirl who understands the elegancies of life by 

instinct, she had suddenly developed a very pretty taste for every 

species of luxurious refinement.  Indeed, she did not spoil her 

house overmuch; nay, she even added to the richness of the 

furniture, save here and there, where certain traces of tender 

foolishness and vulgar magnificence betrayed the ex-flower seller 

who had been wont to dream in front of shopwindows in the arcades.



A carpet was spread on the steps beneath the great awning over the 

front door in the court, and the moment you entered the hall you 

were greeted by a perfume as of violets and a soft, warm atmosphere 

which thick hangings helped to produce.  A window, whose yellow- and 

rose-colored panes suggested the warm pallor of human flesh, gave 

light to the wide staircase, at the foot of which a Negro in carved 

wood held out a silver tray full of visiting cards and four white 

marble women, with bosoms displayed, raised lamps in their uplifted 

hands.  Bronzes and Chinese vases full of flowers, divans covered 

with old Persian rugs, armchairs upholstered in old tapestry, 

furnished the entrance hall, adorned the stairheads and gave the 

first-floor landing the appearance of an anteroom.  Here men's 

overcoats and hats were always in evidence, and there were thick 

hangings which deadened every sound.  It seemed a place apart: on 

entering it you might have fancied yourself in a chapel, whose very 

air was thrilling with devotion, whose very silence and seclusion 

were fraught with mystery.



Nana only opened the large and somewhat too-sumptuous Louis XVI 

drawing room on those gala nights when she received society from the 

Tuileries or strangers of distinction.  Ordinarily she only came 

downstairs at mealtimes, and she woul of the finest needlework.  Armchairs 

wide as beds and sofas deep as alcoves suggested voluptuous idleness 

and the somnolent life of the seraglio.  The prevailing tone of the 

room was old gold blended with green and red, and nothing it 

contained too forcibly indicated the presence of the courtesan save 

the luxuriousness of the seats.  Only two "biscuit" statuettes, a 

woman in her shift, hunting for fleas, and another with nothing at 

all on, walking on her hands and waving her feet in the air, 

sufficed to sully the room with a note of stupid originality.



Through a door, which was nearly always ajar, the dressing room was 

visible.  It was all in marble and glass with a white bath, silver 

jugs and basins and crystal and ivory appointments.  A drawn curtain 

filled the place with a clear twilight which seemed to slumber in 

the warm scent of violets, that suggestive perfume peculiar to Nana 

wherewith the whole house, from the roof to the very courtyard, was 

penetrated.



The furnishing of the house was a most important undertaking.  Nana 

certainly had Zoe with her, that girl so devoted to her fortunes.  

For months she had been tranquilly awaiting this abrupt, new 

departure, as became a woman who was certain of her powers of 

prescience, and now she was triumphant; she was mistress of the 

house and was putting by a round sum while serving Madame as 

honestly as possible.  But a solitary lady's maid wasd feel rather lost on such days 

as she lunched by herself in the lofty dining room with its Gobelin 

tapestry and its monumental sideboard, adorned with old porcelain 

and marvelous pieces of ancient plate.  She used to go upstairs 

again as quickly as possible, for her home was on the first floor, 

in the three rooms, the bed, dressing and small drawing room above 

described.  Twice already she had done the bedchamber up anew: on 

the first occasion in mauve satin, on the second in blue silk under 

lace.  But she had not been satisfied with this; it had struck her 

as "nohowish," and she was still unsuccessfully seeking for new 

colors and designs.  On the elaborately upholstered bed, which was 

as low as a so no longer 

sufficient.  A butler, a coachman, a porter and a cook were wanted.  

Besides, it was necessary to fill the stables.  It was then that 

Labordette made himself most useful.  He undertook to perform all 

sorts of errands which bored the count; he made a comfortable job of 

the purchase of horses; he visited the coachbuilders; he guided the 

young woman in her choice of things.  She was to be met with at the 

shops, leaning on his arm.  Labordette even got in the servants--

Charles, a great, tall coachman, who had been in service with the 

Duc de Corbreuse; Julien, a little, smiling, much-becurled butler, 

and a married couple, of whom the wife Victorine became cook while 

the husband Francois was taken on as porter and footman.  The last 

mentioned in powder and breeches wore Nana's livery, which was a 

sky-blue one adorned with silver lace, and he received visitors in 

the hall.  The whole thing was princely in the correctness of its 

style.



At the end of two months the house was set going.  The cost had been 

more than three hundred thousand francs.  There were eight horses in 

the stables, and five carriages in the coach houses, and of these 

five one was a landau with silver embellishments, which for the 

moment occupied the attention of all Paris.  And amid this great 

wealth Nana began settling down and making her nest.  After the 

third representation of the Petite Duchesse she had quitted the 

theater, leaving Bordenave to struggle on against a bankruptcy 

which, despite the count's money, was imminent.  Nevertheless, she 

was still bitter about her failure.  It added to that other 

bitterness, the lesson Fontan had given her, a shameful lesson for 

which she held all men responsible.  Accordingly she now declared 

herself very firm and quite proof against sudden infatuations, but 

thoughts of vengeance took no hold of her volatile brain.  What did 

maintain a hold on it in the hours when she was not indignant was an 

ever-wakeful lust of expenditure, added to a natural contempt for 

the man who paid and to a perpetual passion for consumption and 

waste, which took pride in the ruin of her lovers.



At starting Nana put the count on a proper footing and clearly 

mapped out the conditions of their relationship.  The count gave 

twelve thousand francs monthly, presents excepted, and demanded 

nothing in return save absolute fidelity.  She swore fidelity but 

insisted also on being treated with the utmost consideration, on 

enjoying complete liberty as mistress of the house and on having her 

every wish respected.  For instance, she was to receive her friends 

every day, and he was to come only at stated times.  In a word, he 

was to repose a blind confidence in her in everything.  And when he 

was seized with jealous anxiety and hesitated to grant what she 

wanted, she stood on her dignity and threatened to give him back all 

he had given or even swore by little Louiset to perform what she 

promised.  This was to suffice him.  There was no love where mutual 

esteem was wanting.  At the end of the first month Muffat respected 

her.



But she desired and obtained still more.  Soon she began to 

influence him, as became a good-natured courtesan.  When he came to 

her in a moody condition she cheered him up, confessed him and then 

gave him good advice.  Little by little she interested herself in 

the annoyanceut of 

the troubled waters.



One morning when Muffat had not yet left the bedroom Zoe ushered a 

gentleman into the dressing room, where Nana was changing her 

underwear.  He was trembling violently.



"Good gracious!  It's Zizi!" said the young woman in great 

astonishment.



It was, indeed, Georges.  But when he saw her in her shift, with her 

golden hair over her bare shoulders, he threw his arms round her 

neck and round her waist and kissed her in all directions.  She 

began struggling to get free, for she was frightened, and in 

smothered tones she stammered:



"Do leave off!  He's there!  Oh, it's silly of you!  And you, Zoe, 

are you out of your senses?  Take him away and keep him downstairs; 

I'll try and come down."



Zoe had to push him in front of her.  When Nana was able to rejoin 

them in the drawing room downstairs she scolded them both, and Zoe 

pursed up her lips and took her departure with a vexed expression, 

remarking that she had only been anxious to give Madame a pleasure.  

Georges was so glad to see Nana again and gazed at her with such 

delight that his fine eyes began filling with tears.  The miserable 

days were over now; his mother believed him to have grown reasonable 

and had allowed him to leave Les Fondettes.  Accordingly, the moment 

he had reached the terminus, he had got a conveyance in order the 

more quickly to come and kiss his sweet darling.  He spoke of living 

at her sids of his home life, in his wife, in his daughter, in 

his love affairs and financial difficulties; she was very sensible, 

very fair and right-minded.  On one occasion only did she let anger 

get the better of her, and that was when he confided to her that 

doubtless Daguenet was going to ask for his daughter Estelle in 

marriage.  When the count began making himself notorious Daguenet 

had thought it a wise move to break off with Nana.  He had treated 

her like a base hussy and had sworn to snatch his future father-in-

law out of the creature's clutches.  In return Nana abused her old 

Mimi in a charming fashion.  He was a renegade who had devoured his 

fortune in the company of vile women; he had no moral sense.  True, 

he did not let them pay him money, but he profited by that of others 

and only repaid them at rare intervals with a bouquet or a dinner.  

And when the count seemed inclined to find excuses for these 

failings she bluntly informed him that Daguenet had enjoyed her 

favors, and she added disgusting particulars.  Muffat had grown 

ashen-pale.  There was no question of the young man now.  This would 

teach him to be lacking in gratitude!



Meanwhile the house had not been entirely furnished, when one 

evening after she had lavished the most energetic promises of 

fidelity on Muffat Nana kept the Count Xavier de Vandeuvres for the 

night.  For the last fortnight he had been paying her assiduous 

court, visiting her and sending presents of flowers, and now she 

gave way not so much out of sudden infatuation as to prove that she 

was a free woman.  The idea of gain followed later when, the day 

after, Vandeuvres helped her to pay a bill which she did not wish to 

mention to the other man.  From Vandeuvres she would certainly 

derive from eight to ten thousand francs a month, and this would 

prove very useful as pocket money.  In those days he was finishing 

the last of his fortune in an access of burning, feverish folly.  

His horses and Lucy had devoured three of his farms, and at one gulp 

Nana was going to swallow his last chateau, near Amiens.  He seemed 

in a hurry to sweep everything away, down to the ruins of the old 

tower built by a Vandeuvres under Philip Augustus.  He was mad for 

ruin and thought it a great thing to leave the last golden bezants 

of his coat of arms in the grasp of this courtesan, whom the world 

of Paris desired.  He, too, accepted Nana's conditions, leaving her 

entire freedom of action and claiming her caresses only on certain 

days.  He was not even naively impassioned enough to require her to 

make vows.  Muffat suspected nothing.  As to Vandeuvres, he knew 

things would take place for a certainty, but he never made the least 

allusion to them and pretended total ignorance, while his lips wore 

the subtle smile of the skeptical man of pleasure who does not seek 

the impossible, provided he can have his day and that Paris is aware 

of it.



From that time forth Nana's house was really properly appointed.  

The staff of servants was complete in the stable, in the kitchen and 

in my lady's chamber.  Zoe organized everything and passed 

successfully through the most unforeseen difficulties.  The 

household moved as easily as the scenery in a theater and was 

regulated like a grand administrative concern.  Indeed, it worked 

with such precision that during the early months there were no jars 

and no derangements.  Madame, however, pained Zoe extremely with her 

imprudent acts, her sudden fits of unwisdom, her mad bravado.  Still 

the lady's maid grew gradually lenient, for she had noticed that she 

made increased profits in seasons of wanton waste when Madame had 

committed a folly which must be made up for.  It was then that the 

presents began raining on her, and she fished up many a louis oe in future, as he used to do down in

the country when he 

waited for her, barefooted, in the bedroom at La Mignotte.  And as 

he told her about himself, he let his fingers creep forward, for he 

longed to touch her after that cruel year of separation.  Then he 

got possession of her hands, felt about the wide sleeves of her 

dressing jacket, traveled up as far as her shoulders.



"You still love your baby?" he asked in his child voice.



"Oh, I certainly love him!" answered Nana, briskly getting out of 

his clutches.  "But you come popping in without warning.  You know, 

my little man, I'm not my own mistress; you must be good!"



Georges, when he got out of his cab, had been so dizzy with the 

feeling that his long desire was at last about to be satisfied that 

he had not even noticed what sort of house he was entering.  But now 

he became conscious of a change in the things around him.  He 

examined the sumptuous dining room with its lofty decorated ceiling, 

its Gobelin hangings, its buffet blazing with plate.



"Yes, yes!" he remarked sadly.



And with that she made him understand that he was never to come in 

the mornings but between four and six in the afternoon, if he cared 

to.  That was her reception time.  Then as he looked at her with 

suppliant, questioning eyes and craved no boon at all, she, in her 

turn, kissed him on the forehead in the most amiable way.



"Be very good," she whispered.  "I'll do all I can."



But the truth was that this remark now meant nothing.  She thought 

Georges very nice and would have liked him as a companion, but as 

nothing else.  Nevertheless, when he arrived daily at four o'clock 

he seemed so wretched that she was often fain to be as compliant as 

of old and would hide him in cupboards and constantly allow him to 

pick up the crumbs from Beauty's table.  He hardly ever left the 

house now and became as much one of its inmates as the little dog 

Bijou.  Together they nestled among Mistress's skirts and enjoyed a 

little of her at a time, even when she was with another man, while 

doles of sugar and stray caresses not seldom fell to their share in 

her hours of loneliness and boredom.



Doubtless Mme Hugon found out that the lad had again returned to 

that wicked woman's arms, for she hurried up to Paris and came and 

sought aid from her other son, the Lieutenant Philippe, who was then 

in garrison at Vincennes.  Georges, who was hiding from his elder 

brother, was seized with despairing apprehension, for he feared the 

latter might adopt violent tactics, and as his tenderness for Nana 

was so nervously expansive that he could not keep anything from her, 

he soon began talking of nothing but his big brother, a great, 

strong fellow, who was capable of all kinds of things.



"You know," he explained, "Mamma won't come to you while she can 

send my brother.  Oh, she'll certainly send Philippe to fetch me."



The first time he said this Nana was deeply wounded.  She said 

frigidly:



"Gracious me, I should like to see him come!  For all that he's a 

lieutenant in the army, Francois will chuck him out in double-quick 

time!"



Soon, as the lad kept returning to the subject of his brother, she 

ended by taking a certain interest in Philippe, and in a week's time 

she knew him from head to foot--knew him as very tall and very 

strong and merry and somewhat rough.  She learned intimate details, 

too, and found out that he had hair on his arms and a birthmark on 

his shoulder.  So thoroughly did she learn her lesson that one day, 

when she was full of the image of the man who was to be turned out 

of doors by her orders, she cried out:



"I say, Zizi, your brother's not coming.  He's a base deserter!"



The next day, when Georges and Nana were alone together, Francois 

came upstairs to ask whether Madame would receive Lieutenant 

Philippe Hugon.  Georges grew extremely white and murmured:



"I suspected it; Mamma was talking about it this morning."



And he besought the young woman to send down word that she could not 

see visitors.  But she was already on her feet and seemed all aflame 

as she said:



"Why should I not see him?  He would think me afraid.  Dear me, 

we'll have a good laugh!  Just leave the gentleman in the drawing 

room for a quarter of an hour, Francois; afterward bring him up to 

me."



She did not sit down again but began pacing feverishly to and fro 

between the fireplace and a Venetian mirror hanging above an Italian 

chest.  And each time she reached the latter she glanced at the 

glass and tried the effect of a smile, while Georges sat nervously 

on a sofa, trembling at the thought of the coming scene.  As she 

walked up and down she kept jerking out such little phrases as:



"It will calm the fellow down if he has to wait a quarter of an 

hour.  Besides, if he thinks he's calling on a tottie the drawing 

room will stun him!  Yes, yes, have a good look at everything, my 

fine fellow!  It isn't imitation, and it'll teach you to respect the 

lady who owns it.  Respect's what men need to feel!  The quarter of 

an hour's gone by, eh?  No?  Only ten minutes?  Oh, we've got plenty 

of time."



She did not stay where she was, however.  At the end of the quarter 

of an hour she sent Georges away after making him solemnly promise 

not to listen at the door, as such conduct would scarcely look 

proper in case the servants saw him.  As he went into her bedroom 

Zizi ventured in a choking sort of way to remark:



"It's my brother, you know--"



"Don't you fear," she said with much dignity; "if he's polite I'll 

be polite."



Francois ushered in Philippe Hugon, who wore morning dress.  Georges 

began crossing on tiptoe on the other side of the room, for he was 

anxious to obey the young woman.  But the sound of voices retained 

him, and he hesitated in such anguish of mind that his knees gave 

way under him.  He began imagining that a dread catastrophe would 

befall, that blows would be struck, that something abominable would 

happen, which would make Nana everlastingly odious to him.  And so 

he could not withstand the temptation to come back and put his ear 

against the door.  He heard very ill, for the thick portieres 

deadened every sound, but he managed to catch certain words spoken 

by Philippe, stern phrases in which such terms as "mere child," 

"family," "honor," were distinctly audible.  He was so anxious about 

his darling's possible answers that his heart beat violently and 

filled his head with a confused, buzzing noise.  She was sure to 

give vent to a "Dirty blackguard!" or to a "Leave me bloody well 

alone!  I'm in my own house!"  But nothing happened--not a breath 

came from her direction.  Nana seemed dead in there!  Soon even his 

brother's voice grew gentler, and he could not make it out at all, 

when a strange murmuring sound finally stupefied him.  Nana was 

sobbing!  For a moment or two he was the prey of contending feelings 

and knew not whether to run away or to fall upon Philippe.  But just 

then Zoe came into the room, and he withdrew from the door, ashamed 

at being thus surprised.



She began quietly to put some linen away in a cupboard while he 

stood mute and motionless, pressing his forehead against a 

windowpane.  He was tortured by uncertainty.  After a short silence 

the woman asked:



"It's your brother that's with Madame?"



"Yes," replied the lad in a choking voice.



There was a fresh silence.



"And it makes you anxious, doesn't it, Monsieur Georges?"



"Yes," he rejoined in the same painful, suffering tone.



Zoe was in no hurry.  She folded up some lace and said slowly:



"You're wrong; Madame will manage it all."



And then the conversation ended; they said not another word.  Still 

she did not leave the room.  A long quarter of an hour passed, and 

she turned round again without seeming to notice the look of 

exasperation overspreading the lad's face, which was already white 

with the effects of uncertainty and constraint.  He was casting 

sidelong glances in the direction of the drawing room.



Maybe Nana was still crying.  The other must have grown savage and 

have dealt her blows.  Thus when Zoe finally took her departure he 

ran to the door and once more pressed his ear against it.  He was 

thunderstruck; his head swam, for he heard a brisk outburst of 

gaiety, tender, whispering voices and the smothered giggles of a 

woman who is being tickled.  Besides, almost directly afterward, 

Nana conducted Philippe to the head of the stairs, and there was an 

exchange of cordial and familiar phrases.



When Georges again ventured into the drawing room the young woman 

was standing before the mirror, looking at herself.



"Well?" he asked in utter bewilderment.



"Well, what?" she said without turning round.  Then negligently:



"What did you mean?  He's very nice, is your brother!"



"So it's all right, is it?"



"Oh, certainly it's all right!  Goodness me, what's come over you?  

One would have thought we were going to fight!"



Georges still failed to understand.



"I thought I heard--that is, you didn't cry?" he stammered out.



"Me cry!" she exclaimed, looking fixedly at him.  "Why, you're 

dreaming!  What makes you think I cried?"



Thereupon the lad was treated to a distressing scene for having 

disobeyed and played Paul Pry behind the door.  She sulked, and he 

returned with coaxing submissiveness to the old subject, for he 

wished to know all about it.



"And my brother then?"



"Your brother saw where he was at once.  You know, I might have been 

a tottie, in which case his interference would have been accounted 

for by your age and the family honor!  Oh yes, I understand those 

kinds of feelings!  But a single glance was enough for him, and he 

behaved like a well-bred man at once.  So don't be anxious any 

longer.  It's all over--he's gone to quiet your mamma!"



And she went on laughingly:



"For that matter, you'll see your brother here.  I've invited him, 

and he's going to return."



"Oh, he's going to return," said the lad, growing white.  He added 

nothing, and they ceased talking of Philippe.  She began dressing to 

go out, and he watched her with his great, sad eyes.  Doubtless he 

was very glad that matters had got settled, for he would have 

preferred death to a rupture of their connection, but deep down in 

his heart there was a silent anguish, a profound sense of pain, 

which he had no experience of and dared not talk about.  How 

Philippe quieted their mother's fears he never knew, but three days 

later she returned to Les Fondettes, apparently satisfied.  On the 

evening of her return, at Nana's house, he trembled when Francois 

announced the lieutenant, but the latter jested gaily and treated 

him like a young rascal, whose escapade he had favored as something 

not likely to have any consequences.  The lad's heart was sore 

within him; he scarcely dared move and blushed girlishly at the 

least word that was spoken to him.  He had not lived much in 

Philippe's society; he was ten years his junior, and he feared him 

as he would a father, from whom stories about women are concealed.  

Accordingly he experienced an uneasy sense of shame when he saw him 

so free in Nana's company and heard him laugh uproariously, as 

became a man who was plunging into a life of pleasure with the gusto 

born of magnificent health.  Nevertheless, when his brother shortly 

began to present himself every day, Georges ended by getting 

somewhat used to it all.  Nana was radiant.



This, her latest installation, had been involving all the riotous 

waste attendant on the life of gallantry, and now her housewarming 

was being defiantly celebrated in a grand mansion positively 

overflowing with males and with furniture.



One afternoon when the Hugons were there Count Muffat arrived out of 

hours.  But when Zoe told him that Madame was with friends he 

refused to come in and took his departure discreetly, as became a 

gallant gentleman.  When he made his appearance again in the evening 

Nana received him with the frigid indignation of a grossly affronted 

woman.



"Sir," she said, "I have given you no cause why you should insult 

me.  You must understand this: when I am at home to visitors, I beg 

you to make your appearance just like other people."



The count simply gaped in astonishment.  "But, my dear--" he 

endeavored to explain.



"Perhaps it was because I had visitors!  Yes, there were men here, 

but what d'you suppose I was doing with those men?  You only 

advertise a woman's affairs when you act the discreet lover, and I 

don't want to be advertised; I don't!"



He obtained his pardon with difficulty, but at bottom he was 

enchanted.  It was with scenes such as these that she kept him in 

unquestioning and docile submission.  She had long since succeeded 

in imposing Georges on him as a young vagabond who, she declared, 

amused her.  She made him dine with Philippe, and the count behaved 

with great amiability.  When they rose from table he took the young 

man on one side and asked news of his mother.  From that time forth 

the young Hugons, Vandeuvres and Muffat were openly about the house 

and shook hands as guests and intimates might have done.  It was a 

more convenient arrangement than the previous one.  Muffat alone 

still abstained discreetly from too-frequent visits, thus adhering 

to the ceremonious policy of an ordinary strange caller.  At night 

when Nana was sitting on her bearskins drawing off her stockings, he 

would talk amicably about the other three gentlemen and lay especial 

stress on Philippe, who was loyalty itself.



"It's very true; they're nice," Nana would say as she lingered on 

the floor to change her shift.  "Only, you know, they see what I am.  

One word about it and I should chuck 'em all out of doors for you!"



Nevertheless, despite her luxurious life and her group of courtiers, 

Nana was nearly bored to death.  She had men for every minute of the 

night, and money overflowed even among the brushes and combs in the 

drawers of her dressing table.  But all this had ceased to satisfy 

her; she felt that there was a void somewhere or other, an empty 

place provocative of yawns.  Her life dragged on, devoid of 

occupation, and successive days only brought back the same 

monotonous hours.  Tomorrow had ceased to be; she lived like a bird: 

sure of her food and ready to perch and roost on any branch which 

she came to.  This certainty of food and drink left her lolling 

effortless for whole days, lulled her to sleep in conventual 

idleness and submission as though she were the prisoner of her 

trade.  Never going out except to drive, she was losing her walking 

powers.  She reverted to low childish tastes, would kiss Bijou from 

morning to night and kill time with stupid pleasures while waiting 

for the man whose caresses she tolerated with an appearance of 

complaisant lassitude.  Amid this species of self-abandonment she 

now took no thought about anything save her personal beauty; her 

sole care was to look after herself, to wash and to perfume her 

limbs, as became one who was proud of being able to undress at any 

moment and in face of anybody without having to blush for her 

imperfections.



At ten in the morning Nana would get up.  Bijou, the Scotch griffon 

dog, used to lick her face and wake her, and then would ensue a game 

of play lasting some five minutes, during which the dog would race 

about over her arms and legs and cause Count Muffat much distress.  

Bijou was the first little male he had ever been jealous of.  It was 

not at all proper, he thought, that an animal should go poking its 

nose under the bedclothes like that!  After this Nana would proceed 

to her dressing room, where she took a bath.  Toward eleven o'clock 

Francois would come and do up her hair before beginning the 

elaborate manipulations of the afternoon.



At breakfast, as she hated feeding alone, she nearly always had Mme 

Maloir at table with her.  This lady would arrive from unknown 

regions in the morning, wearing her extravagantly quaint hats, and 

would return at night to that mysterious existence of hers, about 

which no one ever troubled.  But the hardest to bear were the two or 

three hours between lunch and the toilet.  On ordinary occasions she 

proposed a game of bezique to her old friend; on others she would 

read the Figaro, in which the theatrical echoes and the fashionable 

news interested her.  Sometimes she even opened a book, for she 

fancied herself in literary matters.  Her toilet kept her till close 

on five o'clock, and then only she would wake from her daylong 

drowse and drive out or receive a whole mob of men at her own house.  

She would often dine abroad and always go to bed very late, only to 

rise again on the morrow with the same languor as before and to 

begin another day, differing in nothing from its predecessor.



The great distraction was to go to the Batignolles and see her 

little Louis at her aunt's.  For a fortnight at a time she forgot 

all about him, and then would follow an access of maternal love, and 

she would hurry off on foot with all the modesty and tenderness 

becoming a good mother.  On such occasions she would be the bearer 

of snuff for her aunt and of oranges and biscuits for the child, the 

kind of presents one takes to a hospital.  Or again she would drive 

up in her landau on her return from the Bois, decked in costumes, 

the resplendence of which greatly excited the dwellers in the 

solitary street.  Since her niece's magnificent elevation Mme Lerat 

had been puffed up with vanity.  She rarely presented herself in the 

Avenue de Villiers, for she was pleased to remark that it wasn't her 

place to do so, but she enjoyed triumphs in her own street.  She was 

delighted when the young woman arrived in dresses that had cost four 

or five thousand francs and would be occupied during the whole of 

the next day in showing off her presents and in citing prices which 

quite stupefied the neighbors.  As often as not, Nana kept Sunday 

free for the sake of "her family," and on such occasions, if Muffat 

invited her, she would refuse with the smile of a good little 

shopwoman.  It was impossible, she would answer; she was dining at 

her aunt's; she was going to see Baby.  Moreover, that poor little 

man Louiset was always ill.  He was almost three years old, growing 

quite a great boy!  But he had had an eczema on the back of his 

neck, and now concretions were forming in his ears, which pointed, 

it was feared, to decay of the bones of the skull.  When she saw how 

pale he looked, with his spoiled blood and his flabby flesh all out 

in yellow patches, she would become serious, but her principal 

feeling would be one of astonishment.  What could be the matter with 

the little love that he should grow so weakly?  She, his mother, was 

so strong and well!



On the days when her child did not engross attention Nana would 

again sink back into the noisy monotony of her existence, with its 

drives in the Bois, first nights at the theater, dinners and suppers 

at the Maison-d'Or or the Cafe Anglais, not to mention all the 

places of public resort, all the spectacles to which crowds rushed--

Mabille, the reviews, the races.  But whatever happened she still 

felt that stupid, idle void, which caused her, as it were, to suffer 

internal cramps.  Despite the incessant infatuations that possessed 

her heart, she would stretch out her arms with a gesture of immense 

weariness the moment she was left alone.  Solitude rendered her low 

spirited at once, for it brought her face to face with the emptiness 

and boredom within her.  Extremely gay by nature and profession, she 

became dismal in solitude and would sum up her life in the following 

ejaculation, which recurred incessantly between her yawns:



"Oh, how the men bother me!"



One afternoon as she was returning home from a concert, Nana, on the 

sidewalk in the Rue Montmartre, noticed a woman trotting along in 

down-at-the-heel boots, dirty petticoats and a hat utterly ruined by 

the rain.  She recognized her suddenly.



"Stop, Charles!" she shouted to the coachman and began calling: 

"Satin, Satin!"



Passers-by turned their heads; the whole street stared.  Satin had 

drawn near and was still further soiling herself against the 

carriage wheels.



"Do get in, my dear girl," said Nana tranquilly, disdaining the 

onlookers.



And with that she picked her up and carried her off, though she was 

in disgusting contrast to her light blue landau and her dress of 

pearl-gray silk trimmed with Chantilly, while the street smiled at 

the coachman's loftily dignified demeanor.



From that day forth Nana had a passion to occupy her thoughts.  

Satin became her vicious foible.  Washed and dressed and duly 

installed in the house in the Avenue de Villiers, during three days 

the girl talked of Saint-Lazare and the annoyances the sisters had 

caused her and how those dirty police people had put her down on the 

official list.  Nana grew indignant and comforted her and vowed she 

would get her name taken off, even though she herself should have to 

go and find out the minister of the interior.  Meanwhile there was 

no sort of hurry: nobody would come and search for her at Nana's--

that was certain.  And thereupon the two women began to pass tender 

afternoons together, making numberless endearing little speeches and 

mingling their kisses with laughter.  The same little sport, which 

the arrival of the plainclothes men had interrupted in the Rue de 

Laval, was beginning again in a jocular sort of spirit.  One fine 

evening, however, it became serious, and Nana, who had been so 

disgusted at Laure's, now understood what it meant.  She was upset 

and enraged by it, the more so because Satin disappeared on the 

morning of the fourth day.  No one had seen her go our.  She had, 

indeed, slipped away in her new dress, seized by a longing for air, 

full of sentimental regret for her old street existence.



That day there was such a terrible storm in the house that all the 

servants hung their heads in sheepish silence.  Nana had come near 

beating Francois for not throwing himself across the door through 

which Satin escaped.  She did her best, however, to control herself, 

and talked of Satin as a dirty swine.  Oh, it would teach her to 

pick filthy things like that out of the gutter!



When Madame shut herself up in her room in the afternoon Zoe heard 

her sobbing.  In the evening she suddenly asked for her carriage and 

had herself driven to Laure's.  It had occurred to her that she 

would find Satin at the table d'hote in the Rue des Martyrs.  She 

was not going there for the sake of seeing her again but in order to 

catch her one in the face!  As a matter of fact Satin was dining at 

a little table with Mme Robert.  Seeing Nana, she began to laugh, 

but the former, though wounded to the quick, did not make a scene.  

On the contrary, she was very sweet and very compliant.  She paid 

for champagne made five or six tablefuls tipsy and then carried off 

Satin when Mme Robert was in the closets.  Not till they were in the 

carriage did she make a mordant attack on her, threatening to kill 

her if she did it again.



After that day the same little business began again continually.  On 

twenty different occasions Nana, tragically furious, as only a 

jilted woman can be ran off in pursuit of this sluttish creature, 

whose flights were prompted by the boredom she suffered amid the 

comforts of her new home.  Nana began to talk of boxing Mme Robert's 

ears; one day she even meditated a duel; there was one woman too 

many, she said.



In these latter times, whenever she dined at Laure's, she donned her 

diamonds and occasionally brought with her Louise Violaine, Maria 

Blond and Tatan Nene, all of them ablaze with finery; and while the 

sordid feast was progressing in the three saloons and the yellow 

gaslight flared overhead, these four resplendent ladies would demean 

themselves with a vengeance, for it was their delight to dazzle the 

little local courtesans and to carry them off when dinner was over.  

On days such as these Laure, sleek and tight-laced as ever would 

kiss everyone with an air of expanded maternity.  Yet 

notwithstanding all these circumstances Satin's blue eyes and pure 

virginal face remained as calm as heretofore; torn, beaten and 

pestered by the two women, she would simply remark that it was a 

funny business, and they would have done far better to make it up at 

once.  It did no good to slap her; she couldn't cut herself in two, 

however much she wanted to be nice to everybody.  It was Nana who 

finally carried her off in triumph, so assiduously had she loaded 

Satin with kindnesses and presents.  In order to be revenged, 

however, Mme Robert wrote abominable, anonymous letters to her 

rival's lovers.



For some time past Count Muffat had appeared suspicious, and one 

morning, with considerable show of feeling, he laid before Nana an 

anonymous letter, where in the very first sentences she read that 

she was accused of deceiving the count with Vandeuvres and the young 

Hugons.



"It's false!  It's false!" she loudly exclaimed in accents of 

extraordinary candor.



"You swear?" asked Muffat, already willing to be comforted.



"I'll swear by whatever you like--yes, by the head of my child!"



But the letter was long.  Soon her connection with Satin was 

described in the broadest and most ignoble terms.  When she had done 

reading she smiled.



"Now I know who it comes from," she remarked simply.



And as Muffat wanted her denial to the charges therein contained, 

she resumed quietly enough:



"That's a matter which doesn't concern you, dear old pet.  How can 

it hurt you?"



She did not deny anything.  He used some horrified expressions.  

Thereupon she shrugged her shoulders.  Where had he been all this 

time?  Why, it was done everywhere!  And she mentioned her friends 

and swore that fashionable ladies went in for it.  In fact, to hear 

her speak, nothing could be commoner or more natural.  But a lie was 

a lie, and so a moment ago he had seen how angry she grew in the 

matter of Vandeuvres and the young Hugons!  Oh, if that had been 

true he would have been justified in throttling her!  But what was 

the good of lying to him about a matter of no consequence?  And with 

that she repeated her previous expression:



"Come now, how can it hurt you?"



Then as the scene still continued, she closed it with a rough 

speech:



"Besides, dear boy, if the thing doesn't suit you it's very simple: 

the house door's open!  There now, you must take me as you find me!"



He hung his head, for the young woman's vows of fidelity made him 

happy at bottom.  She, however, now knew her power over him and 

ceased to consider his feelings.  And from that time forth Satin was 

openly installed in the house on the same footing as the gentlemen.  

Vandeuvres had not needed anonymous letters in order to understand 

how matters stood, and accordingly he joked and tried to pick 

jealous quarrels with Satin.  Philippe and Georges, on their parts, 

treated her like a jolly good fellow, shaking hands with her and 

cracking the riskiest jokes imaginable.



Nana had an adventure one evening when this slut of a girl had given 

her the go-by and she had gone to dine in the Rue des Martyrs 

without being able to catch her.  While she was dining by herself 

Daguenet had appeared on the scene, for although he had reformed, he 

still occasionally dropped in under the influence of his old vicious 

inclinations.  He hoped of course that no one would meet him in 

these black recesses, dedicated to the town's lowest depravity.  

Accordingly even Nana's presence seemed to embarrass him at the 

outset.  But he was not the man to run away and, coming forward with 

a smile, he asked if Madame would be so kind as to allow him to dine 

at her table.  Noticing his jocular tone, Nana assumed her 

magnificently frigid demeanor and icily replied:



"Sit down where you please, sir.  We are in a public place."



Thus begun, the conversation proved amusing.  But at dessert Nana, 

bored and burning for a triumph, put her elbows on the table and 

began in the old familiar way:



"Well, what about your marriage, my lad?  Is it getting on all 

right?"



"Not much," Daguenet averred.



As a matter of fact, just when he was about to venture on his 

request at the Muffats', he had met with such a cold reception from 

the count that he had prudently refrained.  The business struck him 

as a failure.  Nana fixed her clear eyes on him; she was sitting, 

leaning her chin on her hand, and there was an ironical curve about 

her lips.



"Oh yes!  I'm a baggage," she resumed slowly.  "Oh yes, the future 

father-in-law will have to be dragged from between my claws!  Dear 

me, dear me, for a fellow with NOUS, you're jolly stupid!  What!  

D'you mean to say you're going to tell your tales to a man who 

adores me and tells me everything?  Now just listen: you shall marry 

if I wish it, my little man!"



For a minute or two he had felt the truth of this, and now he began 

scheming out a method of submission.  Nevertheless, he still talked 

jokingly, not wishing the matter to grow serious, and after he had 

put on his gloves he demanded the hand of Mlle Estelle de Beuville 

in the strict regulation manner.  Nana ended by laughing, as though 

she had been tickled.  Oh, that Mimi!  It was impossible to bear him 

a grudge!  Daguenet's great successes with ladies of her class were 

due to the sweetness of his voice, a voice of such musical purity 

and pliancy as to have won him among courtesans the sobriquet of 

"Velvet-Mouth."  Every woman would give way to him when he lulled 

her with his sonorous caresses.  He knew this power and rocked Nana 

to sleep with endless words, telling her all kinds of idiotic 

anecdotes.  When they left the table d'hote she was blushing rosy-

red; she trembled as she hung on his arm; he had reconquered her.  

As it was very fine, she sent her carriage away and walked with him 

as far as his own place, where she went upstairs with him naturally 

enough.  Two hours later, as she was dressing again, she said:



"So you hold to this marriage of yours, Mimi?"



"Egad," he muttered, "it's the best thing I could possibly do after 

all!  You know I'm stony broke."



She summoned him to button her boots, and after a pause:



"Good heavens!  I've no objection.  I'll shove you on!  She's as dry 

as a lath, is that little thing, but since it suits your game--oh, 

I'm agreeable: I'll run the thing through for you."



Then with bosom still uncovered, she began laughing:



"Only what will you give me?"



He had caught her in his arms and was kissing her on the shoulders 

in a perfect access of gratitude while she quivered with excitement 

and struggled merrily and threw herself backward in her efforts to 

be free.



"Oh, I know," she cried, excited by the contest.  "Listen to what I 

want in the way of commission.  On your wedding day you shall make 

me a present of your innocence.  Before your wife, d'you 

understand?"



"That's it!  That's it!" he said, laughing even louder than Nana.



The bargain amused them--they thought the whole business very good, 

indeed.



Now as it happened, there was a dinner at Nana's next day.  For the 

matter of that, it was the customary Thursday dinner, and Muffat, 

Vandeuvres, the young Hugons and Satin were present.  The count 

arrived early.  He stood in need of eighty thousand francs wherewith 

to free the young woman from two or three debts and to give her a 

set of sapphires she was dying to possess.  As he had already 

seriously lessened his capital, he was in search of a lender, for he 

did not dare to sell another property.  With the advice of Nana 

herself he had addressed himself to Labordette, but the latter, 

deeming it too heavy an undertaking, had mentioned it to the 

hairdresser Francis, who willingly busied himself in such affairs in 

order to oblige his lady clients.  The count put himself into the 

hands of these gentlemen but expressed a formal desire not to appear 

in the matter, and they both undertook to keep in hand the bill for 

a hundred thousand francs which he was to sign, excusing themselves 

at the same time for charging a matter of twenty thousand francs 

interest and loudly denouncing the blackguard usurers to whom, they 

declared, it had been necessary to have recourse.  When Muffat had 

himself announced, Francis was putting the last touches to Nana's 

coiffure.  Labordette also was sitting familiarly in the dressing 

room, as became a friend of no consequence.  Seeing the count, he 

discreetly placed a thick bundle of bank notes among the powders and 

pomades, and the bill was signed on the marble-topped dressing 

table.  Nana was anxious to keep Labordette to dinner, but he 

declined--he was taking a rich foreigner about Paris.  Muffat, 

however, led him aside and begged him to go to Becker, the jeweler, 

and bring him back thence the set of sapphires, which he wanted to 

present the young woman by way of surprise that very evening.  

Labordette willingly undertook the commission, and half an hour 

later Julien handed the jewel case mysteriously to the count.



During dinnertime Nana was nervous.  The sight of the eighty 

thousand francs had excited her.  To think all that money was to go 

to tradespeople!  It was a disgusting thought.  After soup had been 

served she grew sentimental, and in the splendid dining room, 

glittering with plate and glass, she talked of the bliss of poverty.  

The men were in evening dress, Nana in a gown of white embroidered 

satin, while Satin made a more modest appearance in black silk with 

a simple gold heart at her throat, which was a present from her kind 

friend.  Julien and Francois waited behind the guests and were 

assisted in this by Zoe.  All three looked most dignified.



"It's certain I had far greater fun when I hadn't a cent!" Nana 

repeated.



She had placed Muffat on her right hand and Vandeuvres on her left, 

but she scarcely looked at them, so taken up was she with Satin, who 

sat in state between Philippe and Georges on the opposite side of 

the table.



"Eh, duckie?" she kept saying at every turn.  "How we did use to 

laugh in those days when we went to Mother Josse's school in the Rue 

Polonceau!"



When the roast was being served the two women plunged into a world 

of reminiscences.  They used to have regular chattering fits of this 

kind when a sudden desire to stir the muddy depths of their 

childhood would possess them.  These fits always occurred when men 

were present: it was as though they had given way to a burning 

desire to treat them to the dunghill on which they had grown to 

woman's estate.  The gentlemen paled visibly and looked embarrassed.  

The young Hugons did their best to laugh, while Vandeuvres nervously 

toyed with his beard and Muffat redoubled his gravity.



"You remember Victor?" said Nana.  "There was a wicked little fellow 

for you!  Why, he used to take the little girls into cellars!"



"I remember him perfectly," replied Satin.  "I recollect the big 

courtyard at your place very well.  There was a portress there with 

a broom!"



"Mother Boche--she's dead."



"And I can still picture your shop.  Your mother was a great fatty.  

One evening when we were playing your father came in drunk.  Oh, so 

drunk!"



At this point Vandeuvres tried to intercept the ladies' 

reminiscences and to effect a diversion,



"I say, my dear, I should be very glad to have some more truffles.  

They're simply perfect.  Yesterday I had some at the house of the 

Duc de Corbreuse, which did not come up to them at all."



"The truffles, Julien!" said Nana roughly.



Then returning to the subject:



"By Jove, yes, Dad hadn't any sense!  And then what a smash there 

was!  You should have seen it--down, down, down we went, starving 

away all the time.  I can tell you I've had to bear pretty well 

everything and it's a miracle I didn't kick the bucket over it, like 

Daddy and Mamma."



This time Muffat, who was playing with his knife in a state of 

infinite exasperation, made so bold as to intervene.



"What you're telling us isn't very cheerful."



"Eh, what?  Not cheerful!" she cried with a withering glance.  "I 

believe you; it isn't cheerful!  Somebody had to earn a living for 

us dear boy.  Oh yes, you know, I'm the right sort; I don't mince 

matters.  Mamma was a laundress; Daddy used to get drunk, and he 

died of it!  There!  If it doesn't suit you--if you're ashamed of my 

family--"



They all protested.  What was she after now?  They had every sort of 

respect for her family!  But she went on:



"If you're ashamed of my family you'll please leave me, because I'm 

not one of those women who deny their father and mother.  You must 

take me and them together, d'you understand?"



They took her as required; they accepted the dad, the mamma, the 

past; in fact, whatever she chose.  With their eyes fixed on the 

tablecloth, the four now sat shrinking and insignificant while Nana, 

in a transport of omnipotence, trampled on them in the old muddy 

boots worn long since in the Rue de la Goutte-d'Or.  She was 

determined not to lay down the cudgels just yet.  It was all very 

fine to bring her fortunes, to build her palaces; she would never 

leave off regretting the time when she munched apples!  Oh, what 

bosh that stupid thing money was!  It was made for the tradespeople!  

Finally her outburst ended in a sentimentally expressed desire for a 

simple, openhearted existence, to be passed in an atmosphere of 

universal benevolence.



When she got to this point she noticed Julien waiting idly by.



"Well, what's the matter?  Hand the champagne then!" she said.  "Why 

d'you stand staring at me like a goose?"



During this scene the servants had never once smiled.  They 

apparently heard nothing, and the more their mistress let herself 

down, the more majestic they became.  Julien set to work to pour out 

the champagne and did so without mishap, but Francois, who was 

handing round the fruit, was so unfortunate as to tilt the fruit 

dish too low, and the apples, the pears and the grapes rolled on the 

table.



"You bloody clumsy lot!" cried Nana.



The footman was mistaken enough to try and explain that the fruit 

had not been firmly piled up.  Zoe had disarranged it by taking out 

some oranges.



"Then it's Zoe that's the goose!" said Nana.



"Madame--" murmured the lady's maid in an injured tone.



Straightway Madame rose to her feet, and in a sharp voice and with 

royally authoritative gesture:



"We've had enough of this, haven't we?  Leave the room, all of you!  

We don't want you any longer!"



This summary procedure calmed her down, and she was forthwith all 

sweetness and amiability.  The dessert proved charming, and the 

gentlemen grew quite merry waiting on themselves.  But Satin, having 

peeled a pear, came and ate it behind her darling, leaning on her 

shoulder the while and whispering sundry little remarks in her ear, 

at which they both laughed very loudly.  By and by she wanted to 

share her last piece of pear with Nana and presented it to her 

between her teeth.  Whereupon there was a great nibbling of lips, 

and the pear was finished amid kisses.  At this there was a burst of 

comic protest from the gentlemen, Philippe shouting to them to take 

it easy and Vandeuvres asking if one ought to leave the room.  

Georges, meanwhile, had come and put his arm round Satin's waist and 

had brought her back to her seat.



"How silly of you!" said Nana.  "You're making her blush, the poor, 

darling duck.  Never mind, dear girl, let them chaff.  It's our own 

little private affair."



And turning to Muffat, who was watching them with his serious 

expression:



"Isn't it, my friend?"



"Yes, certainly," he murmured with a slow nod of approval.



He no longer protested now.  And so amid that company of gentlemen 

with the great names and the old, upright traditions, the two women 

sat face to face, exchanging tender glances, conquering, reigning, 

in tranquil defiance of the laws of sex, in open contempt for the 

male portion of the community.  The gentlemen burst into applause.



The company went upstairs to take coffee in the little drawing room, 

where a couple of lamps cast a soft glow over the rosy hangings and 

the lacquer and old gold of the knickknacks.  At that hour of the 

evening the light played discreetly over coffers, bronzes and china, 

lighting up silver or ivory inlaid work, bringing into view the 

polished contours of a carved stick and gleaming over a panel with 

glossy silky reflections.  The fire, which had been burning since 

the afternoon, was dying out in glowing embers.  It was very warm--

the air behind the curtains and hangings was languid with warmth.  

The room was full of Nana's intimate existence: a pair of gloves, a 

fallen handkerchief, an open book, lay scattered about, and their 

owner seemed present in careless attire with that well-known odor of 

violets and that species of untidiness which became her in her 

character of good-natured courtesan and had such a charming effect 

among all those rich surroundings.  The very armchairs, which were 

as wide as beds, and the sofas, which were as deep as alcoves, 

invited to slumber oblivious of the flight of time and to tender 

whispers in shadowy corners.



Satin went and lolled back in the depths of a sofa near the 

fireplace.  She had lit a cigarette, but Vandeuvres began amusing 

himself by pretending to be ferociously jealous.  Nay, he even 

threatened to send her his seconds if she still persisted in keeping 

Nana from her duty.  Philippe and Georges joined him and teased her 

and badgered her so mercilessly that at last she shouted out:



"Darling!  Darling!  Do make 'em keep quiet!  They're still after 

me!"



"Now then, let her be," said Nana seriously.  "I won't have her 

tormented; you know that quite well.  And you, my pet, why d'you 

always go mixing yourself up with them when they've got so little 

sense?"



Satin, blushing all over and putting out her tongue, went into the 

dressing room, through the widely open door of which you caught a 

glimpse of pale marbles gleaming in the milky light of a gas flame 

in a globe of rough glass.  After that Nana talked to the four men 

as charmingly as hostess could.  During the day she had read a novel 

which was at that time making a good deal of noise.  It was the 

history of a courtesan, and Nana was very indignant, declaring the 

whole thing to be untrue and expressing angry dislike to that kind 

of monstrous literature which pretends to paint from nature.  "Just 

as though one could describe everything," she said.  Just as though 

a novel ought not to be written so that the reader may while away an 

hour pleasantly!  In the matter of books and of plays Nana had very 

decided opinions: she wanted tender and noble productions, things 

that would set her dreaming and would elevate her soul.  Then 

allusion being made in the course of conversation to the troubles 

agitating Paris, the incendiary articles in the papers, the 

incipient popular disturbances which followed the calls to arms 

nightly raised at public meetings, she waxed wroth with the 

Republicans.  What on earth did those dirty people who never washed 

really want?  Were folks not happy?  Had not the emperor done 

everything for the people?  A nice filthy lot of people!  She knew 

'em; she could talk about 'em, and, quite forgetting the respect 

which at dinner she had just been insisting should be paid to her 

humble circle in the Rue de la Goutte-d'Or, she began blackguarding 

her own class with all the terror and disgust peculiar to a woman 

who had risen successfully above it.  That very afternoon she had 

read in the Figaro an account of the proceedings at a public meeting 

which had verged on the comic.  Owing to the slang words that had 

been used and to the piggish behavior of a drunken man who had got 

himself chucked, she was laughing at those proceedings still.



"Oh, those drunkards!" she said with a disgusted air.  "No, look you 

here, their republic would be a great misfortune for everybody!  Oh, 

may God preserve us the emperor as long as possible!"



"God will hear your prayer, my dear," Muffat replied gravely.  "To 

be sure, the emperor stands firm."



He liked her to express such excellent views.  Both, indeed, 

understood one another in political matters.  Vandeuvres and 

Philippe Hugon likewise indulged in endless jokes against the 

"cads," the quarrelsome set who scuttled off the moment they clapped 

eyes on a bayonet.  But Georges that evening remained pale and 

somber.



"What can be the matter with that baby?" asked Nana, noticing his 

troubled appearance.



"With me?  Nothing--I am listening," he muttered.



But he was really suffering.  On rising from table he had heard 

Philippe joking with the young woman, and now it was Philippe, and 

not himself, who sat beside her.  His heart, he knew not why, 

swelled to bursting.  He could not bear to see them so close 

together; such vile thoughts oppressed him that shame mingled with 

his anguish.  He who laughed at Satin, who had accepted Steiner and 

Muffat and all the rest, felt outraged and murderous at the thought 

that Philippe might someday touch that woman.



"Here, take Bijou," she said to comfort him, and she passed him the 

little dog which had gone to sleep on her dress.



And with that Georges grew happy again, for with the beast still 

warm from her lap in his arms, he held, as it were, part of her.



Allusion had been made to a considerable loss which Vandeuvres had 

last night sustained at the Imperial Club.  Muffat, who did not 

play, expressed great astonishment, but Vandeuvres smilingly alluded 

to his imminent ruin, about which Paris was already talking.  The 

kind of death you chose did not much matter, he averred; the great 

thing was to die handsomely.  For some time past Nana had noticed 

that he was nervous and had a sharp downward droop of the mouth and 

a fitful gleam in the depths of his clear eyes.  But he retained his 

haughty aristocratic manner and the delicate elegance of his 

impoverished race, and as yet these strange manifestations were 

only, so to speak, momentary fits of vertigo overcoming a brain 

already sapped by play and by debauchery.  One night as he lay 

beside her he had frightened her with a dreadful story.  He had told 

her he contemplated shutting himself up in his stable and setting 

fire to himself and his horses at such time as he should have 

devoured all his substance.  His only hope at that period was a 

horse, Lusignan by name, which he was training for the Prix de 

Paris.  He was living on this horse, which was the sole stay of his 

shaken credit, and whenever Nana grew exacting he would put her off 

till June and to the probability of Lusignan's winning.



"Bah!  He may very likely lose," she said merrily, "since he's going 

to clear them all out at the races."



By way of reply he contented himself by smiling a thin, mysterious 

smile.  Then carelessly:



"By the by, I've taken the liberty of giving your name to my 

outsider, the filly.  Nana, Nana--that sounds well.  You're not 

vexed?"



"Vexed, why?" she said in a state of inward ecstasy.



The conversation continued, and same mention was made of an 

execution shortly to take place.  The young woman said she was 

burning to go to it when Satin appeared at the dressing-room door 

and called her in tones of entreaty.  She got up at once and left 

the gentlemen lolling lazily about, while they finished their cigars 

and discussed the grave question as to how far a murderer subject to 

chronic alcoholism is responsible for his act.  In the dressing room 

Zoe sat helpless on a chair, crying her heart out, while Satin 

vainly endeavored to console her.



"What's the matter?" said Nana in surprise.



"Oh, darling, do speak to her!" said Satin.  "I've been trying to 

make her listen to reason for the last twenty minutes.  She's crying 

because you called her a goose."



"Yes, madame, it's very hard--very hard," stuttered Zoe, choked by a 

fresh fit of sobbing.



This sad sight melted the young woman's heart at once.  She spoke 

kindly, and when the other woman still refused to grow calm she sank 

down in front of her and took her round the waist with truly cordial 

familiarity:



"But, you silly, I said 'goose' just as I might have said anything 

else.  How shall I explain?  I was in a passion--it was wrong of me; 

now calm down."



"I who love Madame so," stuttered Zoe; "after all I've done for 

Madame."



Thereupon Nana kissed the lady's maid and, wishing to show her she 

wasn't vexed, gave her a dress she had worn three times.  Their 

quarrels always ended up in the giving of presents!  Zoe plugged her 

handkerchief into her eyes.  She carried the dress off over her arm 

and added before leaving that they were very sad in the kitchen and 

that Julien and Francois had been unable to eat, so entirely had 

Madame's anger taken away their appetites.  Thereupon Madame sent 

them a louis as a pledge of reconciliation.  She suffered too much 

if people around her were sorrowful.



Nana was returning to the drawing room, happy in the thought that 

she had patched up a disagreement which was rendering her quietly 

apprehensive of the morrow, when Satin came and whispered vehemently 

in her ear.  She was full of complaint, threatened to be off if 

those men still went on teasing her and kept insisting that her 

darling should turn them all out of doors for that night, at any 

rate.  It would be a lesson to them.  And then it would be so nice 

to be alone, both of them!  Nana, with a return of anxiety, declared 

it to be impossible.  Thereupon the other shouted at her like a 

violent child and tried hard to overrule her.



"I wish it, d'you see?  Send 'em away or I'm off!"



And she went back into the drawing room, stretched herself out in 

the recesses of a divan, which stood in the background near the 

window, and lay waiting, silent and deathlike, with her great eyes 

fixed upon Nana.



The gentlemen were deciding against the new criminological theories.  

Granted that lovely invention of irresponsibility in certain 

pathological cases, and criminals ceased to exist and sick people 

alone remained.  The young woman, expressing approval with an 

occasional nod, was busy considering how best to dismiss the count.  

The others would soon be going, but he would assuredly prove 

obstinate.  In fact, when Philippe got up to withdraw, Georges 

followed him at once--he seemed only anxious not to leave his 

brother behind.  Vandeuvres lingered some minutes longer, feeling 

his way, as it were, and waiting to find out if, by any chance, some 

important business would oblige Muffat to cede him his place.  Soon, 

however, when he saw the count deliberately taking up his quarters 

for the night, he desisted from his purpose and said good-by, as 

became a man of tact.  But on his way to the door, he noticed Satin 

staring fixedly at Nana, as usual.  Doubtless he understood what 

this meant, for he seemed amused and came and shook hands with her.



"We're not angry, eh?" he whispered.  "Pray pardon me.  You're the 

nicer attraction of the two, on my honor!"



Satin deigned no reply.  Nor did she take her eyes off Nana and the 

count, who were now alone.  Muffat, ceasing to be ceremonious, had 

come to sit beside the young woman.  He took her fingers and began 

kissing them.  Whereupon Nana, seeking to change the current of his 

thoughts, asked him if his daughter Estelle were better.  The 

previous night he had been complaining of the child's melancholy 

behavior--he could not even spend a day happily at his own house, 

with his wife always out and his daughter icily silent.



In family matters of this kind Nana was always full of good advice, 

and when Muffat abandoned all his usual self-control under the 

influence of mental and physical relaxation and once more launched 

out into his former plaints, she remembered the promise she had 

made.



"Suppose you were to marry her?" she said.  And with that she 

ventured to talk of Daguenet.  At the mere mention of the name the 

count was filled with disgust.  "Never," he said after what she had 

told him!



She pretended great surprise and then burst out laughing and put her 

arm round his neck.



"Oh, the jealous man!  To think of it!  Just argue it out a little.  

Why, they slandered me to you--I was furious.  At present I should 

be ever so sorry if--"



But over Muffat's shoulder she met Satin's gaze.  And she left him 

anxiously and in a grave voice continued:



"This marriage must come off, my friend; I don't want to prevent 

your daughter's happiness.  The young man's most charming; you could 

not possibly find a better sort."



And she launched into extraordinary praise of Daguenet.  The count 

had again taken her hands; he no longer refused now; he would see 

about it, he said, they would talk the matter over.  By and by, when 

he spoke of going to bed, she sank her voice and excused herself.  

It was impossible; she was not well.  If he loved her at all he 

would not insist!  Nevertheless, he was obstinate; he refused to go 

away, and she was beginning to give in when she met Satin's eyes 

once more.  Then she grew inflexible.  No, the thing was out of the 

question!  The count, deeply moved and with a look of suffering, had 

risen and was going in quest of his hat.  But in the doorway he 

remembered the set of sapphires; he could feel the case in his 

pocket.  He had been wanting to hide it at the bottom of the bed so 

that when she entered it before him she should feel it against her 

legs.  Since dinnertime he had been meditating this little surprise 

like a schoolboy, and now, in trouble and anguish of heart at being 

thus dismissed, he gave her the case without further ceremony.



"What is it?" she queried.  "Sapphires?  Dear me!  Oh yes, it's that 

set.  How sweet you are!  But I say, my darling, d'you believe it's 

the same one?  In the shopwindow it made a much greater show."



That was all the thanks he got, and she let him go away.  He noticed 

Satin stretched out silent and expectant, and with that he gazed at 

both women and without further insistence submitted to his fate and 

went downstairs.  The hall door had not yet closed when Satin caught 

Nana round the waist and danced and sang.  Then she ran to the 

window.



"Oh, just look at the figure he cuts down in the street!"  The two 

women leaned upon the wrought-iron window rail in the shadow of the 

curtains.  One o'clock struck.  The Avenue de Villiers was deserted, 

and its double file of gas lamps stretched away into the darkness of 

the damp March night through which great gusts of wind kept 

sweeping, laden with rain.  There were vague stretches of land on 

either side of the road which looked like gulfs of shadow, while 

scaffoldings round mansions in process of construction loomed upward 

under the dark sky.  They laughed uncontrollably as they watched 

Muffat's rounded back and glistening shadow disappearing along the 

wet sidewalk into the glacial, desolate plains of new Paris.  But 

Nana silenced Satin.



"Take care; there are the police!"



Thereupon they smothered their laughter and gazed in secret fear at 

two dark figures walking with measured tread on the opposite side of 

the avenue.  Amid all her luxurious surroundings, amid all the royal 

splendors of the woman whom all must obey, Nana still stood in 

horror of the police and did not like to hear them mentioned any 

oftener than death.  She felt distinctly unwell when a policeman 

looked up at her house.  One never knew what such people might do!  

They might easily take them for loose women if they heard them 

laughing at that hour of the night.  Satin, with a little shudder, 

had squeezed herself up against Nana.  Nevertheless, the pair stayed 

where they were and were soon interested in the approach of a 

lantern, the light of which danced over the puddles in the road.  It 

was an old ragpicker woman who was busy raking in the gutters.  

Satin recognized her.



"Dear me," she exclaimed, "it's Queen Pomare with her wickerwork 

shawl!"



And while a gust of wind lashed the fine rain in their faces she 

told her beloved the story of Queen Pomare.  Oh, she had been a 

splendid girl once upon a time: all Paris had talked of her beauty.  

And such devilish go and such cheek!  Why, she led the men about 

like dogs, and great people stood blubbering on her stairs!  Now she 

was in the habit of getting tipsy, and the women round about would 

make her drink absinthe for the sake of a laugh, after which the 

street boys would throw stones at her and chase her.  In fact, it 

was a regular smashup; the queen had tumbled into the mud!  Nana 

listened, feeling cold all over.



"You shall see," added Satin.



She whistled a man's whistle, and the ragpicker, who was then below 

the window, lifted her head and showed herself by the yellow flare 

of her lantern.  Framed among rags, a perfect bundle of them, a face 

looked out from under a tattered kerchief--a blue, seamed face with 

a toothless, cavernous mouth and fiery bruises where the eyes should 

be.  And Nana, seeing the frightful old woman, the wanton drowned in 

drink, had a sudden fit of recollection and saw far back amid the 

shadows of consciousness the vision of Chamont--Irma d'Anglars, the 

old harlot crowned with years and honors, ascending the steps in 

front of her chateau amid abjectly reverential villagers.  Then as 

Satin whistled again, making game of the old hag, who could not see 

her:



"Do leave off; there are the police!" she murmured in changed tones.  

"In with us, quick, my pet!"



The measured steps were returning, and they shut the window.  

Turning round again, shivering, and with the damp of night on her 

hair, Nana was momentarily astounded at sight of her drawing room.  

It seemed as though she had forgotten it and were entering an 

unknown chamber.  So warm, so full of perfume, was the air she 

encountered that she experienced a sense of delighted surprise.  The 

heaped-up wealth of the place, the Old World furniture, the fabrics 

of silk and gold, the ivory, the bronzes, were slumbering in the 

rosy light of the lamps, while from the whole of the silent house a 

rich feeling of great luxury ascended, the luxury of the solemn 

reception rooms, of the comfortable, ample dining room, of the vast 

retired staircase, with their soft carpets and seats.  Her 

individuality, with its longing for domination and enjoyment and its 

desire to possess everything that she might destroy everything, was 

suddenly increased.  Never before had she felt so profoundly the 

puissance of her sex.  She gazed slowly round and remarked with an 

expression of grave philosophy:



"Ah well, all the same, one's jolly well right to profit by things 

when one's young!"



But now Satin was rolling on the bearskins in the bedroom and 

calling her.



"Oh, do come!  Do come!"



Nana undressed in the dressing room, and in order to be quicker 

about it she took her thick fell of blonde hair in both hands and 

began shaking it above the silver wash hand basin, while a downward 

hail of long hairpins rang a little chime on the shining metal.


