






CHAPTER XII





Toward one in the morning, in the great bed of the Venice point 

draperies, Nana and the count lay still awake.  He had returned to 

her that evening after a three days sulking fit.  The room, which 

was dimly illumined by a lamp, seemed to slumber amid a warm, damp 

odor of love, while the furniture, with its white lacquer and silver 

incrustations, loomed vague and wan through the gloom.  A curtain 

had been drawn to, so that the bed lay flooded with shadow.  A sigh 

became audible; then a kiss broke the silence, and Nana, slipping 

off the coverlet, sat for a moment or two, barelegged, on the edge 

of the bed.  The count let his head fall back on the pillow and 

remained in darkness.



"Dearest, you believe in the good God, don't you?" she queried after 

some moments' reflection.  Her face was serious; she had been 

overcome by pious terrors on quitting her lover's arms.



Since morning, indeed, she had been complaining of feeling 

uncomfortable, and all her stupid notions, as she phrased it, 

notions about death and hell, were secretly torturing her.  From 

time to time she had nights such as these, during which childish 

fears and atrocious fancies would thrill her with waking nightmares.  

She continued:



"I say, d'you think I shall go to heaven?"



And with that she shivered, while the count, in his surprise at her 

putting such singular questions at such a moment, felt his old 

religious remorse returning upon him.  Then with her chemise 

slipping from her shoulders and her hair unpinned, she again threw 

herself upon his breast, sobbing and clinging to him as she did so.



"I'm afraid of dying!  I'm afraid of dying!"  He had all the trouble 

in the world to disengage himself.  Indeed, he was himself afraid of 

giving in to the sudden madness of this woman clinging to his body 

in her dread of the Invisible.  Such dread is contagious, and he 

reasoned with her.  Her conduct was perfect--she had only to conduct 

herself well in order one day to merit pardon.  But she shook her 

head.  Doubtless she was doing no one any harm; nay, she was even in 

the constant habit of wearing a medal of the Virgin, which she 

showed to him as it hung by a red thread between her breasts. Only 

it had been foreordained that all unmarried women who held 

conversation with men would go to hell.  Scraps of her catechism 

recurred to her remembrance.  Ah, if one only knew for certain, but, 

alas, one was sure of nothing; nobody ever brought back any 

information, and then, truly, it would be stupid to bother oneself 

about things if the priests were talking foolishness all the time.  

Nevertheless, she religiously kissed her medal, which was still warm 

from contact with her skin, as though by way of charm against death, 

the idea of which filled her with icy horror.  Muffat was obliged to 

accompany her into the dressing room, for she shook at the idea of 

being alone there for one moment, even though she had left the door 

open.  When he had lain down again she still roamed about the room, 

visiting its several corners and starting and shivering at the 

slightest noise.  A mirror stopped her, and as of old she lapsed 

into obvious contemplation of her nakedness.  But the sight of her 

breast, her waist and her thighs only doubled her terror, and she 

ended by feeling with both hands very slowly over the bones of her 

face.



"You're ugly when you're dead," she said in deliberate tones.



And she pressed her cheeks, enlarging her eyes and pushing down her 

jaw, in order to see how she would look.  Thus disfigured, she 

turned toward the count.



"Do look!  My head'll be quite small, it will!"



At this he grew vexed.



"You're mad; come to bed!"



He fancied he saw her in a grave, emaciated by a century of sleep, 

and he joined his hands and stammered a prayer.  It was some time 

ago that the religious sense had reconquered him, and now his daily 

access of faith had again assumed the apoplectic intensity which was 

wont to leave him well-nigh stunned.  The joints of his fingers used 

to crack, and he would repeat without cease these words only: "My 

God, my God, my God!"  It was the cry of his impotence, the cry of 

that sin against which, though his damnation was certain, he felt 

powerless to strive.  When Nana returned she found him hidden 

beneath the bedclothes; he was haggard; he had dug his nails into 

his bosom, and his eyes stared upward as though in search of heaven.  

And with that she started to weep again.  Then they both embraced, 

and their teeth chattered they knew not why, as the same imbecile 

obsession over-mastered them.  They had already passed a similar 

night, but on this occasion the thing was utterly idiotic, as Nana 

declared when she ceased to be frightened.  She suspected something, 

and this caused her to question the count in a prudent sort of way.  

It might be that Rose Mignon had sent the famous letter!  But that 

was not the case; it was sheer fright, nothing more, for he was 

still ignorant whether he was a cuckold or no.



Two days later, after a fresh disappearance, Muffat presented 

himself in the morning, a time of day at which he never came.  He 

was livid; his eyes were red and his whole man still shaken by a 

great internal struggle.  But Zoe, being scared herself, did not 

notice his troubled state.  She had run to meet him and now began 

crying:



"Oh, monsieur, do come in!  Madame nearly died yesterday evening!"



And when he asked for particulars:



"Something it's impossible to believe has happened--a miscarriage, 

monsieur."



Nana had been in the family way for the past three months.  For long 

she had simply thought herself out of sorts, and Dr Boutarel had 

himself been in doubt.  But when afterward he made her a decisive 

announcement, she felt so bored thereby that she did all she 

possibly could to disguise her condition.  Her nervous terrors, her 

dark humors, sprang to some extent from this unfortunate state of 

things, the secret of which she kept very shamefacedly, as became a 

courtesan mother who is obliged to conceal her plight.  The thing 

struck her as a ridiculous accident, which made her appear small in 

her own eyes and would, had it been known, have led people to chaff 

her.



"A poor joke, eh?" she said.  "Bad luck, too, certainly."



She was necessarily very sharp set when she thought her last hour 

had come.  There was no end to her surprise, too; her sexual economy 

seemed to her to have got out of order; it produced children then 

even when one did not want them and when one employed it for quite 

other purposes!  Nature drove her to exasperation; this appearance 

of serious motherhood in a career of pleasure, this gift of life 

amid all the deaths she was spreading around, exasperated her.  Why 

could one not dispose of oneself as fancy dictated, without all this 

fuss?  And whence had this brat come?  She could not even suggest a 

father.  Ah, dear heaven, the man who made him would have a splendid 

notion had he kept him in his own hands, for nobody asked for him; 

he was in everybody's way, and he would certainly not have much 

happiness in life!



Meanwhile Zoe described the catastrophe.



"Madame was seized with colic toward four o'clock.  When she didn't 

come back out of the dressing room I went in and found her lying 

stretched on the floor in a faint.  Yes, monsieur, on the floor in a 

pool of blood, as though she had been murdered.  Then I understood, 

you see.  I was furious; Madame might quite well have confided her 

trouble to me.  As it happened, Monsieur Georges was there, and he 

helped me to lift her up, and directly a miscarriage was mentioned 

he felt ill in his turn!  Oh, it's true I've had the hump since 

yesterday!"



In fact, the house seemed utterly upset.  All the servants were 

galloping upstairs, downstairs and through the rooms.  Georges had 

passed the night on an armchair in the drawing room.  It was he who 

had announced the news to Madame's friends at that hour of the 

evening when Madame was in the habit of receiving.  He had still 

been very pale, and he had told his story very feelingly, and as 

though stupefied.  Steiner, La Faloise, Philippe and others, 

besides, had presented themselves, and at the end of the lad's first 

phrase they burst into exclamations.  The thing was impossible!  It 

must be a farce!  After which they grew serious and gazed with an 

embarrassed expression at her bedroom door.  They shook their heads; 

it was no laughing matter.



Till midnight a dozen gentlemen had stood talking in low voices in 

front of the fireplace.  All were friends; all were deeply exercised 

by the same idea of paternity.  They seemed to be mutually excusing 

themselves, and they looked as confused as if they had done 

something clumsy.  Eventually, however, they put a bold face on the 

matter.  It had nothing to do with them: the fault was hers!  What a 

stunner that Nana was, eh?  One would never have believed her 

capable of such a fake!  And with that they departed one by one, 

walking on tiptoe, as though in a chamber of death where you cannot 

laugh.



"Come up all the same, monsieur," said Zoe to Muffat.  "Madame is 

much better and will see you.  We are expecting the doctor, who 

promised to come back this morning."



The lady's maid had persuaded Georges to go back home to sleep, and 

upstairs in the drawing room only Satin remained.  She lay stretched 

on a divan, smoking a cigarette and scanning the ceiling.  Amid the 

household scare which had followed the accident she had been white 

with rage, had shrugged her shoulders violently and had made 

ferocious remarks.  Accordingly, when Zoe was passing in front of 

her and telling Monsieur that poor, dear Madame had suffered a great 

deal:



"That's right; it'll teach him!" said Satin curtly.



They turned round in surprise, but she had not moved a muscle; her 

eyes were still turned toward the ceiling, and her cigarette was 

still wedged tightly between her lips.



"Dear me, you're charming, you are!" said Zoe.



But Satin sat up, looked savagely at the count and once more hurled 

her remark at him.



"That's right; it'll teach him!"



And she lay down again and blew forth a thin jet of smoke, as though 

she had no interest in present events and were resolved not to 

meddle in any of them.  No, it was all too silly!



Zoe, however, introduced Muffat into the bedroom, where a scent of 

ether lingered amid warm, heavy silence, scarce broken by the dull 

roll of occasional carriages in the Avenue de Villiers.  Nana, 

looking very white on her pillow, was lying awake with wide-open, 

meditative eyes.  She smiled when she saw the count but did not 

move.



"Ah, dear pet!" she slowly murmured.  "I really thought I should 

never see you again."



Then as he leaned forward to kiss her on the hair, she grew tender 

toward him and spoke frankly about the child, as though he were its 

father.



"I never dared tell you; I felt so happy about it!  Oh, I used to 

dream about it; I should have liked to be worthy of you!  And now 

there's nothing left.  Ah well, perhaps that's best.  I don't want 

to bring a stumbling block into your life."



Astounded by this story of paternity, he began stammering vague 

phrases.  He had taken a chair and had sat down by the bed, leaning 

one arm on the coverlet.  Then the young woman noticed his wild 

expression, the blood reddening his eyes, the fever that set his 

lips aquiver.



"What's the matter then?" she asked.  "You're ill too."



"No," he answered with extreme difficulty.



She gazed at him with a profound expression.  Then she signed to Zoe 

to retire, for the latter was lingering round arranging the medicine 

bottles.  And when they were alone she drew him down to her and 

again asked:



"What's the matter with you, darling?  The tears are ready to burst 

from your eyes--I can see that quite well.  Well now, speak out; 

you've come to tell me something."



"No, no, I swear I haven't," he blurted out.  But he was choking 

with suffering, and this sickroom, into which he had suddenly 

entered unawares, so worked on his feelings that he burst out 

sobbing and buried his face in the bedclothes to smother the 

violence of his grief.  Nana understood.  Rose Mignon had most 

assuredly decided to send the letter.  She let him weep for some 

moments, and he was shaken by convulsions so fierce that the bed 

trembled under her.  At length in accents of motherly compassion she 

queried:



"You've had bothers at your home?"



He nodded affirmatively.  She paused anew, and then very low:



"Then you know all?"



He nodded assent.  And a heavy silence fell over the chamber of 

suffering.  The night before, on his return from a party given by 

the empress, he had received the letter Sabine had written her 

lover.  After an atrocious night passed in the meditation of 

vengeance he had gone out in the morning in order to resist a 

longing which prompted him to kill his wife.  Outside, under a 

sudden, sweet influence of a fine June morning, he had lost the 

thread of his thoughts and had come to Nana's, as he always came at 

terrible moments in his life.  There only he gave way to his misery, 

for he felt a cowardly joy at the thought that she would console 

him.



"Now look here, be calm!" the young woman continued, becoming at the 

same time extremely kind.  "I've known it a long time, but it was 

certainly not I that would have opened your eyes.  You remember you 

had your doubts last year, but then things arranged themselves, 

owing to my prudence.  In fact, you wanted proofs.  The deuce, 

you've got one today, and I know it's hard lines.  Nevertheless, you 

must look at the matter quietly: you're not dishonored because it's 

happened."



He had left off weeping.  A sense of shame restrained him from 

saying what he wanted to, although he had long ago slipped into the 

most intimate confessions about his household.  She had to encourage 

him.  Dear me, she was a woman; she could understand everything.  

When in a dull voice he exclaimed:



"You're ill.  What's the good of tiring you?  It was stupid of me to 

have come.  I'm going--"



"No," she answered briskly enough.  "Stay!  Perhaps I shall be able 

to give you some good advice.  Only don't make me talk too much; the 

medical man's forbidden it."



He had ended by rising, and he was now walking up and down the room.  

Then she questioned him:



"Now what are you going to do?



"I'm going to box the man's ears--by heavens, yes!"



She pursed up her lips disapprovingly.



"That's not very wise.  And about your wife?"



"I shall go to law; I've proofs."



"Not at all wise, my dear boy.  It's stupid even.  You know I shall 

never let you do that!"



And in her feeble voice she showed him decisively how useless and 

scandalous a duel and a trial would be.  He would be a nine days' 

newspaper sensation; his whole existence would be at stake, his 

peace of mind, his high situation at court, the honor of his name, 

and all for what?  That he might have the laughers against him.



"What will it matter?" he cried.  "I shall have had my revenge."



"My pet," she said, "in a business of that kind one never has one's 

revenge if one doesn't take it directly."



He paused and stammered.  He was certainly no poltroon, but he felt 

that she was right.  An uneasy feeling was growing momentarily 

stronger within him, a poor, shameful feeling which softened his 

anger now that it was at its hottest.  Moreover, in her frank desire 

to tell him everything, she dealt him a fresh blow.



"And d'you want to know what's annoying you, dearest?  Why, that you 

are deceiving your wife yourself.  You don't sleep away from home 

for nothing, eh?  Your wife must have her suspicions.  Well then, 

how can you blame her?  She'll tell you that you've set her the 

example, and that'll shut you up.  There, now, that's why you're 

stamping about here instead of being at home murdering both of 'em."



Muffat had again sunk down on the chair; he was overwhelmed by these 

home thrusts.  She broke off and took breath, and then in a low 

voice:



"Oh, I'm a wreck!  Do help me sit up a bit.  I keep slipping down, 

and my head's too low."



When he had helped her she sighed and felt more comfortable.  And 

with that she harked back to the subject.  What a pretty sight a 

divorce suit would be!  Couldn't he imagine the advocate of the 

countess amusing Paris with his remarks about Nana?  Everything 

would have come out--her fiasco at the Varietes, her house, her 

manner of life.  Oh dear, no!  She had no wish for all that amount 

of advertising.  Some dirty women might, perhaps, have driven him to 

it for the sake of getting a thundering big advertisement, but she--

she desired his happiness before all else.  She had drawn him down 

toward her and, after passing her arm around his neck, was nursing 

his head close to hers on the edge of the pillow.  And with that she 

whispered softly:



"Listen, my pet, you shall make it up with your wife."



But he rebelled at this.  It could never be!  His heart was nigh 

breaking at the thought; it was too shameful.  Nevertheless, she 

kept tenderly insisting.



"You shall make it up with your wife.  Come, come, you don't want to 

hear all the world saying that I've tempted you away from your home?  

I should have too vile a reputation!  What would people think of me?  

Only swear that you'll always love me, because the moment you go 

with another woman--"



Tears choked her utterance, and he intervened with kisses and said:



"You're beside yourself; it's impossible!"



"Yes, yes," she rejoined, "you must.  But I'll be reasonable.  After 

all, she's your wife, and it isn't as if you were to play me false 

with the firstcomer."



And she continued in this strain, giving him the most excellent 

advice.  She even spoke of God, and the count thought he was 

listening to M. Venot, when that old gentleman endeavored to 

sermonize him out of the grasp of sin.  Nana, however, did not speak 

of breaking it off entirely: she preached indulgent good nature and 

suggested that, as became a dear, nice old fellow, he should divide 

his attentions between his wife and his mistress, so that they would 

all enjoy a quiet life, devoid of any kind of annoyance, something, 

in fact, in the nature of a happy slumber amid the inevitable 

miseries of existence.  Their life would be nowise changed: he would 

still be the little man of her heart.  Only he would come to her a 

bit less often and would give the countess the nights not passed 

with her.  She had got to the end of her strength and left off, 

speaking under her breath:



"After that I shall feel I've done a good action, and you'll love me 

all the more."



Silence reigned.  She had closed her eyes and lay wan upon her 

pillow.  The count was patiently listening to her, not wishing her 

to tire herself.  A whole minute went by before she reopened her 

eyes and murmured:



"Besides, how about the money?  Where would you get the money from 

if you must grow angry and go to law?  Labordette came for the bill 

yesterday.  As for me, I'm out of everything; I have nothing to put 

on now."



Then she shut her eyes again and looked like one dead.  A shadow of 

deep anguish had passed over Muffat's brow.  Under the present 

stroke he had since yesterday forgotten the money troubles from 

which he knew not how to escape.  Despite formal promises to the 

contrary, the bill for a hundred thousand francs had been put in 

circulation after being once renewed, and Labordette, pretending to 

be very miserable about it, threw all the blame on Francis, 

declaring that he would never again mix himself up in such a matter 

with an uneducated man.  It was necessary to pay, for the count 

would never have allowed his signature to be protested.  Then in 

addition to Nana's novel demands, his home expenses were 

extraordinarily confused.  On their return from Les Fondettes the 

countess had suddenly manifested a taste for luxury, a longing for 

worldly pleasures, which was devouring their fortune.  Her ruinous 

caprices began to be talked about.  Their whole household management 

was altered, and five hundred thousand francs were squandered in 

utterly transforming the old house in the Rue Miromesnil.  Then 

there were extravagantly magnificent gowns and large sums 

disappeared, squandered or perhaps given away, without her ever 

dreaming of accounting for them.  Twice Muffat ventured to mention 

this, for he was anxious to know how the money went, but on these 

occasions she had smiled and gazed at him with so singular an 

expression that he dared not interrogate her further for fear of a 

too-unmistakable answer.  If he were taking Daguenet as son-in-law 

as a gift from Nana it was chiefly with the hope of being able to 

reduce Estelle's dower to two hundred thousand francs and of then 

being free to make any arrangements he chose about the remainder 

with a young man who was still rejoicing in this unexpected match.



Nevertheless, for the last week, under the immediate necessity of 

finding Labordette's hundred thousand francs, Muffat had been able 

to hit on but one expedient, from which he recoiled.  This was that 

he should sell the Bordes, a magnificent property valued at half a 

million, which an uncle had recently left the countess.  However, 

her signature was necessary, and she herself, according to the terms 

of the deed, could not alienate the property without the count's 

authorization.  The day before he had indeed resolved to talk to his 

wife about this signature.  And now everything was ruined; at such a 

moment he would never accept of such a compromise.  This reflection 

added bitterness to the frightful disgrace of the adultery.  He 

fully understood what Nana was asking for, since in that ever-

growing self-abandonment  which prompted him to put her in 

possession of all his secrets, he had complained to her of his 

position and had confided to her the tiresome difficulty he was in 

with regard to the signature of the countess.



Nana, however, did not seem to insist.  She did not open her eyes 

again, and, seeing her so pale, he grew frightened and made her 

inhale a little ether.  She gave a sigh and without mentioning 

Daguenet asked him some questions.



"When is the marriage?"



"We sign the contract on Tuesday, in five days' time," he replied.



Then still keeping her eyelids closed, as though she were speaking 

from the darkness and silence of her brain:



"Well then, pet, see to what you've got to do.  As far as I'm 

concerned, I want everybody to be happy and comfortable."



He took her hand and soothed her.  Yes, he would see about it; the 

important thing now was for her to rest.  And the revolt within him 

ceased, for this warm and slumberous sickroom, with its all-

pervading scent of ether, had ended by lulling him into a mere 

longing for happiness and peace.  All his manhood, erewhile maddened 

by wrong, had departed out of him in the neighborhood of that warm 

bed and that suffering woman, whom he was nursing under the 

influence of her feverish heat and of remembered delights.  He 

leaned over her and pressed her in a close embrace, while despite 

her unmoved features her lips wore a delicate, victorious smile.  

But Dr Boutarel made his appearance.



"Well, and how's this dear child?" he said familiarly to Muffat, 

whom he treated as her husband.  "The deuce, but we've made her 

talk!"



The doctor was a good-looking man and still young.  He had a superb 

practice among the gay world, and being very merry by nature and 

ready to laugh and joke in the friendliest way with the demimonde 

ladies with whom, however, he never went farther, he charged very 

high fees and got them paid with the greatest punctuality.  

Moreover, he would put himself out to visit them on the most trivial 

occasions, and Nana, who was always trembling at the fear of death, 

would send and fetch him two or three times a week and would 

anxiously confide to him little infantile ills which he would cure 

to an accompaniment of amusing gossip and harebrained anecdotes.  

The ladies all adored him.  But this time the little ill was 

serious.



Muffat withdrew, deeply moved.  Seeing his poor Nana so very weak, 

his sole feeling was now one of tenderness.  As he was leaving the 

room she motioned him back and gave him her forehead to kiss.  In a 

low voice and with a playfully threatening look she said:



"You know what I've allowed you to do.  Go back to your wife, or 

it's all over and I shall grow angry!"



The Countess Sabine had been anxious that her daughter's wedding 

contract should be signed on a Tuesday in order that the renovated 

house, where the paint was still scarcely dry, might be reopened 

with a grand entertainment.  Five hundred invitations had been 

issued to people in all kinds of sets.  On the morning of the great 

day the upholsterers were still nailing up hangings, and toward nine 

at night, just when the lusters were going to be lit, the architect, 

accompanied by the eager and interested countess, was given his 

final orders.



It was one of those spring festivities which have a delicate charm 

of their own.  Owing to the warmth of the June nights, it had become 

possible to open the two doors of the great drawing room and to 

extend the dancing floor to the sanded paths of the garden.  When 

the first guests arrived and were welcomed at the door by the count 

and the countess they were positively dazzled.  One had only to 

recall to mind the drawing room of the past, through which flitted 

the icy, ghostly presence of the Countess Muffat, that antique room 

full of an atmosphere of religious austerity with its massive First 

Empire mahogany furniture, its yellow velvet hangings, its moldy 

ceiling through which the damp had soaked.  Now from the very 

threshold of the entrance hall mosaics set off with gold were 

glittering under the lights of lofty candelabras, while the marble 

staircase unfurled, as it were, a delicately chiseled balustrade.  

Then, too, the drawing room looked splendid; it was hung with Genoa 

velvet, and a huge decorative design by Boucher covered the ceiling, 

a design for which the architect had paid a hundred thousand francs 

at the sale of the Chateau de Dampierre.  The lusters and the 

crystal ornaments lit up a luxurious display of mirrors and precious 

furniture.  It seemed as though Sabine's long chair, that solitary 

red silk chair, whose soft contours were so marked in the old days, 

had grown and spread till it filled the whole great house with 

voluptuous idleness and a sense of tense enjoyment not less fierce 

and hot than a fire which has been long in burning up.



People were already dancing.  The band, which had been located in 

the garden, in front of one of the open windows, was playing a 

waltz, the supple rhythm of which came softly into the house through 

the intervening night air.  And the garden seemed to spread away and 

away, bathed in transparent shadow and lit by Venetian lamps, while 

in a purple tent pitched on the edge of a lawn a table for 

refreshments had been established.  The waltz, which was none other 

than the quaint, vulgar one in the Blonde Venus, with its laughing, 

blackguard lilt, penetrated the old hotel with sonorous waves of 

sound and sent a feverish thrill along its walls.  It was as though 

some fleshly wind had come up out of the common street and were 

sweeping the relics of a vanished epoch out of the proud old 

dwelling, bearing away the Muffats' past, the age of honor and 

religious faith which had long slumbered beneath the lofty ceilings.



Meanwhile near the hearth, in their accustomed places, the old 

friends of the count's mother were taking refuge.  They felt out of 

their element--they were dazzled and they formed a little group amid 

the slowly invading mob.  Mme du Joncquoy, unable to recognize the 

various rooms, had come in through the dining saloon.  Mme 

Chantereau was gazing with a stupefied expression at the garden, 

which struck her as immense.  Presently there was a sound of low 

voices, and the corner gave vent to all sorts of bitter reflections.



"I declare," murmured Mme Chantereau, "just fancy if the countess 

were to return to life.  Why, can you not imagine her coming in 

among all these crowds of people!  And then there's all this gilding 

and this uproar!  It's scandalous!"



"Sabine's out of her senses," replied Mme du Joncquoy.  "Did you see 

her at the door?  Look, you can catch sight of her here; she's 

wearing all her diamonds."



For a moment or two they stood up in order to take a distant view of 

the count and countess.  Sabine was in a white dress trimmed with 

marvelous English point lace.  She was triumphant in beauty; she 

looked young and gay, and there was a touch of intoxication in her 

continual smile.  Beside her stood Muffat, looking aged and a little 

pale, but he, too, was smiling in his calm and worthy fashion.



"And just to think that he was once master," continued Mme 

Chantereau, "and that not a single rout seat would have come in 

without his permission!  Ah well, she's changed all that; it's her 

house now.  D'you remember when she did not want to do her drawing 

room up again?  She's done up the entire house."



But the ladies grew silent, for Mme de Chezelles was entering the 

room, followed by a band of young men.  She was going into ecstasies 

and marking her approval with a succession of little exclamations.



"Oh, it's delicious, exquisite!  What taste!"  And she shouted back 

to her followers:



"Didn't I say so?  There's nothing equal to these old places when 

one takes them in hand.  They become dazzling!  It's quite in the 

grand seventeenth-century style.  Well, NOW she can receive."



The two old ladies had again sat down and with lowered tones began 

talking about the marriage, which was causing astonishment to a good 

many people.  Estelle had just passed by them.  She was in a pink 

silk gown and was as pale, flat, silent and virginal as ever.  She 

had accepted Daguenet very quietly and now evinced neither joy nor 

sadness, for she was still as cold and white as on those winter 

evenings when she used to put logs on the fire.  This whole fete 

given in her honor, these lights and flowers and tunes, left her 

quite unmoved.



"An adventurer," Mme du Joncquoy was saying.  "For my part, I've 

never seen him."



"Take care, here he is," whispered Mme Chantereau.



Daguenet, who had caught sight of Mme Hugon and her sons, had 

eagerly offered her his arm.  He laughed and was effusively 

affectionate toward her, as though she had had a hand in his sudden 

good fortune.



"Thank you," she said, sitting down near the fireplace.  "You see, 

it's my old corner."



"You know him?" queried Mme du Joncquoy, when Daguenet had gone.  

"Certainly I do--a charming young man.  Georges is very fond of him.  

Oh, they're a most respected family."



And the good lady defended him against the mute hostility which was 

apparent to her.  His father, held in high esteem by Louis Philippe, 

had been a PREFET up to the time of his death.  The son had been a 

little dissipated, perhaps; they said he was ruined, but in any 

case, one of his uncles, who was a great landowner, was bound to 

leave him his fortune.  The ladies, however, shook their heads, 

while Mme Hugon, herself somewhat embarrassed, kept harking back to 

the extreme respectability of his family.  She was very much 

fatigued and complained of her feet.  For some months she had been 

occupying her house in the Rue Richelieu, having, as she said, a 

whole lot of things on hand.  A look of sorrow overshadowed her 

smiling, motherly face.



"Never mind," Mme Chantereau concluded.  "Estelle could have aimed 

at something much better."



There was a flourish.  A quadrille was about to begin, and the crowd 

flowed back to the sides of the drawing room in order to leave the 

floor clear.  Bright dresses flitted by and mingled together amid 

the dark evening coats, while the intense light set jewels flashing 

and white plumes quivering and lilacs and roses gleaming and 

flowering amid the sea of many heads.  It was already very warm, and 

a penetrating perfume was exhaled from light tulles and crumpled 

silks and satins, from which bare shoulders glimmered white, while 

the orchestra played its lively airs.  Through open doors ranges of 

seated ladies were visible in the background of adjoining rooms; 

they flashed a discreet smile; their eyes glowed, and they made 

pretty mouths as the breath of their fans caressed their faces.  And 

guests still kept arriving, and a footman announced their names 

while gentlemen advanced slowly amid the surrounding groups, 

striving to find places for ladies, who hung with difficulty on 

their arms, and stretching forward in quest of some far-off vacant 

armchair.  The house kept filling, and crinolined skirts got jammed 

together with a little rustling sound.  There were corners where an 

amalgam of laces, bunches and puffs would completely bar the way, 

while all the other ladies stood waiting, politely resigned and 

imperturbably graceful, as became people who were made to take part 

in these dazzling crushes.  Meanwhile across the garden couples, who 

had been glad to escape from the close air of the great drawing 

room, were wandering away under the roseate gleam of the Venetian 

lamps, and shadowy dresses kept flitting along the edge of the lawn, 

as though in rhythmic time to the music of the quadrille, which 

sounded sweet and distant behind the trees.



Steiner had just met with Foucarmont and La Faloise, who were 

drinking a glass of champagne in front of the buffet.



"It's beastly smart," said La Faloise as he took a survey of the 

purple tent, which was supported by gilded lances.  "You might fancy 

yourself at the Gingerbread Fair.  That's it--the Gingerbread Fair!"



In these days he continually affected a bantering tone, posing as 

the young man who has abused every mortal thing and now finds 

nothing worth taking seriously.



"How surprised poor Vandeuvres would be if he were to come back," 

murmured Foucarmont.  "You remember how he simply nearly died of 

boredom in front of the fire in there.  Egad, it was no laughing 

matter."



"Vandeuvres--oh, let him be.  He's a gone coon!" La Faloise 

disdainfully rejoined.  "He jolly well choused himself, he did, if 

he thought he could make us sit up with his roast-meat story!  Not a 

soul mentions it now.  Blotted out, done for, buried--that's what's 

the matter with Vandeuvres!  Here's to the next man!"



Then as Steiner shook hands with him:



"You know Nana's just arrived.  Oh, my boys, it was a state entry.  

It was too brilliant for anything!  First of all she kissed the 

countess.  Then when the children came up she gave them her blessing 

and said to Daguenet, 'Listen, Paul, if you go running after the 

girls you'll have to answer for it to me.'  What, d'you mean to say 

you didn't see that?  Oh, it WAS smart.  A success, if you like!"



The other two listened to him, openmouthed, and at last burst out 

laughing.  He was enchanted and thought himself in his best vein.



"You thought it had really happened, eh?  Confound it, since Nana's 

made the match!  Anyway, she's one of the family."



The young Hugons were passing, and Philippe silenced him.  And with 

that they chatted about the marriage from the male point of view.  

Georges was vexed with La Faloise for telling an anecdote.  

Certainly Nana had fubbed off on Muffat one of her old flames as 

son-in-law; only it was not true that she had been to bed with 

Daguenet as lately as yesterday.  Foucarmont made bold to shrug his 

shoulders.  Could anyone ever tell when Nana was in bed with anyone?  

But Georges grew excited and answered with an "I can tell, sir!" 

which set them all laughing.  In a word, as Steiner put it, it was 

all a very funny kettle of fish!



The buffet was gradually invaded by the crowd, and, still keeping 

together, they vacated their positions there.  La Faloise stared 

brazenly at the women as though he believed himself to be Mabille.  

At the end of a garden walk the little band was surprised to find M. 

Venot busily conferring with Daguenet, and with that they indulged 

in some facile pleasantries which made them very merry.  He was 

confessing him, giving him advice about the bridal night!  Presently 

they returned in front of one of the drawing-room doors, within 

which a polka was sending the couples whirling to and fro till they 

seemed to leave a wake behind them among the crowd of men who 

remained standing about.  In the slight puffs of air which came from 

outside the tapers flared up brilliantly, and when a dress floated 

by in time to the rat-tat of the measure, a little gust of wind 

cooled the sparkling heat which streamed down from the lusters.



"Egad, they're not cold in there!" muttered La Faloise.



They blinked after emerging from the mysterious shadows of the 

garden.  Then they pointed out to one another the Marquis de Chouard 

where he stood apart, his tall figure towering over the bare 

shoulders which surrounded him.  His face was pale and very stern, 

and beneath its crown of scant white hair it wore an expression of 

lofty dignity.  Scandalized by Count Muffat's conduct, he had 

publicly broken off all intercourse with him and was by way of never 

again setting foot in the house.  If he had consented to put in an 

appearance that evening it was because his granddaughter had begged 

him to.  But he disapproved of her marriage and had inveighed 

indignantly against the way in which the government classes were 

being disorganized by the shameful compromises engendered by modern 

debauchery.



"Ah, it's the end of all things," Mme du Joncquoy whispered in Mme 

Chantereau's ear as she sat near the fireplace.  "That bad woman has 

bewitched the unfortunate man.  And to think we once knew him such a 

true believer, such a noblehearted gentleman!"



"It appears he is ruining himself," continued Mme Chantereau.  "My 

husband has had a bill of his in his hands.  At present he's living 

in that house in the Avenue de Villiers; all Paris is talking about 

it.  Good heavens!  I don't make excuses for Sabine, but you must 

admit that he gives her infinite cause of complaint, and, dear me, 

if she throws money out of the window, too--"



"She does not only throw money," interrupted the other. "In fact, 

between them, there's no knowing where they'll stop; they'll end in 

the mire, my dear."



But just then a soft voice interrupted them.  It was M. Venot, and 

he had come and seated himself behind them, as though anxious to 

disappear from view.  Bending forward, he murmured:



"Why despair?  God manifests Himself when all seems lost."



He was assisting peacefully at the downfall of the house which he 

erewhile governed.  Since his stay at Les Fondettes he had been 

allowing the madness to increase, for he was very clearly aware of 

his own powerlessness.  He had, indeed, accepted the whole position--

the count's wild passion for Nana, Fauchery's presence, even 

Estelle's marriage with Daguenet.  What did these things matter?  He 

even became more supple and mysterious, for he nursed a hope of 

being able to gain the same mastery over the young as over the 

disunited couple, and he knew that great disorders lead to great 

conversions.  Providence would have its opportunity.



"Our friend," he continued in a low voice, "is always animated by 

the best religious sentiments.  He has given me the sweetest proofs 

of this."



"Well," said Mme du Joncquoy, "he ought first to have made it up 

with his wife."



"Doubtless.  At this moment I have hopes that the reconciliation 

will be shortly effected."



Whereupon the two old ladies questioned him.



But he grew very humble again.  "Heaven," he said, "must be left to 

act."  His whole desire in bringing the count and the countess 

together again was to avoid a public scandal, for religion tolerated 

many faults when the proprieties were respected.



"In fact," resumed Mme du Joncquoy, "you ought to have prevented 

this union with an adventurer."



The little old gentleman assumed an expression of profound 

astonishment.  "You deceive yourself.  Monsieur Daguenet is a young 

man of the greatest merit.  I am acquainted with his thoughts; he is 

anxious to live down the errors of his youth.  Estelle will bring 

him back to the path of virtue, be sure of that."



"Oh, Estelle!" Mme Chantereau murmured disdainfully.  "I believe the 

dear young thing to be incapable of willing anything; she is so 

insignificant!"



This opinion caused M. Venot to smile.  However, he went into no 

explanations about the young bride and, shutting his eyes, as though 

to avoid seeming to take any further interest in the matter, he once 

more lost himself in his corner behind the petticoats.  Mme Hugon, 

though weary and absent-minded, had caught some phrases of the 

conversation, and she now intervened and summed up in her tolerant 

way by remarking to the Marquis de Chouard, who just then bowed to 

her:



"These ladies are too severe.  Existence is so bitter for every one 

of us!  Ought we not to forgive others much, my friend, if we wish 

to merit forgiveness ourselves?"



For some seconds the marquis appeared embarrassed, for he was afraid 

of allusions.  But the good lady wore so sad a smile that he 

recovered almost at once and remarked:



"No, there is no forgiveness for certain faults.  It is by reason of 

this kind of accommodating spirit that a society sinks into the 

abyss of ruin."



The ball had grown still more animated.  A fresh quadrille was 

imparting a slight swaying motion to the drawing-room floor, as 

though the old dwelling had been shaken by the impulse of the dance.  

Now and again amid the wan confusion of heads a woman's face with 

shining eyes and parted lips stood sharply out as it was whirled 

away by the dance, the light of the lusters gleaming on the white 

skin.  Mme du Joncquoy declared that the present proceedings were 

senseless.  It was madness to crowd five hundred people into a room 

which would scarcely contain two hundred.  In fact, why not sign the 

wedding contract on the Place du Carrousel?  This was the outcome of 

the new code of manners, said Mme Chantereau.  In old times these 

solemnities took place in the bosom of the family, but today one 

must have a mob of people; the whole street must be allowed to enter 

quite freely, and there must be a great crush, or else the evening 

seems a chilly affair.  People now advertised their luxury and 

introduced the mere foam on the wave of Parisian society into their 

houses, and accordingly it was only too natural if illicit 

proceedings such as they had been discussing afterward polluted the 

hearth.  The ladies complained that they could not recognize more 

than fifty people.  Where did all this crowd spring from?  Young 

girls with low necks were making a great display of their shoulders.  

A woman had a golden dagger stuck in her chignon, while a bodice 

thickly embroidered with jet beads clothed her in what looked like a 

coat of mail.  People's eyes kept following another lady smilingly, 

so singularly marked were her clinging skirts.  All the luxuriant 

splendor of the departing winter was there--the overtolerant world 

of pleasure, the scratch gathering a hostess can get together after 

a first introduction, the sort of society, in fact, in which great 

names and great shames jostle together in the same fierce quest of 

enjoyment.  The heat was increasing, and amid the overcrowded rooms 

the quadrille unrolled the cadenced symmetry of its figures.



"Very smart--the countess!" La Faloise continued at the garden door.  

"She's ten years younger than her daughter.  By the by, Foucarmont, 

you must decide on a point.  Vandeuvres once bet that she had no 

thighs."



This affectation of cynicism bored the other gentlemen, and 

Foucarmont contented himself by saying:



"Ask your cousin, dear boy.  Here he is."



"Jove, it's a happy thought!" cried La Faloise.  "I bet ten louis 

she has thighs."



Fauchery did indeed come up.  As became a constant inmate of the 

house, he had gone round by the dining room in order to avoid the 

crowded doors.  Rose had taken him up again at the beginning of the 

winter, and he was now dividing himself between the singer and the 

countess, but he was extremely fatigued and did not know how to get 

rid of one of them.  Sabine flattered his vanity, but Rose amused 

him more than she.  Besides, the passion Rose felt was a real one: 

her tenderness for him was marked by a conjugal fidelity which drove 

Mignon to despair.



"Listen, we want some information," said La Faloise as he squeezed 

his cousin's arm.  "You see that lady in white silk?"



Ever since his inheritance had given him a kind of insolent dash of 

manner he had affected to chaff Fauchery, for he had an old grudge 

to satisfy and wanted to be revenged for much bygone raillery, 

dating from the days when he was just fresh from his native 

province.



"Yes, that lady with the lace."



The journalist stood on tiptoe, for as yet he did not understand.



"The countess?" he said at last.



"Exactly, my good friend.  I've bet ten louis--now, has she thighs?"



And he fell a-laughing, for he was delighted to have succeeded in 

snubbing a fellow who had once come heavily down on him for asking 

whether the countess slept with anyone.  But Fauchery, without 

showing the very slightest astonishment, looked fixedly at him.



"Get along, you idiot!" he said finally as he shrugged his 

shoulders.



Then he shook hands with the other gentlemen, while La Faloise, in 

his discomfiture, felt rather uncertain whether he had said 

something funny.  The men chatted.  Since the races the banker and 

Foucarmont had formed part of the set in the Avenue de Villiers.  

Nana was going on much better, and every evening the count came and 

asked how she did.  Meanwhile Fauchery, though he listened, seemed 

preoccupied, for during a quarrel that morning Rose had roundly 

confessed to the sending of the letter.  Oh yes, he might present 

himself at his great lady's house; he would be well received!  After 

long hesitation he had come despite everything--out of sheer 

courage.  But La Faloise's imbecile pleasantry had upset him in 

spite of his apparent tranquillity.



"What's the matter?" asked Philippe.  "You seem in trouble."



"I do?  Not at all.  I've been working: that's why I came so late."



Then coldly, in one of those heroic moods which, although unnoticed, 

are wont to solve the vulgar tragedies of existence:



"All the same, I haven't made my bow to our hosts.  One must be 

civil."



He even ventured on a joke, for he turned to La Faloise and said:



"Eh, you idiot?"



And with that he pushed his way through the crowd.  The valet's full 

voice was no longer shouting out names, but close to the door the 

count and countess were still talking, for they were detained by 

ladies coming in.  At length he joined them, while the gentlemen who 

were still on the garden steps stood on tiptoe so as to watch the 

scene.  Nana, they thought, must have been chattering.



"The count hasn't noticed him," muttered Georges.  "Look out!  He's 

turning round; there, it's done!"



The band had again taken up the waltz in the Blonde Venus.  Fauchery 

had begun by bowing to the countess, who was still smiling in 

ecstatic serenity.  After which he had stood motionless a moment, 

waiting very calmly behind the count's back.  That evening the 

count's deportment was one of lofty gravity: he held his head high, 

as became the official and the great dignitary.  And when at last he 

lowered his gaze in the direction of the journalist he seemed still 

further to emphasize the majesty of his attitude.  For some seconds 

the two men looked at one another.  It was Fauchery who first 

stretched out his hand.  Muffat gave him his.  Their hands remained 

clasped, and the Countess Sabine with downcast eyes stood smiling 

before them, while the waltz continually beat out its mocking, 

vagabond rhythm.



"But the thing's going on wheels!" said Steiner.



"Are their hands glued together?" asked Foucarmont, surprised at 

this prolonged clasp.  A memory he could not forget brought a faint 

glow to Fanchery's pale cheeks, and in his mind's eye he saw the 

property room bathed in greenish twilight and filled with dusty 

bric-a-brac.  And Muffat was there, eggcup in hand, making a clever 

use of his suspicions.  At this moment Muffat was no longer 

suspicious, and the last vestige of his dignity was crumbling in 

ruin.  Fauchery's fears were assuaged, and when he saw the frank 

gaiety of the countess he was seized with a desire to laugh.  The 

thing struck him as comic.



"Aha, here she is at last!" cried La Faloise, who did not abandon a 

jest when he thought it a good one.  "D'you see Nana coming in over 

there?"



"Hold your tongue, do, you idiot!" muttered Philippe.



"But I tell you, it is Nana!  They're playing her waltz for her, by 

Jove!  She's making her entry.  And she takes part in the 

reconciliation, the devil she does!  What?  You don't see her?  

She's squeezing all three of 'em to her heart--my cousin Fauchery, 

my lady cousin and her husband, and she's calling 'em her dear 

kitties.  Oh, those family scenes give me a turn!"



Estelle had come up, and Fauchery complimented her while she stood 

stiffly up in her rose-colored dress, gazing at him with the 

astonished look of a silent child and constantly glancing aside at 

her father and mother.  Daguenet, too, exchanged a hearty shake of 

the hand with the journalist.  Together they made up a smiling 

group, while M. Venot came gliding in behind them.  He gloated over 

them with a beatified expression and seemed to envelop them in his 

pious sweetness, for he rejoiced in these last instances of self-

abandonment which were preparing the means of grace.



But the waltz still beat out its swinging, laughing, voluptuous 

measure; it was like a shrill continuation of the life of pleasure 

which was beating against the old house like a rising tide.  The 

band blew louder trills from their little flutes; their violins sent 

forth more swooning notes.  Beneath the Genoa velvet hangings, the 

gilding and the paintings, the lusters exhaled a living heat and a 

great glow of sunlight, while the crowd of guests, multiplied in the 

surrounding mirrors, seemed to grow and increase as the murmur of 

many voices rose ever louder.  The couples who whirled round the 

drawing room, arm about waist, amid the smiles of the seated ladies, 

still further accentuated the quaking of the floors.  In the garden 

a dull, fiery glow fell from the Venetian lanterns and threw a 

distant reflection of flame over the dark shadows moving in search 

of a breath of air about the walks at its farther end.  And this 

trembling of walls and this red glow of light seemed to betoken a 

great ultimate conflagration in which the fabric of an ancient honor 

was cracking and burning on every side.  The shy early beginnings of 

gaiety, of which Fauchery one April evening had heard the vocal 

expression in the sound of breaking glass, had little by little 

grown bolder, wilder, till they had burst forth in this festival.  

Now the rift was growing; it was crannying the house and announcing 

approaching downfall.  Among drunkards in the slums it is black 

misery, an empty cupboard, which put an end to ruined families; it 

is the madness of drink which empties the wretched beds.  Here the 

waltz tune was sounding the knell of an old race amid the suddenly 

ignited ruins of accumulated wealth, while Nana, although unseen, 

stretched her lithe limbs above the dancers' heads and sent 

corruption through their caste, drenching the hot air with the 

ferment of her exhalations and the vagabond lilt of the music.



On the evening after the celebration of the church marriage Count 

Muffat made his appearance in his wife's bedroom, where he had not 

entered for the last two years.  At first, in her great surprise, 

the countess drew back from him.  But she was still smiling the 

intoxicated smile which she now always wore.  He began stammering in 

extreme embarrassment; whereupon she gave him a short moral lecture.  

However, neither of them risked a decisive explanation.  It was 

religion, they pretended, which required this process of mutual 

forgiveness, and they agreed by a tacit understanding to retain 

their freedom.  Before going to bed, seeing that the countess still 

appeared to hesitate, they had a business conversation, and the 

count was the first to speak of selling the Bordes.  She consented 

at once.  They both stood in great want of money, and they would 

share and share alike.  This completed the reconciliation, and 

Muffat, remorseful though he was, felt veritably relieved.



That very day, as Nana was dozing toward two in the afternoon, Zoe 

made so bold as to knock at her bedroom door.  The curtains were 

drawn to, and a hot breath of wind kept blowing through a window 

into the fresh twilight stillness within.  During these last days 

the young woman had been getting up and about again, but she was 

still somewhat weak.  She opened her eyes and asked:



"Who is it?"



Zoe was about to reply, but Daguenet pushed by her and announced 

himself in person.  Nana forthwith propped herself up on her pillow 

and, dismissing the lady's maid:



"What!  Is that you?" she cried.  "On the day of your marriage?  

What can be the matter?"



Taken aback by the darkness, he stood still in the middle of the 

room.  However, he grew used to it and came forward at last.  He was 

in evening dress and wore a white cravat and gloves.



"Yes, to be sure, it's me!" he said.  "You don't remember?"



No, she remembered nothing, and in his chaffing way he had to offer 

himself frankly to her.



"Come now, here's your commission.  I've brought you the handsel of 

my innocence!"



And with that, as he was now by the bedside, she caught him in her 

bare arms and shook with merry laughter and almost cried, she 

thought it so pretty of him.



"Oh, that Mimi, how funny he is!  He's thought of it after all!  And 

to think I didn't remember it any longer!  So you've slipped off; 

you're just out of church.  Yes, certainly, you've got a scent of 

incense about you.  But kiss me, kiss me!  Oh, harder than that, 

Mimi dear!  Bah!  Perhaps it's for the last time."



In the dim room, where a vague odor of ether still lingered, their 

tender laughter died away suddenly.  The heavy, warm breeze swelled 

the window curtains, and children's voices were audible in the 

avenue without.  Then the lateness of the hour tore them asunder and 

set them joking again.  Daguenet took his departure with his wife 

directly after the breakfast.


