




CHAPTER II





At ten o'clock the next morning Nana was still asleep.  She occupied 

the second floor of a large new house in the Boulevard Haussmann, 

the landlord of which let flats to single ladies in order by their 

means to dry the paint.  A rich merchant from Moscow, who had come 

to pass a winter in Paris, had installed her there after paying six 

months' rent in advance.  The rooms were too big for her and had 

never been completely furnished.  The vulgar sumptuosity of gilded 

consoles and gilded chairs formed a crude contrast therein to the 

bric-a-brac of a secondhand furniture shop--to mahogany round 

tables, that is to say, and zinc candelabras, which sought to 

imitate Florentine bronze.  All of which smacked of the courtesan 

too early deserted by her first serious protector and fallen back on 

shabby lovers, of a precarious first appearance of a bad start, 

handicapped by refusals of credit and threats of eviction.



Nana was sleeping on her face, hugging in her bare arms a pillow in 

which she was burying cheeks grown pale in sleep.  The bedroom and 

the dressing room were the only two apartments which had been 

properly furnished by a neighboring upholsterer.  A ray of light, 

gliding in under a curtain, rendered visible rosewood furniture and 

hangings and chairbacks of figured damask with a pattern of big blue 

flowers on a gray ground.  But in the soft atmosphere of that 

slumbering chamber Nana suddenly awoke with a start, as though 

surprised to find an empty place at her side.  She looked at the 

other pillow lying next to hers; there was the dint of a human head 

among its flounces: it was still warm.  And groping with one hand, 

she pressed the knob of an electric bell by her bed's head.



"He's gone then?" she asked the maid who presented herself.



"Yes, madame, Monsieur Paul went away not ten minutes back.  As 

Madame was tired, he did not wish to wake her.  But he ordered me to 

tell Madame that he would come tomorrow."



As she spoke Zoe, the lady's maid, opened the outer shutter.  A 

flood of daylight entered.  Zoe, a dark brunette with hair in little 

plaits, had a long canine face, at once livid and full of seams, a 

snub nose, thick lips and two black eyes in continual movement.



"Tomorrow, tomorrow," repeated Nana, who was not yet wide awake, "is 

tomorrow the day?"



"Yes, madame, Monsieur Paul has always come on the Wednesday."



"No, now I remember," said the young woman, sitting up.  "It's all 

changed.  I wanted to tell him so this morning.  He would run 

against the nigger!  We should have a nice to-do!"



"Madame did not warn me; I couldn't be aware of it," murmured Zoe.  

"When Madame changes her days she will do well to tell me so that I 

may know.  Then the old miser is no longer due on the Tuesday?"



Between themselves they were wont thus gravely to nickname as "old 

miser" and "nigger" their two paying visitors, one of whom was a 

tradesman of economical tendencies from the Faubourg Saint-Denis, 

while the other was a Walachian, a mock count, whose money, paid 

always at the most irregular intervals, never looked as though it 

had been honestly come by.  Daguenet had made Nana give him the days 

subsequent to the old miser's visits, and as the trader had to be at 

home by eight o'clock in the morning, the young man would watch for 

his departure from Zoes kitchen and would take his place, which was 

still quite warm, till ten o'clock.  Then he, too, would go about 

his business.  Nana and he were wont to think it a very comfortable 

arrangement.



"So much the worse," said Nana; "I'll write to him this afternoon.  

And if he doesn't receive my letter, then tomorrow you will stop him 

coming in."



In the meantime Zoe was walking softly about the room.  She spoke of 

yesterday's great hit.  Madame had shown such talent; she sang so 

well!  Ah! Madame need not fret at all now!



Nana, her elbow dug into her pillow, only tossed her head in reply.  

Her nightdress had slipped down on her shoulders, and her hair, 

unfastened and entangled, flowed over them in masses.



"Without doubt," she murmured, becoming thoughtful; "but what's to 

be done to gain time?  I'm going to have all sorts of bothers today.  

Now let's see, has the porter come upstairs yet this morning?"



Then both the women talked together seriously.  Nana owed three 

quarters' rent; the landlord was talking of seizing the furniture.  

Then, too, there was a perfect downpour of creditors; there was a 

livery-stable man, a needlewoman, a ladies' tailor, a charcoal 

dealer and others besides, who came every day and settled themselves 

on a bench in the little hall.  The charcoal dealer especially was a 

dreadful fellow--he shouted on the staircase.  But Nana's greatest 

cause of distress was her little Louis, a child she had given birth 

to when she was sixteen and now left in charge of a nurse in a 

village in the neighborhood of Rambouillet.  This woman was 

clamoring for the sum of three hundred francs before she would 

consent to give the little Louis back to her.  Nana, since her last 

visit to the child, had been seized with a fit of maternal love and 

was desperate at the thought that she could not realize a project, 

which had now become a hobby with her.  This was to pay off the 

nurse and to place the little man with his aunt, Mme Lerat, at the 

Batignolles, whither she could go and see him as often as she liked.



Meanwhile the lady's maid kept hinting that her mistress ought to 

have confided her necessities to the old miser.



"To be sure, I told him everything," cried Nana, "and he told me in 

answer that he had too many big liabilities.  He won't go beyond his 

thousand francs a month.  The nigger's beggared just at present; I 

expect he's lost at play.  As to that poor Mimi, he stands in great 

need of a loan himself; a fall in stocks has cleaned him out--he 

can't even bring me flowers now."



She was speaking of Daguenet.  In the self-abandonment of her 

awakening she had no secrets from Zoe, and the latter, inured to 

such confidences, received them with respeciful sympathy.  Since 

Madame condescended to speak to her of her affairs she would permit 

herself to say what she thought.  Besides, she was very fond of 

Madame; she had left Mme Blanche for the express purpose of taking 

service with her, and heaven knew Mme Blanche was straining every 

nerve to have her again!  Situations weren't lacking; she was pretty 

well known, but she would have stayed with Madame even in narrow 

circumstances, because she believed in Madame's future.  And she 

concluded by stating her advice with precision.  When one was young 

one often did silly things.  But this time it was one's duty to look 

alive, for the men only thought of having their fun.  Oh dear, yes!  

Things would right themselves.  Madame had only to say one word in 

order to quiet her creditors and find the money she stood in need 

of.



"All that doesn't help me to three hundred francs," Nana kept 

repeating as she plunged her fingers into the vagrant convolutions 

of her back hair.  "I must have three hundred francs today, at once!  

It's stupid not to know anyone who'll give you three hundred 

francs."



She racked her brains.  She would have sent Mme Lerat, whom she was 

expecting that very morning, to Rambouillet.  The counteraction of 

her sudden fancy spoiled for her the triumph of last night.  Among 

all those men who had cheered her, to think that there wasn't one to 

bring her fifteen louis!  And then one couldn't accept money in that 

way!  Dear heaven, how unfortunate she was!  And she kept harking 

back again to the subject of her baby--he had blue eyes like a 

cherub's; he could lisp "Mamma" in such a funny voice that you were 

ready to die of laughing!



But at this moment the electric bell at the outer door was heard to 

ring with its quick and tremulous vibration.  Zoe returned, 

murmuring with a confidential air:



"It's a woman."



She had seen this woman a score of times, only she made believe 

never to recognize her and to be quite ignorant of the nature of her 

relations with ladies in difficulties.



"She has told me her name--Madame Tricon."



"The Tricon," cried Nana.  "Dear me!  That's true.  I'd forgotten 

her.  Show her in."



Zoe ushered in a tall old lady who wore ringlets and looked like a 

countess who haunts lawyers' offices.  Then she effaced herself, 

disappearing noiselessly with the lithe, serpentine movement 

wherewith she was wont to withdraw from a room on the arrival of a 

gentleman.  However, she might have stayed.  The Tricon did not even 

sit down.  Only a brief exchange of words took place.



"I have someone for you today.  Do you care about it?"



"Yes.  How much?"



"Twenty louis."



"At what o'clock?"



"At three.  It's settled then?"



"It's settled."



Straightway the Tricon talked of the state of the weather.  It was 

dry weather, pleasant for walking.  She had still four or five 

persons to see.  And she took her departure after consulting a small 

memorandum book.  When she was once more alone Nana appeared 

comforted.  A slight shiver agitated her shoulders, and she wrapped 

herself softly up again in her warm bedclothes with the lazy 

movements of a cat who is susceptible to cold.  Little by little her 

eyes closed, and she lay smiling at the thought of dressing Louiset 

prettily on the following day, while in the slumber into which she 

once more sank last night's long, feverish dream of endlessly 

rolling applause returned like a sustained accompaniment to music 

and gently soothed her lassitude.



At eleven o'clock, when Zoe showed Mme Lerat into the room, Nana was 

still asleep.  But she woke at the noise and cried out at once:



"It's you.  You'll go to Rambouillet today?"



"That's what I've come for," said the aunt.  "There's a train at 

twenty past twelve.  I've got time to catch it."



"No, I shall only have the money by and by," replied the young 

woman, stretching herself and throwing out her bosom.  "You'll have 

lunch, and then we'll see."



Zoe brought a dressing jacket.



"The hairdresser's here, madame," she murmured.



But Nana did not wish to go into the dressing room.  And she herself 

cried out:



"Come in, Francis."



A well-dressed man pushed open the door and bowed.  Just at that 

moment Nana was getting out of bed, her bare legs in full view.  But 

she did not hurry and stretched her hands out so as to let Zoe draw 

on the sleeves of the dressing jacket.  Francis, on his part, was 

quite at his ease and without turning away waited with a sober 

expression on his face.



"Perhaps Madame has not seen the papers.  There's a very nice 

article in the Figaro."



He had brought the journal.  Mme Lerat put on her spectacles and 

read the article aloud, standing in front of the window as she did 

so.  She had the build of a policeman, and she drew herself up to 

her full height, while her nostrils seemed to compress themselves 

whenever she uttered a gallant epithet.  It was a notice by 

Fauchery, written just after the performance, and it consisted of a 

couple of very glowing columns, full of witty sarcasm about the 

artist and of broad admiration for the woman.



"Excellent!" Francis kept repeating.



Nana laughed good-humoredly at his chaffing her about her voice!  He 

was a nice fellow, was that Fauchery, and she would repay him for 

his charming style of writing.  Mme Lerat, after having reread the 

notice, roundly declared that the men all had the devil in their 

shanks, and she refused to explain her self further, being fully 

satisfied with a brisk allusion of which she alone knew the meaning her in an income of six hundred

francs a year.  Nana 

promised to rent some pretty little lodgings for her and to give her 

a hundred francs a month besides.  At the mention of this sum the 

aunt forgot herself and shrieked to her niece, bidding her squeeze 

their throats, since she had them in her grasp.  She was meaning the 

men, of course.  Then they both embraced again, but i.  

Francis finished turning up and fastening Nana's hair.  He bowed and 

said:



"I'll keep my eye on the evening papers.  At half-past five as 

usual, eh?"



"Bring me a pot of pomade and a pound of burnt almonds from 

Boissier's," Nana cried to him across the drawing room just as he 

was shutting the door after him.



Then the two women, once more alone, recollected that they had not 

embraced, and they planted big kisses on each other's cheeks.  The 

notice warmed their hearts.  Nana, who up till now had been half 

asleep, was again seized with the fever of her triumph.  Dear, dear, 

'twas Rose Mignon that would be spending a pleasant morning!  Her 

aunt having been unwilling to go to the theater because, as she 

averred, sudden emotions ruined her stomach, Nana set herself to 

describe the events of the evening and grew intoxicated at her own 

recital, as though all Paris had been shaken to the ground by the 

applause.  Then suddenly interrupting herself, she asked with a 

laugh if one would ever have imagined it all when she used to go 

traipsing about the Rue de la Goutte-d'Or.  Mme Lerat shook her 

head.  No, no, one never could have foreseen it!  And she began 

talking in her turn, assuming a serious air as she did so and 

calling Nana "daughter."  Wasn't she a second mother to her since 

the first had gone to rejoin Papa and Grandmamma?  Nana was greatly 

softened and on the verge of tears.  But Mme Lerat declared that the 

past was the past--oh yes, to be sure, a dirty past with things in 

it which it was as well not to stir up every day.  She had left off 

seeing her niece for a long time because among the family she was 

accused of ruining herself along with the little thing.  Good God, 

as though that were possible!  She didn't ask for confidences; she 

believed that Nana had always lived decently, and now it was enough 

for her to have found her again in a fine position and to observe 

her kind feelings toward her son.  Virtue and hard work were still 

the only things worth anything in this world.



"Who is the baby's father?" she said, interrupting herself, her eyes 

lit up with an exhad crossed two knives on the 

table in front of her.  Notwithstanding this, the young woman 

defended herself from the charge of superstition.  Thus, if the salt 

were upset, it meant nothing, even on a Friday; but when it came to 

knives, that was too much of a good thing; that had never proved 

fallacious.  There could be no doubt that something unpleasant was 

going to happen to her.  She yawned, and then with an air, of 

profound boredom:



"Two o'clock already.  I must go out.  What a nuisance!"



The two old ladies looked at one another.  The three women shook 

their heads without speaking.  To be sure, life was not always 

amusing.  Nana had tilted her chair back anew and lit a cigarette, 

while the others sat pursing up their lips discreetly, thinking 

deeply philosophic thoughts.



"While waiting for you to return we'll play a game of bezique," said 

Mme Maloir after a short silence.  "Does Madame play bezique?"



Certainly Mme Lerat played it, and that to perfection.  It was no 

good troubling Zoe, who had vanished--a corner of the table would do 

quite well.  And they pushepression of acute curiosity.



Nana was taken by surprise and hesitated a moment.



"A gentleman," she replied.



"There now!" rejoined the aunt.  "They declared that you had him by 

a stonemason who was in the habit of beating you.  Indeed, you shall 

tell me all about it someday; you know I'm discreet!  Tut, tut, I'll 

look after him as though he were a prince's son."



She had retired from business as a florist and was living on her 

savings, which she had got together sou by sou, till now they 

broughtn the midst of 

her rejoicing Nana's face, as she led the talk back to the subject 

of Louiset, seemed to be overshadowed by a sudden recollection.



"Isn't it a bore I've got to go out at three o'clock?" she muttered.  

"It IS a nuisance!"



Just then Zoe came in to say that lunch was on the table.  They went 

into the dining room, where an old lady was already seated at table.  

She had not taken her hat off, and she wore a dark dress of an 

indecisive color midway between puce and goose dripping.  Nana did 

not seem surprised at sight of her.  She simply asked her why she 

hadn't come into the bedroom.



"I heard voices," replied the old lady.  "I thought you had 

company."



Mme Maloir, a respectable-looking and mannerly woman, was Nana's old 

friend, chaperon and companion.  Mme Lerat's presence seemed to 

fidget her at first.  Afterward, when she became aware that it was 

Nana's aunt, she looked at her with a sweet expression and a die-

away smile.  In the meantime Nana, who averred that she was as 

hungry as a wolf, threw herself on the radishes and gobbled them up 

without bread.  Mme Lerat had become ceremonious; she refused the 

radishes as provocative of phlegm.  By and by when Zoe had brought 

in the cutlets Nana just chipped the meat and contented herself with 

sucking the bones.  Now and again she scrutinized her old friend's 

hat out of the corners of her eyes.



"It's the new hat I gave you?" she ended by saying.



"Yes, I made it up," murmured Mme Maloir, her mouth full of meat.



The hat was smart to distraction.  In front it was greatly 

exaggerated, and it was adorned with a lofty feather.  Mme Maloir 

had a mania for doing up all her hats afresh; she alone knew what 

really became her, and with a few stitches she could manufacture a 

toque out of the most elegant headgear.  Nana, who had bought her 

this very hat in order not to be ashamed of her when in her company 

out of doors, was very near being vexed.



"Push it up, at any rate," she cried.



"No, thank you," replied the old lady with dignity.  "It doesn't get 

in my way; I can eat very comfortably as it is."



After the cutlets came cauliflowers and the remains of a cold 

chicken.  But at the arrival of each successive dish Nana made a 

little face, hesitated, sniffed and left her plateful untouched.  

She finished her lunch with the help of preserve.



Dessert took a long time.  Zoe did not remove the cloth before 

serving the coffee.  Indeed, the ladies simply pushed back their 

plates before taking it.  They talked continually of yesterday's 

charming evening.  Nana kept rolling cigarettes, which she smoked, 

swinging up and down on her backward-tilted chair.  And as Zoe had 

remained behind and was lounging idly against the sideboard, it came 

about that the company were favored with her history.  She said she 

was the daughter of a midwife at Bercy who had failed in business.  

First of all she had taken service with a dentist and after that 

with an insurance agent, but neither place suited her, and she 

thereupon enumerated, not without a certain amount of pride, the 

names of the ladies with whom she had served as lady's maid.  Zoe 

spoke of these ladies as one who had had the making of their 

fortunes.  It was very certain that without her more than one would 

have had some queer tales to tell.  Thus one day, when Mme Blanche 

was with M. Octave, in came the old gentleman.  What did Zoe do?  

She made believe to tumble as she crossed the drawing room; the old 

boy rushed up to her assistance, flew to the kitchen to fetch her a 

glass of water, and M. Octave slipped away.



"Oh, she's a good girl, you bet!" said Nana, who was listening to 

her with tender interest and a sort of submissive admiration.



"Now I've had my troubles," began Mme Lerat.  And edging up to Mme 

Maloir, she imparted to her certain confidential confessions.  Both 

ladies took lumps of sugar dipped in cognac and sucked them.  But 

Mme Maloir was wont to listen to other people's secrets without even 

confessing anything concerning herself.  People said that she lived 

on a mysterious allowance in a room whither no one ever penetrated.



All of a sudden Nana grew excited.



"Don't play with the knives, Aunt.  You know it gives me a turn!"



Without thinking about it Mme Lerat d back the tablecloth over the dirty 

plates.  But as Mme Maloir was herself going to take the cards out 

of a drawer in the sideboard, Nana remarked that before she sat down 

to her game it would be very nice of her if she would write her a 

letter.  It bored Nana to write letters; besides, she was not sure 

of her spelling, while her old friend could turn out the most 

feeling epistles.  She ran to fetch some good note paper in her 

bedroom.  An inkstand consisting of a bottle of ink worth about 

three sous stood untidily on one of the pieces of furniture, with a 

pen deep in rust beside it.  The letter was for Daguenet.  Mme 

Maloir herself wrote in her bold English hand, "My darling little 

man," and then she told him not to come tomorrow because "that could 

not be" but hastened to add that "she was with him in thought at 

every moment of the day, whether she were near or far away."



"And I end with 'a thousand kisses,'" she murmured.



Mme Lerat had shown her approval of each phrase with an emphatic 

nod.  Her eyes were sparkling; she loved to find herself in the 

midst of love affairs.  Nay, she was seized with a desire to add 

some words of her own and, assuming a tender look and cooing like a 

dove, she suggested:



"A thousand kisses on thy beautiful eyes."



"That's the thing: 'a thousand kisses on thy beautiful eyes'!"  Nana 

repeated, while the two old ladies assumed a beatified expression.



Zoe was rung for and told to take the letter down to a 

commissionaire.  She had just been talking with the theater 

messenger, who had brought her mistress the day's playbill and 

rehearsal arrangements, which he had forgotten in the morning.  Nana 

had this individual ushered in and got him to take the latter to 

Daguenet on his return.  Then she put questions to him.  Oh yes!  M. 

Bordenave was very pleased; people had already taken seats for a 

week to come; Madame had no idea of the number of people who had 

been asking her address since morning.  When the man had taken his 

departure Nana announced that at most she would only be out half an 

hour.  If there were any visitors Zoe would make them wait.  As she 

spoke the electric bell sounded.  It was a creditor in the shape of 

the man of whom she jobbed her carriages.  He had settled himself on 

the bench in the anteroom, and the fellow was free to twiddle his 

thumbs till night--there wasn't the least hurry now.



"Come, buck up!" said Nana, still torpid with laziness and yawning 

and stretching afresh.  "I ought to be there now!"



Yet she did not budge but kept watching the play of her aunt, who 

had just announced four aces.  Chin on hand, she grew quite 

engrossed in it but gave a violent start on hearing three o'clock 

strike.



"Good God!" she cried roughly.



Then Mme Maloir, who was counting the tricks she had won with her 

tens and aces, said cheeringly to her in her soft voice:



"It would be better, dearie, to give up your expedition at once."



"No, be quick about it," said Mme Lerat, shuffling the cards.  "I 

shall take the half-past four o'clock train if you're back here with 

the money before four o'clock."



"Oh, there'll be no time lost," she murmured.



Ten minutes after Zoe helped her on with a dress and a hat.  It 

didn't matter much if she were badly turned out.  Just as she was 

about to go downstairs there was a new ring at the bell.  This time 

it was the charcoal dealer.  Very well, he might keep the livery-

stable keeper company--it would amuse the fellows.  Only, as she 

dreaded a scene, she crossed the kitchen and made her escape by the 

back stairs.  She often went that way and in return had only to lift 

up her flounces.



"When one is a good mother anything's excusable," said Mme Maloir 

sententiously when left alone with Mme Lerat.



"Four kings," replied this lady, whom the play greatly excited.



And they both plunged into an interminable game.



The table had not been cleared.  The smell of lunch and the 

cigarette smoke filled the room with an ambient, steamy vapor.  The 

two ladies had again set to work dipping lumps of sugar in brandy 

and sucking the same.  For twenty minutes at least they played and 

sucked simultaneously when, the electric bell having rung a third 

time, Zoe bustled into the room and roughly disturbed them, just as 

if they had been her own friends.



"Look here, that's another ring.  You can't stay where you are.  If 

many foiks call I must have the whole flat.  Now off you go, off you 

go!"



Mme Maloir was for finishing the game, but Zoe looked as if she was 

going to pounce down on the cards, and so she decided to carry them 

off without in any way altering their positions, while Mme Lerat 

undertook the removal of the brandy bottle, the glasses and the 

sugar.  Then they both scudded to the kitchen, where they installed 

themselves at the table in an empty space between the dishcloths, 

which were spread out to dry, and the bowl still full of dishwater.



"We said it was three hundred and forty.  It's your turn."



"I play hearts."



When Zoe returned she found them once again absorbed.  After a 

silence, as Mme Lerat was shuffling, Mme Maloir asked who it was.



"Oh, nobody to speak of," replied the servant carelessly; "a slip of 

a lad!  I wanted to send him away again, but he's such a pretty boy 

with never a hair on his chin and blue eyes and a girl's face!  So I 

told him to wait after all.  He's got an enormous bouquet in his 

hand, which he never once consented to put down.  One would like to 

catch him one--a brat like that who ought to be at school still!"



Mme Lerat went to fetch a water bottle to mix herself some brandy 

and water, the lumps of sugar having rendered her thirsty.  Zoe 

muttered something to the effect that she really didn't mind if she 

drank something too.  Her mouth, she averred, was as bitter as gall.



"So you put him--?" continued Mme Maloir.



"Oh yes, I put him in the closet at the end of the room, the little 

unfurnished one.  There's only one of my lady's trunks there and a 

table.  It's there I stow the lubbers."



And she was putting plenty of sugar in her grog when the electric 

bell made her jump.  Oh, drat it all!  Wouldn't they let her have a 

drink in peace?  If they were to have a peal of bells things 

promised well.  Nevertheless, she ran off to open the door.  

Returning presently, she saw Mme Maloir questioning her with a 

glance.



"It's nothing," she said, "only a bouquet."



All three refreshed themselves, nodding to each other in token of 

salutation.  Then while Zoe was at length busy clearing the table, 

bringing the plates out one by one and putting them in the sink, two 

other rings followed close upon one another.  But they weren't 

serious, for while keeping the kitchen informed of what was going on 

she twice repeated her disdainful expression:



"Nothing, only a bouquet."



Notwithstanding which, the old ladies laughed between two of their 

tricks when they heard her describe the looks of the creditors in 

the anteroom after the flowers had arrived.  Madame would find her 

bouquets on her toilet table.  What a pity it was they cost such a 

lot and that you could only get ten sous for them!  Oh dear, yes, 

plenty of money was wasted!



"For my part," said Mme Maloir, "I should be quite content if every 

day of my life I got what the men in Paris had spent on flowers for 

the women."



"Now, you know, you're not hard to please," murmured Mme Lerat.  

"Why, one would have only just enough to buy thread with.  Four 

queens, my dear."



It was ten minutes to four.  Zoe was astonished, could not 

understand why her mistress was out so long.  Ordinarily when Madame 

found herself obliged to go out in the afternoons she got it over in 

double-quick time.  But Mme Maloir declared that one didn't always 

manage things as one wished.  Truly, life was beset with obstacles, 

averred Mme Lerat.  The best course was to wait.  If her niece was 

long in coming it was because her occupations detained her; wasn't 

it so?  Besides, they weren't overworked--it was comfortable in the 

kitchen.  And as hearts were out, Mme Lerat threw down diamonds.



The bell began aga in 

her small gloved hands.



It was too late now--Mme Lerat would not go to Rambouillet till 

tomorrow, and Nana entered into long explanations.



"There's company waiting for you," the lady's maid repeated.



But Nana grew excited again.  The company might wait: she'd go to 

them all in good time when she'd finished.  And as her aunt began 

putting her hand out for the money:



"Ah no!  Not all of it," she said.  "Three hundred francs for the 

nurse, fifty for your journey and expenses, that's three hundred and 

fifty.  Fifty francs I keep."



The big difficulty was how to find change.  There were not ten 

francs in the house.  But they did not even address themselves to 

Mme Maloir who, never having more than a six-sou omnibus fair upon 

her, was listening in quite a disinterested manner.  At length Zoe 

went out of the room, remarking that she would go and looin, and when Zoe reappeared she was burning

with 

excitement.



"My children, it's fat Steiner!" she said in the doorway, lowering 

her voice as she spoke.  "I've put HIM in the little sitting room."



Thereupon Mme Maloir spoke about the banker to Mme Lerat, who knew 

no such gentleman.  Was he getting ready to give Rose Mignon the go-

by?  Zoe shook her head; she knew a thing or two.  But once more she 

had to go and open the door.



"Here's bothers!" she murmured when she came back.  "It's the 

nigger!  'Twasn't any good telling him that my lady's gone out, and 

so he's settled himself in the bedroom.  We only expected him this 

evening."



At a quarter past four Nana was not in yet.  What could she be 

after?  It was silly of her!  Two other bouquets were brought round, 

and Zoe, growing bored looked to see if there were any coffee left.  

Yes, the ladies would willingly finish off the coffee; it would 

waken them up.  Sitting hunched up on their chairs, they were 

beginning to fall asleep through dint of constantly taking their 

cards between their fingers with the accustomed movement.  The half-

hour sounded.  Something must decidedly have happened to Madame.  

And they began whispering to each other.



Suddenly Mme Maloir forgot herself and in a ringing voice announced: 

"I've the five hundred!  Trumps, Major Quint!"



"Oh, do be quiet!" said Zoe angrily.  "What will all those gentlemen 

think?"  And in the silence which ensued and amid the whispered 

muttering of the two old women at strife over their game, the sound 

of rapid footsteps ascended from the back stairs.  It was Nana at 

last.  Before she had opened the door her breathlessness became 

audible.  She bounced abruptly in, looking very red in the face.  

Her skirt, the string of which must have been broken, was trailing 

over the stairs, and her flounces had just been dipped in a puddle 

of something unpleasant which had oozed out on the landing of the 

first floor, where the servant girl was a regular slut.



"Here you are!  It's lucky!" said Mme Lerat, pursing up her lips, 

for she was still vexed at Mme Maloir's "five hundred."  "You may 

flatter yourself at the way you keep folks waiting."



"Madame isn't reasonable; indeed, she isn't!" added Zoe.



Nana was already harassed, and these reproaches exasperated her.  

Was that the way people received her after the worry she had gone 

through?



"Will you blooming well leave me alone, eh?" she cried.



"Hush, ma'am, there are people in there," said the maid.



Then in lower tones the young Woman stuttered breathlessly:



"D'you suppose I've been having a good time?  Why, there was no end 

to it.  I should have liked to see you there!  I was boiling with 

rage!  I felt inclined to smack somebody.  And never a cab to come 

home in!  Luckily it's only a step from here, but never mind that; I 

did just run home."



"You have the money?" asked the aunt.



"Dear, dear!  That question!" rejoined Nana.



She had sat herself down on a chair close up against the stove, for 

her legs had failed her after so much running, and without stopping 

to take breath she drew from behind her stays an envelope in which 

there were four hundred-franc notes.  They were visible through a 

large rent she had torn with savage fingers in order to be sure of 

the contents.  The three women round about her stared fixedly at the 

envelope, a big, crumpled, dirty receptacle, as it lay claspedk in her 

box, and she brought back a hundred francs in hundred-sou pieces.  

They were counted out on a corner of the table, and Mme Lerat took 

her departure at once after having promised to bring Louiset back 

with her the following day.



"You say there's company there?" continued Nana, still sitting on 

the chair and resting herself.



"Yes, madame, three people."



And Zoe mentioned the banker first.  Nana made a face.  Did that man 

Steiner think she was going to let herself be bored because he had 

thrown her a bouquet yesterday evening?



"Besides, I've had enough of it," she declared.  "I shan't receive 

today.  Go and say you don't expect me now."



"Madame will think the matter over; Madame will receive Monsieur 

Steiner," murmured Zoe gravely, without budging from her place.  She 

was annoyed to see her mistress on the verge of committing another 

foolish mistake.



Then she mentioned the Walachian, who ought by now to find time 

hanging heavy on his hands in the bedroom.  Whereupon Nana grew 

furious and more obstinate than ever.  No, she would see nobody, 

nobody!  Who'd sent her such a blooming leech of a man?



"Chuck 'em all out!  I--I'm going to play a game of bezique with 

Madame Maloir.  I prefer doing that."



The bell interrupted her remarks.  That was the last straw.  Another 

of the beggars yet!  She forbade Zoe to go and open the door, but 

the latter had left the kitchen without listening to her, and when 

she reappeared she brought back a couple of cards and said 

authoritatively:



"I told them that Madame was receiving visitors.  The gentlemen are 

in the drawing room."



Nana had sprung up, raging, but the names of the Marquis de Chouard 

and of Count Muffat de Beuville, which were inscribed on the cards, 

calmed her down.  For a moment or two she remained silent.



"Who are they?" she asked at last.  "You know them?"



"I know the old fellow," replied Zoe, discreetly pursing up her 

lips.



And her mistress continuing to question her with her eyes, she added 

simply:



"I've seen him somewhere."



This remark seemed to decide the young woman.  Regretfully she left 

the kitchen, that asylum of steaming warmth, where you could talk 

and take your ease amid the pleasant fumes of the coffeepot which 

was being kept warm over a handful of glowing embers.  She left Mme 

Maloir behind her.  That lady was now busy reading her fortune by 

the cards; she had never yet taken her hat off, but now in order to 

be more at her ease she undid the strings and threw them back over 

her shoulders.



In the dressing room, where Zoe rapidly helped her on with a tea 

gown, Nana revenged herself for the way in which they were all 

boring her by muttering quiet curses upon the male sex.  These big 

words caused the lady's maid not a little distress, for she saw with 

pain that her mistress was not rising superior to her origin as 

quickly as she could have desired.  She even made bold to beg Madame 

to calm herself.



"You bet," was Nana's crude answer; "they're swine; they glory in 

that sort of thing."



Nevertheless, she assumed her princesslike manner, as she was wont 

to call it.  But just when she was turning to go into the drawing 

room Zoe held her back and herself introduced the Marquis de Chouard 

and the Count Muffat into the dressing room.  It was much better so.



"I regret having kept you waiting, gentlemen," said the young woman 

with studied politeness.



The two men bowed and seated themselves.  A blind of embroidered 

tulle kept the little room in twilight.  It was the most elegant 

chamber in the flat, for it was hung with some light-colored fabric 

and contained a cheval glass framed in inlaid wood, a lounge chair 

and some others with arms and blue satin upholsteries.  On the 

toilet table the bouquets--roses, lilacs and hyacinths--appeared 

like a very ruin of flowers.  Their perfume was strong and 

penetrating, while through the dampish air of the place, which was 

full of the spoiled exhalations of the washstand, came occasional 

whiffs of a more pungent scent, the scent of some grains or dry 

patchouli ground to fine powder at the bottom of a cup.  And as she 

gathered herself together and drew up her dressing jacket, which had 

been ill fastened, Nana had all the appearance of having been 

surprised at her toilet: her skin was still damp; she smiled and 

looked quite startled amid her frills and laces.



"Madame, you will pardon our insistence," said the Count Muffat 

gravely.  "We come on a quest.  Monsieur and I are members of the 

Benevolent Organization of the district."



The Marquis de Chouard hastened gallantly to add:



"When we learned that a great artiste lived in this house we 

promised ourselves that we would put the claims of our poor people 

before her in a very special manner.  Talent is never without a 

heart."



Nana pretended to be modest.  She answered them with little 

assenting movements of her head, making rapid reflections at the 

same time.  It must be the old man that had brought the other one: 

he had such wicked eyes.  And yet the other was not to be trusted 

either: the veins near his temples were so queerly puffed up.  He 

might quite well have come by himself.  Ah, now that she thought of 

it, it was this way: the porter had given them her name, and they 

had egged one another on, each with his own ends in view.



"Most certainly, gentlemen, you were quite right to come up," she 

said with a very good grace.



But the electric bell made her tremble again.  Another call, and 

that Zoe always opening the door!  She went on:



"One is only too happy to be able to give."



At bottom she was flattered.



"Ah, madame," rejoined the marquis, "if only you knew about it! 

there's such misery!  Our district has more than three thousand poor 

people in it, and yet it's one of the richest.  You cannot picture 

to yourself anything like the present distress--children with no 

bread, women ill, utterly without assistance, perishing of the 

cold!"



"The poor souls!" cried Nana, very much moved.



Such was her feeling of compassion that tears flooded her fine eyes.  

No longer studying deportment, she leaned forward with a quick 

movement, and under her open dressing jacket her neck became 

visible, while the bent position of her knees served to outline the 

rounded contour of the thigh under the thin fabric of her skirt.  A 

little flush of blood appeared in the marquis's cadaverous cheeks.  

Count Muffat, who was on the point of speaking, lowered his eyes.  

The air of that little room was too hot: it had the close, heavy 

warmth of a greenhouse.  The roses were withering, and intoxicating 

odors floated up from the patchouli in the cup.



"One would like to be very rich on occasions like this," added Nana.  

"Well, well, we each do what we can.  Believe me, gentlemen, if I 

had known--"



She was on the point of being guilty of a silly speech, so melted 

was she at heart.  But she did not end her sentence and for a moment 

was worried at not being able to remember where she had put her 

fifty francs on changing her dress.  But she recollected at last: 

they must be on the corner of her toilet table under an inverted 

pomatum pot.  As she was in the act of rising the bell sounded for 

quite a long time.  Capital!  Another of them still!  It would never 

end.  The count and the marquis had both risen, too, and the ears of 

the latter seemed to be pricked up and, as it were, pointing toward 

the door; doubtless he knew that kind of ring.  Muffat looked at 

him; then they averted their gaze mutually.  They felt awkward and 

once more assumed their frigid bearing, the one looking square-set 

and solid with his thick head of hair, the other drawing back his 

lean shoulders, over which fell his fringe of thin white locks.



"My faith," said Nana, bringing the ten big silver pieces and quite 

determined to laugh about it, "I am going to entrust you with this, 

gentlemen.  It is for the poor."



And the adorable little dimple in her chin became apparent.  She 

assumed her favorite pose, her amiable baby expression, as she held 

the pile of five-franc pieces on her open palm and offered it to the 

men, as though she were saying to them, "Now then, who wants some?"  

The count was the sharper of the two.  He took fifty francs but left 

one piece behind and, in order to gain possession of it, had to pick 

it off the young woman's very skin, a moist, supple skin, the touch 

of which sent a thrill through him.  She was thoroughly merry and 

did not cease laughing.



"Come, gentlemen," she continued.  "Another time I hope to give 

more."



The gentlemen no longer had any pretext for staying, and they bowed 

and went toward the door.  But just as they were about to go out the 

bell rang anew.  The marquis could not conceal a faint smile, while 

a frown made the count look more grave than before.  Nana detained 

them some seconds so as to give Zoe time to find yet another corner 

for the newcomers.  She did not relish meetings at her house.  Only 

this time the whole place must be packed!  She was therefore much 

relieved when she saw the drawing room empty and asked herself 

whether Zoe had really stuffed them into the cupboards.



"Au revoir, gentlemen," she said, pausing on the threshold of the 

drawing room.



It was as though she lapped them in her laughing smile and clear, 

unclouded glance.  The Count Muffat bowed slightly.  Despite his 

great social experience he felt that he had lost his equilibrium.  

He needed air; he was overcome with the dizzy feeling engendered in 

that dressing room with a scent of flowers, with a feminine essence 

which choked him.  And behind his back, the Marquis de Chouard, who 

was sure that he could not be seen, made so bold as to wink at Nana, 

his whole face suddenly altering its expression as he did so, and 

his tongue nigh lolling from his mouth.



When the young woman re-entered the little room, where Zoe was 

awaiting her with letters and visiting cards, she cried out, 

laughing more heartily than ever:



"There are a pair of beggars for you!  Why, they've got away with my 

fifty francs!"



She wasn't vexed.  It struck her as a joke that MEN should have got 

money out of her.  All the same, they were swine, for she hadn't a 

sou left.  But at sight of the cards and the letters her bad temper 

returned.  As to the letters, why, she said "pass" to them.  They 

were from fellows who, after applauding her last night, were now 

making their declarations.  And as to the callers, they might go 

about their business!



Zoe had stowed them all over the place, and she called attention to 

the great capabilities of the flat, every room in which opened on 

the corridor.  That wasn't the case at Mme Blanche's, where people 

had all to go through the drawing room.  Oh yes, Mme Blanche had had 

plenty of bothers over it!



"You will send them all away," continued Nana in pursuance of her 

idea.  "Begin with the nigger."



"Oh, as to him, madame, I gave him his marching orders a while ago," 

said Zoe with a grin.  "He only wanted to tell Madame that he 

couldn't come to-night."



There was vast joy at this announcement, and Nana clapped her hands.  

He wasn't coming, what good luck!  She would be free then!  And she 

emitted sighs of relief, as though she had been let off the most 

abominable of tortures.  Her first thought was for Daguenet.  Poor 

duck, why, she had just written to tell him to wait till Thursday!  

Quick, quick, Mme Maloir should write a second letter!  But Zoe 

announced that Mme Maloir had slipped away unnoticed, according to 

her wont.  Whereupon Nana, after talking of sending someone to him, 

began to hesitate.  She was very tired.  A long night's sleep--oh, 

it would be so jolly!  The thought of such a treat overcame her at 

last.  For once in a way she could allow herself that!



"I shall go to bed when I come back from the theater," she murmured 

greedily, "and you won't wake me before noon."



Then raising her voice:



"Now then, gee up!  Shove the others downstairs!"



Zoe did not move.  She would never have dreamed of giving her 

mistress overt advice, only now she made shift to give Madame the 

benefit of her experience when Madame seemed to be running her hot 

head against a wall.



"Monsieur Steiner as well?" she queried curtly.



"Why, certainly!" replied Nana.  "Before all the rest."



The maid still waited, in order to give her mistress time for 

reflection.  Would not Madame be proud to get such a rich gentleman 

away from her rival Rose Mignon--a man, moreover, who was known in 

all the theaters?



"Now make haste, my dear," rejoined Nana, who perfectly understood 

the situation, "and tell him he pesters me."



But suddenly there was a reversion of feeling.  Tomorrow she might 

want him.  Whereupon she laughed, winked once or twice and with a 

naughty little gesture cried out:



"After all's said and done, if I want him the best way even now is 

to kick him out of doors."



Zoe seemed much impressed.  Struck with a sudden admiration, she 

gazed at her mistress and then went and chucked Steiner out of doors 

without further deliberation.



Meanwhile Nana waited patiently for a second or two in order to give 

her time to sweep the place out, as she phrased it.  No one would 

ever have expected such a siege!  She craned her head into the 

drawing room and found it empty.  The dining room was empty too.  

But as she continued her visitation in a calmer frame of mind, 

feeling certain that nobody remained behind, she opened the door of 

a closet and came suddenly upon a very young man.  He was sitting on 

the top of a trunk, holding a huge bouquet on his knees and looking 

exceedingly quiet and extremely well behaved.



"Goodness gracious me!" she cried.  "There's one of 'em in there 

even now!"  The very young man had jumped down at sight of her and 

was blushing as red as a poppy.  He did not know what to do with his 

bouquet, which he kept shifting from one hand to the other, while 

his looks betrayed the extreme of emotion.  His youth, his 

embarrassment and the funny figure he cut in his struggles with his 

flowers melted Nana's heart, and she burst into a pretty peal of 

laughter.  Well, now, the very children were coming, were they?  Men 

were arriving in long clothes.  So she gave up all airs and graces, 

became familiar and maternal, tapped her leg and asked for fun:



"You want me to wipe your nose; do you, baby?"



"Yes," replied the lad in a low, supplicating tone.



This answer made her merrier than ever.  He was seventeen years old, 

he said.  His name was Georges Hugon.  He was at the Varietes last 

night and now he had come to see her.



"These flowers are for me?"



"Yes."



"Then give 'em to me, booby!"



But as she took the bouquet from him he sprang upon her hands and 

kissed them with all the gluttonous eagerness peculiar to his 

charming time of life.  She had to beat him to make him let go.  

There was a dreadful little dribbling customer for you!  But as she 

scolded him she flushed rosy-red and began smiling.  And with that 

she sent him about his business, telling him that he might call 

again.  He staggered away; he could not find the doors.



Nana went back into her dressing room, where Francis made his 

appearance almost simultaneously in order to dress her hair for the 

evening.  Seated in front of her mirror and bending her head beneath 

the hairdresser's nimble hands, she stayed silently meditative.  

Presently, however, Zoe entered, remarking:



"There's one of them, madame, who refuses to go."



"Very well, he must be left alone," she answered quietly.



"If that comes to that they still keep arriving."



"Bah!  Tell 'em to wait.  When they begin to feel too hungry they'll 

be off."  Her humor had changed, and she was now delighted to make 

people wait about for nothing.  A happy thought struck her as very 

amusing; she escaped from beneath Francis' hands and ran and bolted 

the doors.  They might now crowd in there as much as they liked; 

they would probably refrain from making a hole through the wall.  

Zoe could come in and out through the little doorway leading to the 

kitchen.  However, the electric bell rang more lustily than ever.  

Every five minutes a clear, lively little ting-ting recurred as 

regularly as if it had been produced by some well-adjusted piece of 

mechanism.  And Nana counted these rings to while the time away 

withal.  But suddenly she remembered something.



"I say, where are my burnt almonds?"



Francis, too, was forgetting about the burnt almonds.  But now he 

drew a paper bag from one of the pockets of his frock coat and 

presented it to her with the discreet gesture of a man who is 

offering a lady a present.  Nevertheless, whenever his accounts came 

to be settled, he always put the burnt almonds down on his bill.  

Nana put the bag between her knees and set to work munching her 

sweetmeats, turning her head from time to time under the 

hairdresser's gently compelling touch.



"The deuce," she murmured after a silence, "there's a troop for 

you!"



Thrice, in quick succession, the bell had sounded.  Its summonses 

became fast and furious.  There were modest tintinnabulations which 

seemed to stutter and tremble like a first avowal; there were bold 

rings which vibrated under some rough touch and hasty rings which 

sounded through the house with shivering rapidity.  It was a regular 

peal, as Zoe said, a peal loud enough to upset the neighborhood, 

seeing that a whole mob of men were jabbing at the ivory button, one 

after the other.  That old joker Bordenave had really been far too 

lavish with her address.  Why, the whole of yesterday's house was 

coming!



"By the by, Francis, have you five louis?" said Nana.



He drew back, looked carefully at her headdress and then quietly 

remarked:



"Five louis, that's according!"



"Ah, you know if you want securities. . ." she continued.



And without finishing her sentence, she indicated the adjoining 

rooms with a sweeping gesture.  Francis lent the five louis.  Zoe, 

during each momentary respite, kept coming in to get Madame's things 

ready.  Soon she came to dress her while the hairdresser lingered 

with the intention of giving some finishing touches to the 

headdress.  But the bell kept continually disturbing the lady's 

maid, who left Madame with her stays half laced and only one shoe 

on.  Despite her long experience, the maid was losing her head.  

After bringing every nook and corner into requisition and putting 

men pretty well everywhere, she had been driven to stow them away in 

threes and fours, which was a course of procedure entirely opposed 

to her principles.  So much the worse for them if they ate each 

other up!  It would afford more room!  And Nana, sheltering behind 

her carefully bolted door, began laughing at them, declaring that 

she could hear them pant.  They ought to be looking lovely in there 

with their tongues hanging out like a lot of bowwows sitting round 

on their behinds.  Yesterday's success was not yet over, and this 

pack of men had followed up her scent.



"Provided they don't break anything," she murmured.



She began to feel some anxiety, for she fancied she felt their hot 

breath coming through chinks in the door.  But Zoe ushered 

Labordette in, and the young woman gave a little shout of relief.  

He was anxious to tell her about an account he had settled for her 

at the justice of peace's court.  But she did not attend and said:



"I'll take you along with me.  We'll have dinner together, and 

afterward you shall escort me to the Varietes.  I don't go on before 

half-past nine."



Good old Labordette, how lucky it was he had come!  He was a fellow 

who never asked for any favors.  He was only the friend of the 

women, whose little bits of business he arranged for them.  Thus on 

his way in he had dismissed the creditors in the anteroom.  Indeed, 

those good folks really didn't want to be paid.  On the contrary, if 

they HAD been pressing for payment it was only for the sake of 

complimenting Madame and of personally renewing their offers of 

service after her grand success of yesterday.



"Let's be off, let's be off," said Nana, who was dressed by now.



But at that moment Zoe came in again, shouting:



"I refuse to open the door any more.  They're waiting in a crowd all 

down the stairs."



A crowd all down the stairs!  Francis himself, despite the English 

stolidity of manner which he was wont to affect, began laughing as 

he put up his combs.  Nana, who had already taken Labordette's arm, 

pushed him into the kitchen and effected her escape.  At last she 

was delivered from the men and felt happily conscious that she might 

now enjoy his society anywhere without fear of stupid interruptions.



"You shall see me back to my door," she said as they went down the 

kitchen stairs.  "I shall feel safe, in that case.  Just fancy, I 

want to sleep a whole night quite by myself--yes, a whole night!  

It's sort of infatuation, dear boy!"

