





CHAPTER VIII





We are in a little set of lodgings on the fourth floor in the Rue 

Veron at Montmartre.  Nana and Fontan have invited a few friends to 

cut their Twelfth-Night cake with them.  They are giving their 

housewarming, though they have been only three days settled.



They had no fixed intention of keeping house together, but the whole 

thing had come about suddenly in the first glow of the honeymoon.  

After her grand blowup, when she had turned the count and the banker 

so vigorously out of doors, Nana felt the world crumbling about her 

feet.  She estimated the situation at a glance; the creditors would 

swoop down on her anteroom, would mix themselves up with her love 

affairs and threaten to sell her little all unless she continued to 

act sensibly.  Then, too, there would be no end of disputes and 

carking anxieties if she attempted to save her furniture from their 

clutches.  And so she preferred giving up everything.  Besides, the 

flat in the Boulevard Haussmann was plaguing her to death.  It was 

so stupid with its great gilded rooms!  In her access of tenderness 

for Fontan she began dreaming of a pretty little bright chamber.  

Indeed, she returned to the old ideals of the florist days, when her 

highest ambition was to have a rosewood cupboard with a plate-glass 

door and a bed hung with blue "reps."  In the course of two days she 

sold what she could smuggle out of the house in the way of 

knickknacks and jewelry and then disappeared, taking with her ten 

thousand francs and never even warning the porter's wife.  It was a 

plunge into the dark, a merry spree; never a trace was left behind.  

In this way she would prevent the men from coming dangling after 

her.  Fontain was very nice.  He did not say no to anything but just 

let her do as she liked.  Nay, he even displayed an admirable spirit 

of comradeship.  He had, on his part, nearly seven thousand francs, 

and despite the fact that people accused him of stinginess, he 

consented to add them to the young woman's ten thousand.  The sum 

struck them as a solid foundation on which to begin housekeeping.  

And so they started away, drawing from their common hoard, in order 

to hire and furnish the two rooms in the Rue Veron, and sharing 

everything together like old friends.  In the early days it was 

really delicious.



On Twelfth Night Mme Lerat and Louiset were the first to arrive.  As 

Fontan had not yet come home, the old lady ventured to give 

expression to her fears, for she trembled to see her niece 

renouncing the chance of wealth.



"Oh, Aunt, I love him so dearly!" cried Nana, pressing her hands to 

her heart with the prettiest of gestures.



This phrase produced an extraordinary effect on Mme Lerat, and tears 

came into her eyes.



"That's true," she said with an air of conviction.  "Love before all 

things!"



And with that she went into raptures over the prettiness of the 

rooms.  Nana took her to see the bedroom, the parlor and the very 

kitchen.  Gracious goodness, it wasn't a vast place, but then, they 

had painted it afresh and put up new wallpapers.  Besides, the sun 

shone merrily into it during the daytime.



Thereupon Mme Lerat detained the young woman in the bedroom, while 

Louiset installed himself behind the charwoman in the kitchen in 

order to watch a chicken being roasted.  If, said Mme Lerat, she 

permitted herself to say what was in her mind, it was because Zoe 

had just been at her house.  Zoe had stayed courageously in the 

breach because she was devoted to her mistress.  Madame would pay 

her later on; she was in no anxiety about that!  And amid the 

breakup of the Boulevard Haussmann establishment it was she who 

showed the creditors a bold front; it was she who conducted a 

dignified retreat, saving what she could from the wreck and telling 

everyone that her mistress was traveling.  She never once gave them 

her address.  Nay, through fear of being followed, she even deprived 

herself of the pleasure of calling on Madame.  Nevertheless, that 

same morning she had run round to Mme Lerat's because matters were 

taking a new turn.  The evening before creditors in the persons of 

the upholsterer, the charcoal merchant and the laundress had put in 

an appearance and had offered to give Madame an extension of time.  

Nay, they had even proposed to advance Madame a very considerable 

amount if only Madame would return to her flat and conduct herself 

like a sensible person.  The aunt repeated Zoe's words. Without 

doubt there was a gentleman behind it all.



"I'll never consent!" declared Nana in great disgust.  "Ah, they're 

a pretty lot those tradesmen!  Do they think I'm to be sold so that 

they can get their bills paid? Why, look here, I'd rather die of 

hunger than deceive Fontan."



"That's what I said," averred Mme Lerat. "'My niece,' I said, 'is 

too noble-hearted!'"



Nana, however, was much vexed to learn that La Mignotte was being 

sold and that Labordette was buying it for Caroline Hequet at an 

absurdly low price.  It made her angry with that clique.  Oh, they 

were a regular cheap lot, in spite of their airs and graces!  Yes, 

by Jove, she was worth more than the whole lot of them!



"They can have their little joke out," she concluded, "but money 

will never give them true happiness!  Besides, you know, Aunt, I 

don't even know now whether all that set are alive or not.  I'm much 

too happy."



At that very moment Mme Maloir entered, wearing one of those hats of 

which she alone understood the shape.  It was delightful meeting 

again.  Mme Maloir explained that magnificence frightened her and 

that NOW, from time to time, she would come back for her game of 

bezique.  A second visit was paid to the different rooms in the 

lodgings, and in the kitchen Nana talked of economy in the presence 

of the charwoman, who was basting the fowl, and said that a servant 

would have cost too much and that she was herself desirous of 

looking after things.  Louiset was gazing beatifically at the 

roasting process.



But presently there was a loud outburst of voices.  Fontan had come 

in with Bosc and Prulliere, and the company could now sit down to 

table.  The soup had been already served when Nana for the third 

time showed off the lodgings.



"Ah, dear children, how comfortable you are here!"  Bosc kept 

repeating, simply for the sake of pleasing the chums who were 

standing the dinner.  At bottom the subject of the "nook," as he 

called it, nowise touched him.



In the bedroom he harped still more vigorously on the amiable note.  

Ordinarily he was wont to treat women like cattle, and the idea of a 

man bothering himself about one of the dirty brutes excited within 

him the only angry feelings of which, in his comprehensive, drunken 

disdain of the universe, he was still capable.



"Ah, ah, the villains," he continued with a wink, "they've done this 

on the sly.  Well, you were certainly right.  It will be charming, 

and, by heaven, we'll come and see you!"



But when Louiset arrived on the scene astride upon a broomstick, 

Prulliere chuckled spitefully and remarked:



"Well, I never!  You've got a baby already?"



This struck everybody as very droll, and Mme Lerat and Mme Maloir 

shook with laughter.  Nana, far from being vexed, laughed tenderly 

and said that unfortunately this was not the case.  She would very 

much have liked it, both for the little one's sake and for her own, 

but perhaps one would arrive all the same.  Fontan, in his role of 

honest citizen, took Louiset in his arms and began playing with him 

and lisping.



"Never mind!  It loves its daddy!  Call me 'Papa,' you little 

blackguard!"



"Papa, Papa!" stammered the child.



The company overwhelmed him with caresses, but Bosc was bored and 

talked of sitting down to table.  That was the only serious business 

in life.  Nana asked her guests' permission to put Louiset's chair 

next her own.  The dinner was very merry, but Bosc suffered from the 

near neighborhood of the child, from whom he had to defend his 

plate.  Mme Lerat bored him too.  She was in a melting mood and kept 

whispering to him all sorts of mysterious things about gentlemen of 

the first fashion who were still running after Nana.  Twice he had 

to push away her knee, for she was positively invading him in her 

gushing, tearful mood.  Prulliere behaved with great incivility 

toward Mme Maloir and did not once help her to anything.  He was 

entirely taken up with Nana and looked annoyed at seeing her with 

Fontan.  Besides, the turtle doves were kissing so excessively as to 

be becoming positive bores.  Contrary to all known rules, they had 

elected to sit side by side.



"Devil take it!  Why don't you eat?  You've got plenty of time ahead 

of you!"  Bosc kept repeating with his mouth full.  "Wait till we 

are gone!"



But Nana could not restrain herself.  She was in a perfect ecstasy 

of love.  Her face was as full of blushes as an innocent young 

girl's, and her looks and her laughter seemed to overflow with 

tenderness.  Gazing on Fontan, she overwhelmed him with pet names--

"my doggie, my old bear, my kitten"--and whenever he passed her the 

water or the salt she bent forward and kissed him at random on lips, 

eyes, nose or ear.  Then if she met with reproof she would return to 

the attack with the cleverest maneuvers and with infinite 

submissiveness and the supple cunning of a beaten cat would catch 

hold of his hand when no one was looking, in order to kiss it again.  

It seemed she must be touching something belonging to him.  As to 

Fontan, he gave himself airs and let himself be adored with the 

utmost condescension.  His great nose sniffed with entirely sensual 

content; his goat face, with its quaint, monstrous ugliness, 

positively glowed in the sunlight of devoted adoration lavished upon 

him by that superb woman who was so fair and so plump of limb.  

Occasionally he gave a kiss in return, as became a man who is having 

all the enjoyment and is yet willing to behave prettily.



"Well, you're growing maddening!" cried Prulliere.  "Get away from 

her, you fellow there!"



And he dismissed Fontan and changed covers, in order to take his 

place at Nana's side.  The company shouted and applauded at this and 

gave vent to some stiffish epigrammatic witticisms.  Fontan 

counterfeited despair and assumed the quaint expression of Vulcan 

crying for Venus.  Straightway Prulliere became very gallant, but 

Nana, whose foot he was groping for under the table, caught him a 

slap to make him keep quiet.  No, no, she was certainly not going to 

become his mistress.  A month ago she had begun to take a fancy to 

him because of his good looks, but now she detested him.  If he 

pinched her again under pretense of picking up her napkin, she would 

throw her glass in his face!



Nevertheless, the evening passed off well.  The company had 

naturally begun talking about the Varietes.  Wasn't that cad of a 

Bordenave going to go off the hooks after all?  His nasty diseases 

kept reappearing and causing him such suffering that you couldn't 

come within six yards of him nowadays.  The day before during 

rehearsal he had been incessantly yelling at Simonne.  There was a 

fellow whom the theatrical people wouldn't shed many tears over.  

Nana announced that if he were to ask her to take another part she 

would jolly well send him to the rightabout.  Moreover, she began 

talking of leaving the stage; the theater was not to compare with 

her home.  Fontan, who was not in the present piece or in that which 

was then being rehearsed, also talked big about the joy of being 

entirely at liberty and of passing his evenings with his feet on the 

fender in the society of his little pet.  And at this the rest 

exclaimed delightedly, treating their entertainers as lucky people 

and pretending to envy their felicity.



The Twelfth-Night cake had been cut and handed round.  The bean had 

fallen to the lot of Mme Lerat, who popped it into Bosc's glass.  

Whereupon there were shouts of "The king drinks!  The king drinks!"  

Nana took advantage of this outburst of merriment and went and put 

her arms round Fontan's neck again, kissing him and whispering in 

his ear.  But Prulliere, laughing angrily, as became a pretty man, 

declared that they were not playing the game.  Louiset, meanwhile, 

slept soundly on two chairs.  It was nearing one o'clock when the 

company separated, shouting au revoir as they went downstairs.



For three weeks the existence of the pair of lovers was really 

charming.  Nana fancied she was returning to those early days when 

her first silk dress had caused her infinite delight.  She went out 

little and affected a life of solitude and simplicity.  One morning 

early, when she had gone down to buy fish IN PROPRIA PERSONA in La 

Rouchefoucauld Market, she was vastly surprised to meet her old hair 

dresser Francis face to face.  His getup was as scrupulously careful 

as ever: he wore the finest linen, and his frock coat was beyond 

reproach; in fact, Nana felt ashamed that he should see her in the 

street with a dressing jacket and disordered hair and down-at-heel 

shoes.  But he had the tact, if possible, to intensify his 

politeness toward her.  He did not permit himself a single inquiry 

and affected to believe that Madame was at present on her travels.  

Ah, but Madame had rendered many persons unhappy when she decided to 

travel!  All the world had suffered loss.  The young woman, however, 

ended by asking him questions, for a sudden fit of curiosity had 

made her forget her previous embarrassment.  Seeing that the crowd 

was jostling them, she pushed him into a doorway and, still holding 

her little basket in one hand, stood chatting in front of him.  What 

were people saying about her high jinks?  Good heavens!  The ladies 

to whom he went said this and that and all sorts of things.  In 

fact, she had made a great noise and was enjoying a real boom: And 

Steiner?  M. Steiner was in a very bad way, would make an ugly 

finish if he couldn't hit on some new commercial operation.  And 

Daguenet?  Oh, HE was getting on swimmingly.  M. Daguenet was 

settling down.  Nana, under the exciting influence of various 

recollections, was just opening her mouth with a view to a further 

examination when she felt it would be awkward to utter Muffat's 

name.  Thereupon Francis smiled and spoke instead of her.  As to 

Monsieur le Comte, it was all a great pity, so sad had been his 

sufferings since Madame's departure.



He had been like a soul in pain--you might have met him wherever 

Madame was likely to be found.  At last M. Mignon had come across 

him and had taken him home to his own place.  This piece of news 

caused Nana to laugh a good deal.  But her laughter was not of the 

easiest kind.



"Ah, he's with Rose now," she said.  "Well then, you must know, 

Francis, I've done with him!  Oh, the canting thing!  It's learned 

some pretty habits--can't even go fasting for a week now!  And to 

think that he used to swear he wouldn't have any woman after me!"



She was raging inwardly.



"My leavings, if you please!" she continued.  "A pretty Johnnie for 

Rose to go and treat herself to!  Oh, I understand it all now: she 

wanted to have her revenge because I got that brute of a Steiner 

away from her.  Ain't it sly to get a man to come to her when I've 

chucked him out of doors?"



"M. Mignon doesn't tell that tale," said the hairdresser.  

"According to his account, it was Monsieur le Comte who chucked you 

out.  Yes, and in a pretty disgusting way too--with a kick on the 

bottom!"



Nana became suddenly very pale.



"Eh, what?" she cried.  "With a kick on my bottom?  He's going too 

far, he is!  Look here, my little friend, it was I who threw him 

downstairs, the cuckold, for he is a cuckold, I must inform you.  

His countess is making him one with every man she meets--yes, even 

with that good-for-nothing of a Fauchery.  And that Mignon, who goes 

loafing about the pavement in behalf of his harridan of a wife, whom 

nobody wants because she's so lean!  What a foul lot!  What a foul 

lot!"



She was choking, and she paused for breath



"Oh, that's what they say, is it?  Very well, my little Francis, 

I'll go and look 'em up, I will.  Shall you and I go to them at 

once?  Yes, I'll go, and we'll see whether they will have the cheek 

to go telling about kicks on the bottom.  Kick's!  I never took one 

from anybody!  And nobody's ever going to strike me--d'ye see?--for 

I'd smash the man who laid a finger on me!"



Nevertheless, the storm subsided at last.  After all, they might 

jolly well what they liked!  She looked upon them as so much filth 

underfoot!  It would have soiled her to bother about people like 

that.  She had a conscience of her own, she had!  And Francis, 

seeing her thus giving herself away, what with her housewife's 

costume and all, became familiar and, at parting, made so bold as to 

give her some good advice.  It was wrong of her to be sacrificing 

everything for the sake of an infatuation; such infatuations ruined 

existence.  She listened to him with bowed head while he spoke to 

her with a pained expression, as became a connoisseur who could not 

bear to see so fine a girl making such a hash of things.



"Well, that's my affair," she said at last "Thanks all the same, 

dear boy."  She shook his hand, which despite his perfect dress was 

always a little greasy, and then went off to buy her fish.  During 

the day that story about the kick on the bottom occupied her 

thoughts.  She even spoke about it to Fontan and again posed as a 

sturdy woman who was not going to stand the slightest flick from 

anybody.  Fontan, as became a philosophic spirit, declared that all 

men of fashion were beasts whom it was one's duty to despise.  And 

from that moment forth Nana was full of very real disdain.



That same evening they went to the Bouffes-Parisiens Theatre to see 

a little woman of Fontan's acquaintance make her debut in a part of 

some ten lines.  It was close on one o'clock when they once more 

trudged up the heights of Montmartre.  They had purchased a cake, a 

"mocha," in the Rue de la Chaussee-d'Antin, and they ate it in bed, 

seeing that the night was not warm and it was not worth while 

lighting a fire.  Sitting up side by side, with the bedclothes 

pulled up in front and the pillows piled up behind, they supped and 

talked about the little woman.  Nana thought her plain and lacking 

in style.  Fontan, lying on his stomach, passed up the pieces of 

cake which had been put between the candle and the matches on the 

edge of the night table.  But they ended by quarreling.



"Oh, just to think of it!" cried Nana.  "She's got eyes like gimlet 

holes, and her hair's the color of tow."



"Hold your tongue, do!" said Fontan.  "She has a superb head of hair 

and such fire in her looks!  It's lovely the way you women always 

tear each other to pieces!"



He looked annoyed.



"Come now, we've had enough of it!" he said at last in savage tones.  

"You know I don't like being bored.  Let's go to sleep, or things'll 

take a nasty turn."



And he blew out the candle, but Nana was furious and went on 

talking.  She was not going to be spoken to in that voice; she was 

accustomed to being treated with respect!  As he did not vouchsafe 

any further answer, she was silenced, but she could not go to sleep 

and lay tossing to and fro.



"Great God, have you done moving about?" cried he suddenly, giving a 

brisk jump upward.



"It isn't my fault if there are crumbs in the bed," she said curtly.



In fact, there were crumbs in the bed.  She felt them down to her 

middle; she was everywhere devoured by them.  One single crumb was 

scorching her and making her scratch herself till she bled.  

Besides, when one eats a cake isn't it usual to shake out the 

bedclothes afterward?  Fontan, white with rage, had relit the 

candle, and they both got up and, barefooted and in their night 

dresses, they turned down the clothes and swept up the crumbs on the 

sheet with their hands.  Fontan went to bed again, shivering, and 

told her to go to the devil when she advised him to wipe the soles 

of his feet carefully.  And in the end she came back to her old 

position, but scarce had she stretched herself out than she danced 

again.  There were fresh crumbs in the bed!



"By Jove, it was sure to happen!" she cried.  "You've brought them 

back again under your feet.  I can't go on like this!  No, I tell 

you, I can't go on like this!"



And with that she was on the point of stepping over him in order to 

jump out of bed again, when Fontan in his longing for sleep grew 

desperate and dealt her a ringing box on the ear.  The blow was so 

smart that Nana suddenly found herself lying down again with her 

head on the pillow.



She lay half stunned.



"Oh!" she ejaculated simply, sighing a child's big sigh.



For a second or two he threatened her with a second slap, asking her 

at the same time if she meant to move again.  Then he put out the 

light, settled himself squarely on his back and in a trice was 

snoring.  But she buried her face in the pillow and began sobbing 

quietly to herself.  It was cowardly of him to take advantage of his 

superior strength!  She had experienced very real terror all the 

same, so terrible had that quaint mask of Fontan's become.  And her 

anger began dwindling down as though the blow had calmed her.  She 

began to feel respect toward him and accordingly squeezed herself 

against the wall in order to leave him as much room as possible.  

She even ended by going to sleep, her cheek tingling, her eyes full 

of tears and feeling so deliciously depressed and wearied and 

submissive that she no longer noticed the crumbs.  When she woke up 

in the morning she was holding Fontain in her naked arms and 

pressing him tightly against her breast.  He would never begin it 

again, eh?  Never again?  She loved him too dearly.  Why, it was 

even nice to be beaten if he struck the blow!



After that night a new life began.  For a mere trifle--a yes, a no--

Fontan would deal her a blow.  She grew accustomed to it and 

pocketed everything.  Sometimes she shed tears and threatened him, 

but he would pin her up against the wall and talk of strangling her, 

which had the effect of rendering her extremely obedient.  As often 

as not, she sank down on a chair and sobbed for five minutes on end.  

But afterward she would forget all about it, grow very merry, fill 

the little lodgings with the sound of song and laughter and the 

rapid rustle of skirts.  The worst of it was that Fontan was now in 

the habit of disappearing for the whole day and never returning home 

before midnight, for he was going to cafes and meeting his old 

friends again.  Nana bore with everything.  She was tremulous and 

caressing, her only fear being that she might never see him again if 

she reproached him.  But on certain days, when she had neither Mme 

Maloir nor her aunt and Louiset with her, she grew mortally dull.  

Thus one Sunday, when she was bargaining for some pigeons at La 

Rochefoucauld Market, she was delighted to meet Satin, who, in her 

turn, was busy purchasing a bunch of radishes.  Since the evening 

when the prince had drunk Fontan's champagne they had lost sight of 

one another.



"What?  It's you!  D'you live in our parts?" said Satin, astounded 

at seeing her in the street at that hour of the morning and in 

slippers too.  "Oh, my poor, dear girl, you're really ruined then!"



Nana knitted her brows as a sign that she was to hold her tongue, 

for they were surrounded by other women who wore dressing gowns and 

were without linen, while their disheveled tresses were white with 

fluff.  In the morning, when the man picked up overnight had been 

newly dismissed, all the courtesans of the quarter were wont to come 

marketing here, their eyes heavy with sleep, their feet in old down-

at-heel shoes and themselves full of the weariness and ill humor 

entailed by a night of boredom.  From the four converging streets 

they came down into the market, looking still rather young in some 

cases and very pale and charming in their utter unconstraint; in 

others, hideous and old with bloated faces and peeling skin.  The 

latter did not the least mind being seen thus outside working hours, 

and not one of them deigned to smile when the passers-by on the 

sidewalk turned round to look at them.  Indeed, they were all very 

full of business and wore a disdainful expression, as became good 

housewives for whom men had ceased to exist.  Just as Satin, for 

instance, was paying for her bunch of radishes a young man, who 

might have been a shop-boy going late to his work, threw her a 

passing greeting:



"Good morning, duckie."



She straightened herself up at once and with the dignified manner 

becoming an offended queen remarked:



"What's up with that swine there?"



Then she fancied she recognized him.  Three days ago toward 

midnight, as the was coming back alone from the boulevards, she had 

talked to him at the corner of the Rue Labruyere for nearly half an 

hour, with a view to persuading him to come home with her.  But this 

recollection only angered her the more.



"Fancy they're brutes enough to shout things to you in broad 

daylight!" she continued.  "When one's out on business one ought to 

be respecifully treated, eh?"



Nana had ended by buying her pigeons, although she certainly had her 

doubts of their freshness.  After which Satin wanted to show her 

where she lived in the Rue Rochefoucauld close by.  And the moment 

they were alone Nana told her of her passion for Fontan.  Arrived in 

front of the house, the girl stopped with her bundle of radishes 

under her arm and listened eagerly to a final detail which the other 

imparted to her.  Nana fibbed away and vowed that it was she who had 

turned Count Muffat out of doors with a perfect hail of kickastliness of 

the men.  Nana was overpowering on the subject of Fontan.  She could 

not say a dozen words without lapsing into endless repetitions of 

his sayings and his doings.  But Satin, like a good-natured girl, 

would listen unwearyingly to everlasting accounts of how Nana had 

watched for him at the window, how they had fallen out over a burnt 

dish of hash and how they had made it up in bed after hours of 

silent sulking.  In her desire to be always talking about these 

things Nana had gs on the 

posterior.



"Oh how smart!" Satin repeated.  "How very smart!  Kicks, eh?  And 

he never said a word, did he?  What a blooming coward!  I wish I'd 

been there to see his ugly mug!  My dear girl, you were quite right.  

A pin for the coin!  When I'M on with a mash I starve for it!  

You'll come and see me, eh?  You promise?  It's the left-hand door.  

Knock three knocks, for there's a whole heap of damned squints 

about."



After that whenever Nana grew too weary of life she went down and 

saw Satin.  She was always sure of finding her, for the girl never 

went out before six in the evening.  Satin occupied a couple of 

rooms which a chemist had furnished for her in order to save her 

from the clutches of the police, but in little more than a 

twelvemonth she had broken the furniture, knocked in the chairs, 

dirtied the curtains, and that in a manner so furiously filthy and 

untidy that the lodgings seemed as though inhabited by a pack of mad 

cats.  On the mornings when she grew disgusted with herself and 

thought about cleaning up a bit, chair rails and strips of curtain 

would come off in her hands during her struggle with superincumbent 

dirt.  On such days the place was fouler than ever, and it was 

impossible to enter it, owing to the things which had fallen down 

across the doorway.  At length she ended by leaving her house 

severely alone.  When the lamp was lit the cupboard with plate-glass 

doors, the clock and what remained of the curtains still served to 

impose on the men.  Besides, for six months past her landlord had 

been threatening to evict her.  Well then, for whom should she be 

keeping the furniture nice?  For him more than anyone else, perhaps!  

And so whenever she got up in a merry mood she would shout "Gee up!" 

and give the sides of the cupboard and the chest of drawers such a 

tremendous kick that they cracked again.



Nana nearly always found her in bed.  Even on the days when Satin 

went out to do her marketing she felt so tired on her return 

upstairs that she flung herself down on the bed and went to sleep 

again.  During the day she dragged herself about and dozed off on 

chairs.  Indeed, she did not emerge from this languid condition till 

the evening drew on and the gas was lit outside.  Nana felt very 

comfortable at Satin's, sitting doing nothing on the untidy bed, 

while basins stood about on the floor at her feet and petticoats 

which had been bemired last night hung over the backs of armchairs 

and stained them with mud.  They had long gossips together and were 

endlessly confidential, while Satin lay on her stomach in her 

nightgown, waving her legs above her head and smoking cigarettes as 

she listened.  Sometimes on such afternoons as they had troubles to 

retail they treated themselves to absinthe in order, as they termed 

it, "to forget."  Satin did not go downstairs or put on a petticoat 

but simply went and leaned over the banisters and shouted her order 

to the portress's little girl, a chit of ten, who when she brought 

up the absinthe in a glass would look furtively at the lady's bare 

legs.  Every conversation led up to one subject--the beot to tell of every slap that he dealt her. 

Last 

week he had given her a swollen eye; nay, the night before he had 

given her such a box on the ear as to throw her across the night 

table, and all because he could not find his slippers.  And the 

other woman did not evince any astonishment but blew out cigarette 

smoke and only paused a moment to remark that, for her part, she 

always ducked under, which sent the gentleman pretty nearly 

sprawling.  Both of them settled down with a will to these anecdotes 

about blows; they grew supremely happy and excited over these same 

idiotic doings about which they told one another a hundred times or 

more, while they gave themselves up to the soft and pleasing sense 

of weariness which was sure to follow the drubbings they talked of.  

It was the delight of rediscussing Fontan's blows and of explaining 

his works and his ways, down to the very manner in which he took off 

his boots, which brought Nana back daily to Satin's place.  The 

latter, moreover, used to end by growing sympathetic in her turn and 

would cite even more violent cases, as, for instance, that of a 

pastry cook who had left her for dead on the floor.  Yet she loved 

him, in spite of it all!  Then came the days on which Nana cried and 

declared that things could not go on as they were doing.  Satin 

would escort her back to her own door and would linger an hour out 

in the street to see that he did not murder her.  And the next day 

the two women would rejoice over the reconciliation the whole 

afternoon through.  Yet though they did not say so, they preferred 

the days when threshings were, so to speak, in the air, for then 

their comfortable indignation was all the stronger.



They became inseparable.  Yet Satin never went to Nana's, Fontan 

having announced that he would have no trollops in his house.  They 

used to go out together, and thus it was that Satin one day took her 

friend to see another woman.  This woman turned out to be that very 

Mme Robert who had interested Nana and inspired her with a certain 

respect ever since she had refused to come to her supper.  Mme 

Robert lived in the Rue Mosnier, a silent, new street in the 

Quartier de l'Europe, where there were no shops, and the handsome 

houses with their small, limited flats were peopled by ladies.  It 

was five o'clock, and along the silent pavements in the quiet, 

aristocratic shelter of the tall white houses were drawn up the 

broughams of stock-exchange people and merchants, while men walked 

hastily about, looking up at the windows, where women in dressing 

jackets seemed to be awaiting them.  At first Nana refused to go up, 

remarking with some constraint that she had not the pleasure of the 

lady's acquaintance.  But Satin would take no refusal.  She was only 

desirous of paying a civil call, for Mme Robert, whom she had met in 

a restaurant the day before, had made herself extremely agreeable 

and had got her to promise to come and see her.  And at last Nana 

consented.  At the top of the stairs a little drowsy maid informed 

them that Madame had not come home yet, but she ushered them into 

the drawing room notwithstanding and left them there.



"The deuce, it's a smart show!" whispered Satin.  It was a stiff, 

middle-class room, hung with dark-colored fabrics, and suggested the 

conventional taste of a Parisian shopkeeper who has retired on his 

fortune.  Nana was struck and did her best to make merry about it.  

But Satin showed annoyance and spoke up for Mme Robert's strict 

adherence to the proprieties.  She was always to be met in the 

society of elderly, grave-looking men, on whose arms she leaned.  At 

present she had a retired chocolate seller in tow, a serious soul.  

Whenever he came to see her he was so charmed by the solid, handsome 

way in which the house was arranged that he had himself announced 

and addressed its mistress as "dear child."



"Look, here she is!" continued Satin, pointing to a photograph which 

stood in front of the clock.  Nana scrutinized the portrait for a 

second or so.  It represented a very dark brunette with a longish 

face and lips pursed up in a discreet smile.  "A thoroughly 

fashionable lady," one might have said of the likeness, "but one who 

is rather more reserved than the rest."



"It's strange," murmured Nana at length, "but I've certainly seen 

that face somewhere.  Where, I don't remember.  But it can't have 

been in a pretty place--oh no, I'm sure it wasn't in a pretty 

place."



And turning toward her friend, she added, "So she's made you promise 

to come and see her?  What does she want with you?"



"What does she want with me?  'Gad!  To talk, I expect--to be with 

me a bit.  It's her politeness."



Nana looked steadily at Satin.  "Tut, tut," she said softly.  After 

all, it didn't matter to her!  Yet seeing that the lady was keeping 

them waiting, she declared that she would not stay longer, and 

accordingly they both took their departure.



The next day Fontan informed Nana that he was not coming home to 

dinner, and she went down early to find Satin with a view to 

treating her at a restaurant.  The choice of the restaurant involved 

infinite debate.  Satin proposed various brewery bars, which Nana 

thought detestable, and at last persuaded her to dine at Laure's.  

This was a table d'hote in the Rue des Martyrs, where the dinner 

cost three francs.



Tired of waiting for the dinner hour and not knowing what to do out 

in the street, the pair went up to Laure's twenty minutes too early.  

The three dining rooms there were still empty, and they sat down at 

a table in the very saloon where Laure Piedefer was enthroned on a 

high bench behind a bar.  This Laure was a lady of some fifty 

summers, whose swelling contours were tightly laced by belts and 

corsets.  Women kept entering in quick procession, and each, in 

passing, craned upward so as to overtop the saucers raised on the 

counter and kissed Laure on the mouth with tender familiarity, while 

the monstrous creature tried, with tears in her eyes, to divide her 

attentions among them in such a way as to make no one jealous.  On 

the other hand, the servant who waited on the ladies was a tall, 

lean woman.  She seemed wasted with disease, and her eyes were 

ringed with dark lines and glowed with somber fire.  Very rapidly 

the three saloons filled up.  There were some hundred customers, and 

they had seated themselves wherever they could find vacant places.  

The majority were nearing the age of forty: their flesh was puffy 

and so bloated by vice as almost to hide the outlines of their 

flaccid mouths.  But amid all these gross bosoms and figures some 

slim, pretty girls were observable.  These still wore a modest 

expression despite their impudent gestures, for they were only 

beginners in their art, who had started life in the ballrooms of the 

slums and had been brought to Laure's by some customer or other.  

Here the tribe of bloated women, excited by the sweet scent of their 

youth, jostled one another and, while treating them to dainties, 

formed a perfect court round them, much as old amorous bachelors 

might have done.  As to the men, they were not numerous.  There were 

ten or fifteen of them at the outside, and if we except four tall 

fellows who had come to see the sight and were cracking jokes and 

taking things easy, they behaved humbly enough amid this whelming 

flood of petticoats.



"I say, their stew's very good, ain't it?" said Satin.



Nana nodded with much satisfaction.  It was the old substantial 

dinner you get in a country hotel and consisted of vol-au-vent a la 

financiere, fowl boiled in rice, beans with a sauce and vanilla 

creams, iced and flavored with burnt sugar.  The ladies made an 

especial onslaught on the boiled fowl and rice: their stays seemed 

about to burst; they wiped their lips with slow, luxurious 

movements.  At first Nana had been afraid of meeting old friends who 

might have asked her silly questions, but she grew calm at last, for 

she recognized no one she knew among that extremely motley throng, 

where faded dresses and lamentable hats contrasted strangely with 

handsome costumes, the wearers of which fraternized in vice with 

their shabbier neighbors.  She was momentarily interested, however, 

at the sight of a young man with short curly hair and insolent face 

who kept a whole tableful of vastly fat women breathlessly attentive 

to his slightest caprice.  But when the young man began to laugh his 

bosom swelled.



"Good lack, it's a woman!"



She let a little cry escape as she spoke, and Satin, who was 

stuffing herself with boiled fowl, lifted up her head and whispered:



"Oh yes!  I know her.  A smart lot, eh?  They do just fight for 

her."



Nana pouted disgustingly.  She could not understand the thing as 

yet.  Nevertheless, she remarked in her sensible tone that there was 

no disputing about tastes or colors, for you never could tell what 

you yourself might one day have a liking for.  So she ate her cream 

with an air of philosophy, though she was perfectly well aware that 

Satin with her great blue virginal eyes was throwing the neighboring 

tables into a state of great excitement.  There was one woman in 

particular, a powerful, fair-haired person who sat close to her and 

made herself extremely agreeable.  She seemed all aglow with 

affection and pushed toward the girl so eagerly that Nana was on the 

point of interfering.



But at that very moment a woman who was entering the room gave her a 

shock of surprise.  Indeed, she had recognized Mme Robert.  The 

latter, looking, as was her wont, like a pretty brown mouse, nodded 

familiarly to the tall, lean serving maid and came and leaned upon 

Laure's counter.  Then both women exchanged a long kiss.  Nana 

thought such an attention on the part of a woman so distinguished 

looking very amusing, the more so because Mme Robert had quite 

altered her usual modest expression.  On the contrary, her eye roved 

about the saloon as she kept up a whispered conversation.  Laure had 

resumed her seat and once more settled herself down with all the 

majesty of an old image of Vice, whose face has been worn and 

polished by the kisses of the faithful.  Above the range of loaded 

plates she sat enthroned in all the opulence which a hotelkeeper 

enjoys after forty years of activity, and as she sat there she 

swayed her bloated following of large women, in comparison with the 

biggest of whom she seemed monstrous.



But Mme Robert had caught sight of Satin, and leaving Laure, she ran 

up and behaved charmingly, telling her how much she regretted not 

having been at home the day before.  When Satin, however, who was 

ravished at this treatment, insisted on finding room for her at the 

table, she vowed she had already dined.  She had simply come up to 

look about her.  As she stood talking behind her new friend's chair 

she leaned lightly on her shoulders and in a smiling, coaxing manner 

remarked:



"Now when shall I see you?  If you were free--"



Nana unluckily failed to hear more.  The conversation vexed her, and 

she was dying to tell this honest lady a few home truths.  But the 

sight of a troop of new arrivals paralyzed her.  It was composed of 

smart, fashionably dressed women who were wearing their diamonds.  

Under the influence of perverse impulse they had made up a party to 

come to Laure's--whom, by the by, they all treated with great 

familiarity--to eat the three-franc dinner while flashing their 

jewels of great price in the jealous and astonished eyes of poor, 

bedraggled prostitutes.  The moment they entered, talking and 

laughing in their shrill, clear tones and seeming to bring sunshine 

with them from the outside world, Nana turned her head rapidly away.  

Much to her annoyance she had recognized Lucy Stewart and Maria 

Blond among them, and for nearly five minutes, during which the 

ladies chatted with Laure before passing into the saloon beyond, she 

kept her head down and seemed deeply occupied in rolling bread pills 

on the cloth in front of her.  But when at length she was able to 

look round, what was her astonishment to observe the chair next to 

hers vacant!  Satin had vanished.



"Gracious, where can she be?" she loudly ejaculated.



The sturdy, fair woman who had been overwhelming Satin with civil 

attentions laughed ill-temperedly, and when Nana, whom the laugh 

irritated, looked threatening she remarked in a soft, drawling way:



"It's certainly not me that's done you this turn; it's the other 

one!"



Thereupon Nana understood that they would most likely make game of 

her and so said nothing more.  She even kept her seat for some 

moments, as she did not wish to show how angry she felt.  She could 

hear Lucy Stewart laughing at the end of the next saloon, where she 

was treating a whole table of little women who had come from the 

public balls at Montmartre and La Chapelle.  It was very hot; the 

servant was carrying away piles of dirty plates with a strong scent 

of boiled fowl and rice, while the four gentlemen had ended by 

regaling quite half a dozen couples with capital wine in the hope of 

making them tipsy and hearing some pretty stiffish things.  What at 

present most exasperated Nana was the thought of paying for Satin's 

dinner.  There was a wench for you, who allowed herself to be amused 

and then made off with never a thank-you in company with the first 

petticoat that came by!  Without doubt it was only a matter of three 

francs, but she felt it was hard lines all the same--her way of 

doing it was too disgusting.  Nevertheless, she paid up, throwing 

the six francs at Laure, whom at the moment she despised more than 

the mud in the street.  In the Rue des Martyrs Nana felt her 

bitterness increasing.  She was certainly not going to run after 

Satin!  It was a nice filthy business for one to be poking one's 

nose into!  But her evening was spoiled, and she walked slowly up 

again toward Montmartre, raging against Mme Robert in particular.  

Gracious goodness, that woman had a fine cheek to go playing the 

lady--yes, the lady in the dustbin!  She now felt sure she had met 

her at the Papillon, a wretched public-house ball in the Rue des 

Poissonniers, where men conquered her scruples for thirty sous.  And 

to think a thing like that got hold of important functionaries with 

her modest looks!  And to think she refused suppers to which one did 

her the honor of inviting her because, forsooth, she was playing the 

virtuous game!  Oh yes, she'd get virtued!  It was always those 

conceited prudes who went the most fearful lengths in low corners 

nobody knew anything about.



Revolving these matters, Nana at length reached her home in the Rue 

Veron and was taken aback on observing a light in the window.  

Fontan had come home in a sulk, for he, too, had been deserted by 

the friend who had been dining with him.  He listened coldly to her 

explanations while she trembled lest he should strike her.  It 

scared her to find him at home, seeing that she had not expected him 

before one in the morning, and she told him a fib and confessed that 

she had certainly spent six francs, but in Mme Maloir's society.  He 

was not ruffled, however, and he handed her a letter which, though 

addressed to her, he had quietly opened.  It was a letter from 

Georges, who was still a prisoner at Les Fondettes and comforted 

himself weekly with the composition of glowing pages.  Nana loved to 

be written to, especially when the letters were full of grand, 

loverlike expressions with a sprinkling of vows.  She used to read 

them to everybody.  Fontan was familiar with the style employed by 

Georges and appreciated it.  But that evening she was so afraid of a 

scene that she affected complete indifference, skimming through the 

letter with a sulky expression and flinging it aside as soon as 

read.  Fontan had begun beating a tattoo on a windowpane; the 

thought of going to bed so early bored him, and yet he did not know 

how to employ his evening.  He turned briskly round:



"Suppose we answer that young vagabond at once," he said.



It was the custom for him to write the letters in reply.  He was 

wont to vie with the other in point of style.  Then, too, he used to 

be delighted when Nana, grown enthusiastic after the letter had been 

read over aloud, would kiss him with the announcement that nobody 

but he could "say things like that."  Thus their latent affections 

would be stirred, and they would end with mutual adoration.



"As you will," she replied.  "I'll make tea, and we'll go to bed 

after."



Thereupon Fontan installed himself at the table on which pen, ink 

and paper were at the same time grandly displayed.  He curved his 

arm; he drew a long face.



"My heart's own," he began aloud.



And for more than an hour he applied himself to his task, polishing 

here, weighing a phrase there, while he sat with his head between 

his hands and laughed inwardly whenever he hit upon a peculiarly 

tender expression.  Nana had already consumed two cups of tea in 

silence, when at last he read out the letter in the level voice and 

with the two or three emphatic gestures peculiar to such 

performances on the stage.  It was five pages long, and he spoke 

therein of "the delicious hours passed at La Mignotte, those hours 

of which the memory lingered like subtle perfume."  He vowed 

"eternal fidelity to that springtide of love" and ended by declaring 

that his sole wish was to "recommence that happy time if, indeed, 

happiness can recommence."



"I say that out of politeness, y'know," he explained.  "The moment 

it becomes laughable--eh, what!  I think she's felt it, she has!"



He glowed with triumph.  But Nana was unskillful; she still 

suspected an outbreak and now was mistaken enough not to fling her 

arms round his neck in a burst of admiration.  She thought the 

letter a respectable performance, nothing more.  Thereupon he was 

much annoyed.  If his letter did not please her she might write 

another!  And so instead of bursting out in loverlike speeches and 

exchanging kisses, as their wont was, they sat coldly facing one 

another at the table.  Nevertheless, she poured him out a cup of 

tea.



"Here's a filthy mess," he cried after dipping his lips in the 

mixture.  "You've put salt in it, you have!"



Nana was unlucky enough to shrug her shoulders, and at that he grew 

furious.



"Aha!  Things are taking a wrong turn tonight!"



And with that the quarrel began.  It was only ten by the clock, and 

this was a way of killing time.  So he lashed himself into a rage 

and threw in Nana's teeth a whole string of insults and all kinds of 

accusations which followed one another so closely that she had no 

time to defend herself.  She was dirty; she was stupid; she had 

knocked about in all sorts of low places!  After that he waxed 

frantic over the money question.  Did he spend six francs when he 

dined out?  No, somebody was treating him to a dinner; otherwise he 

would have eaten his ordinary meal at home.  And to think of 

spending them on that old procuress of a Maloir, a jade he would 

chuck out of the house tomorrow!  Yes, by jingo, they would get into 

a nice mess if he and she were to go throwing six francs out of the 

window every day!



"Now to begin with, I want your accounts," he shouted.  "Let's see; 

hand over the money!  Now where do we stand?"



All his sordid avaricious instincts came to the surface.  Nana was 

cowed and scared, and she made haste to fetch their remaining cash 

out of the desk and to bring it him.  Up to that time the key had 

lain on this common treasury, from which they had drawn as freely as 

they wished.



"How's this?" he said when he had counted up the money.  "There are 

scarcely seven thousand francs remaining out of seventeen thousand, 

and we've only been together three months.  The thing's impossible."



He rushed forward, gave the desk a savage shake and brought the 

drawer forward in order to ransack it in the light of the lamp.  But 

it actually contained only six thousand eight hundred and odd 

francs.  Thereupon the tempest burst forth.



"Ten thousand francs in three months!" he yelled.  "By God!  What 

have you done with it all?  Eh?  Answer!  It all goes to your jade 

of an aunt, eh?  Or you're keeping men; that's plain!  Will you 

answer?"



"Oh well, if you must get in a rage!" said Nana.  "Why, the 

calculation's easily made!  You haven't allowed for the furniture; 

besides, I've had to buy linen.  Money goes quickly when one's 

settling in a new place."



But while requiring explanations he refused to listen to them.



"Yes, it goes a deal too quickly!" he rejoined more calmly.  "And 

look here, little girl, I've had enough of this mutual housekeeping.  

You know those seven thousand francs are mine.  Yes, and as I've got 

'em, I shall keep 'em!  Hang it, the moment you become wasteful I 

get anxious not to be ruined.  To each man his own."



And he pocketed the money in a lordly way while Nana gazed at him, 

dumfounded.  He continued speaking complaisantly:



"You must understand I'm not such a fool as to keep aunts and 

likewise children who don't belong to me.  You were pleased to spend 

your own money--well, that's your affair!  But my money--no, that's 

sacred!  When in the future you cook a leg of mutton I'll pay for 

half of it.  We'll settle up tonight--there!"



Straightway Nana rebelled.  She could not help shouting:



"Come, I say, it's you who've run through my ten thousand francs.  

It's a dirty trick, I tell you!"



But he did not stop to discuss matters further, for he dealt her a 

random box on the ear across the table, remarking as he did so:



"Let's have that again!"



She let him have it again despite his blow.  Whereupon he fell upon 

her and kicked and cuffed her heartily.  Soon he had reduced her to 

such a state that she ended, as her wont was, by undressing and 

going to bed in a flood of tears.



He was out of breath and was going to bed, in his turn, when he 

noticed the letter he had written to Georges lying on the table.  

Whereupon he folded it up carefully and, turning toward the bed, 

remarked in threatening accents:



"It's very well written, and I'm going to post it myself because I 

don't like women's fancies.  Now don't go moaning any more; it puts 

my teeth on edge."



Nana, who was crying and gasping, thereupon held her breath.  When 

he was in bed she choked with emotion and threw herself upon his 

breast with a wild burst of sobs.  Their scuffles always ended thus, 

for she trembled at the thought of losing him and, like a coward, 

wanted always to feel that he belonged entirely to her, despite 

everything.  Twice he pushed her magnificently away, but the warm 

embrace of this woman who was begging for mercy with great, tearful 

eyes, as some faithful brute might do, finally aroused desire.  And 

he became royally condescending without, however, lowering his 

dignity before any of her advances.  In fact, he let himself be 

caressed and taken by force, as became a man whose forgiveness is 

worth the trouble of winning.  Then he was seized with anxiety, 

fearing that Nana was playing a part with a view to regaining 

possession of the treasury key.  The light had been extinguished 

when he felt it necessary to reaffirm his will and pleasure.



"You must know, my girl, that this is really very serious and that I 

keep the money."



Nana, who was falling asleep with her arms round his neck, uttered a 

sublime sentiment.



"Yes, you need fear nothing!  I'll work for both of us!"



But from that evening onward their life in common became more and 

more difficult.  From one week's end to the other the noise of slaps 

filled the air and resembled the ticking of a clock by which they 

regulated their existence.  Through dint of being much beaten Nana 

became as pliable as fine linen; her skin grew delicate and pink and 

white and so soft to the touch and clear to the view that she may be 

said to have grown more good looking than ever.  Prulliere, 

moreover, began running after her like a madman, coming in when 

Fontan was away and pushing her into corners in order to snatch an 

embrace.  But she used to struggle out of his grasp, full of 

indignation and blushing with shame.  It disgusted her to think of 

him wanting to deceive a friend.  Prulliere would thereupon begin 

sneering with a wrathful expression.  Why, she was growing jolly 

stupid nowadays!  How could she take up with such an ape?  For, 

indeed, Fontan was a regular ape with that great swingeing nose of 

his.  Oh, he had an ugly mug!  Besides, the man knocked her about 

too!



"It's possible I like him as he is," she one day made answer in the 

quiet voice peculiar to a woman who confesses to an abominable 

taste.



Bosc contented himself by dining with them as often as possible.  He 

shrugged his shoulders behind Prulliere's back--a pretty fellow, to 

be sure, but a frivolous!  Bosc had on more than one occasion 

assisted at domestic scenes, and at dessert, when Fontan slapped 

Nana, he went on chewing solemnly, for the thing struck him as being 

quite in the course of nature.  In order to give some return for his 

dinner he used always to go into ecstasies over their happiness.  He 

declared himself a philosopher who had given up everything, glory 

included.  At times Prulliere and Fontan lolled back in their 

chairs, losing count of time in front of the empty table, while with 

theatrical gestures and intonation they discussed their former 

successes till two in the morning.  But he would sit by, lost in 

thought, finishing the brandy bottle in silence and only 

occasionally emitting a little contemptuous sniff.  Where was 

Talma's tradition?  Nowhere.  Very well, let them leave him jolly 

well alone!  It was too stupid to go on as they were doing!



One evening he found Nana in tears.  She took off her dressing 

jacket in order to show him her back and her arms, which were black 

and blue.  He looked at her skin without being tempted to abuse the 

opportunity, as that ass of a Prulliere would have been.  Then, 

sententiously:



"My dear girl, where there are women there are sure to be ructions.  

It was Napoleon who said that, I think.  Wash yourself with salt 

water.  Salt water's the very thing for those little knocks.  Tut, 

tut, you'll get others as bad, but don't complain so long as no 

bones are broken.  I'm inviting myself to dinner, you know; I've 

spotted a leg of mutton."



But Mme Lerat had less philosophy.  Every time Nana showed her a 

fresh bruise on the white skin she screamed aloud.  They were 

killing her niece; things couldn't go on as they were doing.  As a 

matter of fact, Fontan had turned Mme Lerat out of doors and had 

declared that he would not have her at his house in the future, and 

ever since that day, when he returned home and she happened to be 

there, she had to make off through the kitchen, which was a horrible 

humiliation to her.  Accordingly she never ceased inveighing against 

that brutal individual.  She especially blamed his ill breeding, 

pursing up her lips, as she did so, like a highly respectable lady 

whom nobody could possibly remonstrate with on the subject of good 

manners.



"Oh, you notice it at once," she used to tell Nana; "he hasn't the 

barest notion of the very smallest proprieties.  His mother must 

have been common!  Don't deny it--the thing's obvious!  I don't 

speak on my own account, though a person of my years has a right to 

respectful treatment, but YOU--how do YOU manage to put up with his 

bad manners?  For though I don't want to flatter myself, I've always 

taught you how to behave, and among our own people you always 

enjoyed the best possible advice.  We were all very well bred in our 

family, weren't we now?"



Nana used never to protest but would listen with bowed head.



"Then, too," continued the aunt, "you've only known perfect 

gentlemen hitherto.  We were talking of that very topic with Zoe at 

my place yesterday evening.  She can't understand it any more than I 

can.  'How is it,' she said, 'that Madame, who used to have that 

perfect gentleman, Monsieur le Comte, at her beck and call'--for 

between you and me, it seems you drove him silly--'how is it that 

Madame lets herself be made into mincemeat by that clown of a 

fellow?'  I remarked at the time that you might put up with the 

beatings but that I would never have allowed him to be lacking in 

proper respect.  In fact, there isn't a word to be said for him.  I 

wouldn't have his portrait in my room even!  And you ruin yourself 

for such a bird as that; yes, you ruin yourself, my darling; you 

toil and you moil, when there are so many others and such rich men, 

too, some of them even connected with the government!  Ah well, it's 

not I who ought to be telling you this, of course!  But all the 

same, when next he tries any of his dirty tricks on I should cut him 

short with a 'Monsieur, what d'you take me for?'  You know how to 

say it in that grand way of yours!  It would downright cripple him."



Thereupon Nana burst into sobs and stammered out:



"Oh, Aunt, I love him!"



The fact of the matter was that Mme Lerat was beginning to feel 

anxious at the painful way her niece doled out the sparse, 

occasional francs destined to pay for little Louis's board and 

lodging.  Doubtless she was willing to make sacrifices and to keep 

the child by her whatever might happen while waiting for more 

prosperous times, but the thought that Fontan was preventing her and 

the brat and its mother from swimming in a sea of gold made her so 

savage that she was ready to deny the very existence of true love.  

Accordingly she ended up with the following severe remarks:



"Now listen, some fine day when he's taken the skin off your back, 

you'll come and knock at my door, and I'll open it to you."



Soon money began to engross Nana's whole attention.  Fontan had 

caused the seven thousand francs to vanish away.  Without doubt they 

were quite safe; indeed, she would never have dared ask him 

questions about them, for she was wont to be blushingly diffident 

with that bird, as Mme Lerat called him.  She trembled lest he 

should think her capable of quarreling with him about halfpence.  He 

had certainly promised to subscribe toward their common household 

expenses, and in the early days he had given out three francs every 

morning.  But he was as exacting as a boarder; he wanted everything 

for his three francs--butter, meat, early fruit and early 

vegetables--and if she ventured to make an observation, if she 

hinted that you could not have everything in the market for three 

francs, he flew into a temper and treated her as a useless, wasteful 

woman, a confounded donkey whom the tradespeople were robbing.  

Moreover, he was always ready to threaten that he would take 

lodgings somewhere else.  At the end of a month on certain mornings 

he had forgotten to deposit the three francs on the chest of 

drawers, and she had ventured to ask for them in a timid, roundabout 

way.  Whereupon there had been such bitter disputes and he had 

seized every pretext to render her life so miserable that she had 

found it best no longer to count upon him.  Whenever, however, he 

had omitted to leave behind the three one-franc pieces and found a 

dinner awaiting him all the same, he grew as merry as a sandboy, 

kissed Nana gallantly and waltzed with the chairs.  And she was so 

charmed by this conduct that she at length got to hope that nothing 

would be found on the chest of drawers, despite the difficulty she 

experienced in making both ends meet.  One day she even returned him 

his three francs, telling him a tale to the effect that she still 

had yesterday's money.  As he had given her nothing then, he 

hesitated for some moments, as though he dreaded a lecture.  But she 

gazed at him with her loving eyes and hugged him in such utter self-

surrender that he pocketed the money again with that little 

convulsive twitch or the fingers peculiar to a miser when he regains 

possession of that which has been well-nigh lost.  From that day 

forth he never troubled himself about money again or inquired whence 

it came.  But when there were potatoes on the table he looked 

intoxicated with delight and would laugh and smack his lips before 

her turkeys and legs of mutton, though of course this did not 

prevent his dealing Nana sundry sharp smacks, as though to keep his 

hand in amid all his happiness.



Nana had indeed found means to provide for all needs, and the place 

on certain days overflowed with good things.  Twice a week, 

regularly, Bosc had indigestion.  One evening as Mme Lerat was 

withdrawing from the scene in high dudgeon because she had noticed a 

copious dinner she was not destined to eat in process of 

preparation, she could not prevent herself asking brutally who paid 

for it all.  Nana was taken by surprise; she grew foolish and began 

crying.



"Ah, that's a pretty business," said the aunt, who had divined her 

meaning.



Nana had resigned herself to it for the sake of enjoying peace in 

her own home.  Then, too, the Tricon was to blame.  She had come 

across her in the Rue de Laval one fine day when Fontan had gone out 

raging about a dish of cod.  She had accordingly consented to the 

proposals made her by the Tricon, who happened just then to be in 

difficulty.  As Fontan never came in before six o'clock, she made 

arrangements for her afternoons and used to bring back forty francs, 

sixty francs, sometimes more.  She might have made it a matter of 

ten and fifteen louis had she been able to maintain her former 

position, but as matters stood she was very glad thus to earn enough 

to keep the pot boiling.  At night she used to forget all her 

sorrows when Bosc sat there bursting with dinner and Fontan leaned 

on his elbows and with an expression of lofty superiority becoming a 

man who is loved for his own sake allowed her to kiss him on the 

eyelids.



In due course Nana's very adoration of her darling, her dear old 

duck, which was all the more passionately blind, seeing that now she 

paid for everything, plunged her back into the muddiest depths of 

her calling.  She roamed the streets and loitered on the pavement in 

quest of a five-franc piece, just as when she was a slipshod baggage 

years ago.  One Sunday at La Rochefoucauld Market she had made her 

peace with Satin after having flown at her with furious reproaches 

about Mme Robert.  But Satin had been content to answer that when 

one didn't like a thing there was no reason why one should want to 

disgust others with it.  And Nana, who was by way of being wide-

minded, had accepted the philosophic view that you never can tell 

where your tastes will lead you and had forgiven her.  Her curiosity 

was even excited, and she began questioning her about obscure vices 

and was astounded to be adding to her information at her time of 

life and with her knowledge.  She burst out laughing and gave vent 

to various expressions of surprise.  It struck her as so queer, and 

yet she was a little shocked by it, for she was really quite the 

philistine outside the pale of her own habits.  So she went back to 

Laure's and fed there when Fontan was dining out.  She derived much 

amusement from the stories and the amours and the jealousies which 

inflamed the female customers without hindering their appetites in 

the slightest degree.  Nevertheless, she still was not quite in it, 

as she herself phrased it.  The vast Laure, meltingly maternal as 

ever, used often to invite her to pass a day or two at her Asnieries 

Villa, a country house containing seven spare bedrooms.  But she 

used to refuse; she was afraid.  Satin, however, swore she was 

mistaken about it, that gentlemen from Paris swung you in swings and 

played tonneau with you, and so she promised to come at some future 

time when it would be possible for her to leave town.



At that time Nana was much tormented by circumstances and not at all 

festively inclined.  She needed money, and when the Tricon did not 

want her, which too often happened, she had no notion where to 

bestow her charms.  Then began a series of wild descents upon the 

Parisian pavement, plunges into the baser sort of vice, whose 

votaries prowl in muddy bystreets under the restless flicker of gas 

lamps.  Nana went back to the public-house balls in the suburbs, 

where she had kicked up her heels in the early ill-shod days.  She 

revisited the dark corners on the outer boulevards, where when she 

was fifteen years old men used to hug her while her father was 

looking for her in order to give her a hiding.  Both the women would 

speed along, visiting all the ballrooms and restaurants in a quarter 

and climbing innumerable staircases which were wet with spittle and 

spilled beer, or they would stroll quietly about, going up streets 

and planting themselves in front of carriage gates.  Satin, who had 

served her apprenticeship in the Quartier Latin, used to take Nana 

to Bullier's and the public houses in the Boulevard Saint-Michel.  

But the vacations were drawing on, and the Quarter looked too 

starved.  Eventually they always returned to the principal 

boulevards, for it was there they ran the best chance of getting 

what they wanted.  From the heights of Montmartre to the observatory 

plateau they scoured the whole town in the way we have been 

describing.  They were out on rainy evenings, when their boots got 

worn down, and on hot evenings, when their linen clung to their 

skins.  There were long periods of waiting and endless periods of 

walking; there were jostlings and disputes and the nameless, brutal 

caresses of the stray passer-by who was taken by them to some 

miserable furnished room and came swearing down the greasy stairs 

afterward.



The summer was drawing to a close, a stormy summer of burning 

nights.  The pair used to start out together after dinner, toward 

nine o'clock.  On the pavements of the Rue Notre Dame de la Lorette 

two long files of women scudded along with tucked-up skirts and bent 

heads, keeping close to the shops but never once glancing at the 

displays in the shopwindows as they hurried busily down toward the 

boulevards.  This was the hungry exodus from the Quartier Breda 

which took place nightly when the street lamps had just been lit.  

Nana and Satin used to skirt the church and then march off along the 

Rue le Peletier.  When they were some hundred yards from the Cafe 

Riche and had fairly reached their scene of operations they would 

shake out the skirts of their dresses, which up till that moment 

they had been holding carefully up, and begin sweeping the 

pavements, regardless of dust.  With much swaying of the hips they 

strolled delicately along, slackening their pace when they crossed 

the bright light thrown from one of the great cafes.  With shoulders 

thrown back, shrill and noisy laughter and many backward glances at 

the men who turned to look at them, they marched about and were 

completely in their element.  In the shadow of night their 

artificially whitened faces, their rouged lips and their darkened 

eyelids became as charming and suggestive as if the inmates of a 

make-believe trumpery oriental bazaar had been sent forth into the 

open street.  Till eleven at night they sauntered gaily along among 

the rudely jostling crowds, contenting themselves with an occasional 

"dirty ass!" hurled after the clumsy people whose boot heels had 

torn a flounce or two from their dresses.  Little familiar 

salutations would pass between them and the cafe waiters, and at 

times they would stop and chat in front of a small table and accept 

of drinks, which they consumed with much deliberation, as became 

people not sorry to sit down for a bit while waiting for the 

theaters to empty.  But as night advanced, if they had not made one 

or two trips in the direction of the Rue la Rochefoucauld, they 

became abject strumpets, and their hunt for men grew more ferocious 

than ever.  Beneath the trees in the darkening and fast-emptying 

boulevards fierce bargainings took place, accompanied by oaths and 

blows.  Respectable family parties--fathers, mothers and daughters--

who were used to such scenes, would pass quietly by the while 

without quickening their pace.  Afterward, when they had walked from 

the opera to the GYMNASE some half-score times and in the deepening 

night men were rapidly dropping off homeward for good and all, Nana 

and Satin kept to the sidewalk in the Rue du Faubourg Montmartre.  

There up till two o'clock in the morning restaurants, bars and ham-

and-beef shops were brightly lit up, while a noisy mob of women hung 

obstinately round the doors of the cafes.  This suburb was the only 

corner of night Paris which was still alight and still alive, the 

only market still open to nocturnal bargains.  These last were 

openly struck between group and group and from one end of the street 

to the other, just as in the wide and open corridor of a disorderly 

house.  On such evenings as the pair came home without having had 

any success they used to wrangle together.  The Rue Notre Dame de la 

Lorette stretched dark and deserted in front of them.  Here and 

there the crawling shadow of a woman was discernible, for the 

Quarter was going home and going home late, and poor creatures, 

exasperated at a night of fruitless loitering, were unwilling to 

give up the chase and would still stand, disputing in hoarse voices 

with any strayed reveler they could catch at the corner of the Rue 

Breda or the Rue Fontaine.



Nevertheless, some windfalls came in their way now and then in the 

shape of louis picked up in the society of elegant gentlemen, who 

slipped their decorations into their pockets as they went upstairs 

with them.  Satin had an especially keen scent for these.  On rainy 

evenings, when the dripping city exhaled an unpleasant odor 

suggestive of a great untidy bed, she knew that the soft weather and 

the fetid reek of the town's holes and corners were sure to send the 

men mad.  And so she watched the best dressed among them, for she 

knew by their pale eyes what their state was.  On such nights it was 

as though a fit of fleshly madness were passing over Paris.  The 

girl was rather nervous certainly, for the most modish gentlemen 

were always the most obscene.  All the varnish would crack off a 

man, and the brute beast would show itself, exacting, monstrous in 

lust, a past master in corruption.  But besides being nervous, that 

trollop of a Satin was lacking in respect.  She would blurt out 

awful things in front of dignified gentlemen in carriages and assure 

them that their coachmen were better bred than they because they 

behaved respectfully toward the women and did not half kill them 

with their diabolical tricks and suggestions.  The way in which 

smart people sprawled head over heels into all the cesspools of vice 

still caused Nana some surprise, for she had a few prejudices 

remaining, though Satin was rapidly destroying them.



"Well then," she used to say when talking seriously about the 

matter, "there's no such thing as virtue left, is there?"



From one end of the social ladder to the other everybody was on the 

loose!  Good gracious!  Some nice things ought to be going on in 

Paris between nine o'clock in the evening and three in the morning!  

And with that she began making very merry and declaring that if one 

could only have looked into every room one would have seen some 

funny sights--the little people going it head over ears and a good 

lot of swells, too, playing the swine rather harder than the rest.  

Oh, she was finishing her education!



One evenlng when she came to call for Satin she recognized the 

Marquis de Chouard.  He was coming downstairs with quaking legs; his 

face was ashen white, and he leaned heavily on the banisters.  She 

pretended to be blowing her nose.  Upstairs she found Satin amid 

indescribable filth.  No household work had been done for a week; 

her bed was disgusting, and ewers and basins were standing about in 

all directions.  Nana expressed surprise at her knowing the marquis.  

Oh yes, she knew him!  He had jolly well bored her confectioner and 

her when they were together.  At present he used to come back now 

and then, but he nearly bothered her life out, going sniffing into 

all the dirty corners--yes, even into her slippers!



"Yes, dear girl, my slippers!  Oh, he's the dirtiest old beast, 

always wanting one to do things!"



The sincerity of these low debauches rendered Nana especially 

uneasy.  Seeing the courtesans around her slowly dying of it every 

day, she recalled to mind the comedy of pleasure she had taken part 

in when she was in the heyday of success.  Moreover, Satin inspired 

her with an awful fear of the police.  She was full of anecdotes 

about them.  Formerly she had been the mistress of a plain-clothes 

man, had consented to this in order to be left in peace, and on two 

occasions he had prevented her from being put "on the lists."  But 

at present she was in a great fright, for if she were to be nabbed 

again there was a clear case against her.  You had only to listen to 

her!  For the sake of perquisites the police used to take up as many 

women as possible.  They laid hold of everybody and quieted you with 

a slap if you shouted, for they were sure of being defended in their 

actions and rewarded, even when they had taken a virtuous girl among 

the rest.  In the summer they would swoop upon the boulevard in 

parties of twelve or fifteen, surround a whole long reach of 

sidewalk and fish up as many as thirty women in an evening.  Satin, 

however, knew the likely places, and the moment she saw a plain-

clothes man heaving in sight she took to her heels, while the long 

lines of women on the pavements scattered in consternation and fled 

through the surrounding crowd.  The dread of the law and of the 

magistracy was such that certain women would stand as though 

paralyzed in the doorways of the cafes while the raid was sweeping 

the avenue without.  But Satin was even more afraid of being 

denounced, for her pastry cook had proved blackguard enough to 

threaten to sell her when she had left him.  Yes, that was a fake by 

which men lived on their mistresses!  Then, too, there were the 

dirty women who delivered you up out of sheer treachery if you were 

prettier than they!  Nana listened to these recitals and felt her 

terrors growing upon her.  She had always trembled before the law, 

that unknown power, that form of revenge practiced by men able and 

willing to crush her in the certain absence of all defenders.  

Saint-Lazare she pictured as a grave, a dark hole, in which they 

buried live women after they had cut off their hair.  She admitted 

that it was only necessary to leave Fontan and seek powerful 

protectors.  But as matters stood it was in vain that Satin talked 

to her of certain lists of women's names, which it was the duty of 

the plainclothes men to consult, and of certain photographs 

accompanying the lists, the originals of which were on no account to 

be touched.  The reassurance did not make her tremble the less, and 

she still saw herself hustled and dragged along and finally 

subjected to the official medical inspection.  The thought of the 

official armchair filled her with shame and anguish, for had she not 

bade it defiance a score of times?



Now it so happened that one evening toward the close of September, 

as she was walking with Satin in the Boulevard Poissonniere, the 

latter suddenly began tearing along at a terrible pace.  And when 

Nana asked her what she meant thereby:



"It's the plain-clothes men!" whispered Satin.  "Off with you!  Off 

with you!"  A wild stampede took place amid the surging crowd.  

Skirts streamed out behind and were torn.  There were blows and 

shrieks.  A woman fell down.  The crowd of bystanders stood 

hilariously watching this rough police raid while the plain-clothes 

men rapidly narrowed their circle.  Meanwhile Nana had lost Satin.  

Her legs were failing her, and she would have been taken up for a 

certainty had not a man caught her by the arm and led her away in 

front of the angry police.  It was Prulliere, and he had just 

recognized her.  Without saying a word he turned down the Rue 

Rougemont with her.  It was just then quite deserted, and she was 

able to regain breath there, but at first her faintness and 

exhaustion were such that he had to support her.  She did not even 

thank him.



"Look here," he said, "you must recover a bit.  Come up to my 

rooms."



He lodged in the Rue Bergere close by.  But she straightened herself 

up at once.



"No, I don't want to."



Thereupon he waxed coarse and rejoined:



"Why don't you want to, eh?  Why, everybody visits my rooms."



"Because I don't."



In her opinion that explained everything.  She was too fond of 

Fontan to betray him with one of his friends.  The other people 

ceased to count the moment there was no pleasure in the business, 

and necessity compelled her to it.  In view of her idiotic obstinacy 

Prulliere, as became a pretty fellow whose vanity had been wounded, 

did a cowardly thing.



"Very well, do as you like!" he cried.  "Only I don't side with you, 

my dear.  You must get out of the scrape by yourself."



And with that he left her.  Terrors got hold of her again, and 

scurrying past shops and turning white whenever a man drew nigh, she 

fetched an immense compass before reaching Montmartre.



On the morrow, while still suffering from the shock of last night's 

terrors, Nana went to her aunt's and at the foot of a small empty 

street in the Batignolles found herself face to face with 

Labordette.  At first they both appeared embarrassed, for with his 

usual complaisance he was busy on a secret errand.  Nevertheless, he 

was the first to regain his self-possession and to announce himself 

fortunate in meeting her.  Yes, certainly, everybody was still 

wondering at Nana's total eclipse.  People were asking for her, and 

old friends were pining.  And with that he grew quite paternal and 

ended by sermonizing.



"Frankly speaking, between you and me, my dear, the thing's getting 

stupid.  One can understand a mash, but to go to that extent, to be 

trampled on like that and to get nothing but knocks!  Are you 

playing up for the 'Virtue Prizes' then?"



She listened to him with an embarrassed expression.  But when he 

told her about Rose, who was triumphantly enjoying her conquest of 

Count Muffat, a flame came into her eyes.



"Oh, if I wanted to--" she muttered.



As became an obliging friend, he at once offered to act as 

intercessor.  But she refused his help, and he thereupon attacked 

her in an opposite quarter.



He informed her that Bordenave was busy mounting a play of 

Fauchery's containing a splendid part for her.



"What, a play with a part!" she cried in amazement.  "But he's in it 

and he's told me nothing about it!"



She did not mention Fontan by name.  However, she grew calm again 

directly and declared that she would never go on the stage again.  

Labordette doubtless remained unconvinced, for he continued with 

smiling insistence.



"You know, you need fear nothing with me.  I get your Muffat ready 

for you, and you go on the stage again, and I bring him to you like 

a little dog!"



"No!" she cried decisively.



And she left him.  Her heroic conduct made her tenderly pitiful 

toward herself.  No blackguard of a man would ever have sacrificed 

himself like that without trumpeting the fact abroad.  Nevertheless, 

she was struck by one thing: Labordette had given her exactly the 

same advice as Francis had given her.  That evening when Fontan came 

home she questioned him about Fauchery's piece.  The former had been 

back at the Varietes for two months past.  Why then had he not told 

her about the part?



"What part?" he said in his ill-humored tone.  "The grand lady's 

part, maybe?  The deuce, you believe you've got talent then!  Why, 

such a part would utterly do for you, my girl!  You're meant for 

comic business--there's no denying it!"



She was dreadfully wounded.  All that evening he kept chaffing her, 

calling her Mlle Mars.  But the harder he hit the more bravely she 

suffered, for she derived a certain bitter satisfaction from this 

heroic devotion of hers, which rendered her very great and very 

loving in her own eyes.  Ever since she had gone with other men in 

order to supply his wants her love for him had increased, and the 

fatigues and disgusts encountered outside only added to the flame.  

He was fast becoming a sort of pet vice for which she paid, a 

necessity of existence it was impossible to do without, seeing that 

blows only stimulated her desires.  He, on his part, seeing what a 

good tame thing she had become, ended by abusing his privileges.  

She was getting on his nerves, and he began to conceive so fierce a 

loathing for her that he forgot to keep count of his real interests.  

When Bosc made his customary remarks to him he cried out in 

exasperation, for which there was no apparent cause, that he had had 

enough of her and of her good dinners and that he would shortly 

chuck her out of doors if only for the sake of making another woman 

a present of his seven thousand francs.  Indeed, that was how their 

liaison ended.



One evening Nana came in toward eleven o'clock and found the door 

bolted.  She tapped once--there was no answer; twice--still no 

answer.  Meanwhile she saw light under the door, and Fontan inside 

did not trouble to move.  She rapped again unwearyingly; she called 

him and began to get annoyed.  At length Fontan's voice became 

audible; he spoke slowly and rather unctuously and uttered but this 

one word.



"MERDE!"



She beat on the door with her fists.



"MERDE!"



She banged hard enough to smash in the woodwork.



"MERDE!"



And for upward of a quarter of an hour the same foul expression 

buffeted her, answering like a jeering echo to every blow wherewith 

she shook the door.  At length, seeing that she was not growing 

tired, he opened sharply, planted himself on the threshold, folded 

his arms and said in the same cold, brutal voice:



"By God, have you done yet?  What d'you want?  Are you going to let 

us sleep in peace, eh?  You can quite see I've got company tonight."



He was certainly not alone, for Nana perceived the little woman from 

the Bouffes with the untidy tow hair and the gimlet-hole eyes, 

standing enjoying herself in her shift among the furniture she had 

paid for.  But Fontan stepped out on the landing.  He looked 

terrible, and he spread out and crooked his great fingers as if they 

were pincers.



"Hook it or I'll strangle you!"



rhereupon Nana burst into a nervous fit of sobbing.  She was 

frightened and she made off.  This time it was she that was being 

kicked out of doors.  And in her fury the thought of Muffat suddenly 

occurred to her.  Ah, to be sure, Fontan, of all men, ought never to 

have done her such a turn!



When she was out in the street her first thought was to go and sleep 

with Satin, provided the girl had no one with her.  She met her in 

front of her house, for she, too, had been turned out of doors by 

her landlord.  He had just had a padlock affixed to her door--quite 

illegally, of course, seeing that she had her own furniture.  She 

swore and talked of having him up before the commissary of police.  

In the meantime, as midnight was striking, they had to begin 

thinking of finding a bed.  And Satin, deeming it unwise to let the 

plain-clothes men into her secrets, ended by taking Nana to a woman 

who kept a little hotel in the Rue de Laval.  Here they were 

assigned a narrow room on the first floor, the window of which 

opened on the courtyard.  Satin remarked:



"I should gladly have gone to Mme Robert's.  There's always a corner 

there for me.  But with you it's out of the question.  She's getting 

absurdly jealous; she beat me the other night."



When they had shut themselves in, Nana, who had not yet relieved her 

feelings, burst into tears and again and again recounted Fontan's 

dirty behavior.  Satin listened complaisantly, comforted her, grew 

even more angry than she in denunciation of the male sex.



"Oh, the pigs, the pigs!  Look here, we'll have nothing more to do 

with them!"



Then she helped Nana to undress with all the small, busy attentions, 

becoming a humble little friend.  She kept saying coaxingly:



"Let's go to bed as fast as we can, pet.  We shall be better off 

there!  Oh, how silly you are to get crusty about things!  I tell 

you, they're dirty brutes.  Don't think any more about 'em.  I--I 

love you very much.  Don't cry, and oblige your own little darling 

girl."



And once in bed, she forthwith took Nana in her arms and soothed and 

comforted her.  She refused to hear Fontan's name mentioned again, 

and each time it recurred to her friend's lips she stopped it with a 

kiss.  Her lips pouted in pretty indignation; her hair lay loose 

about her, and her face glowed with tenderness and childlike beauty.  

Little by little her soft embrace compelled Nana to dry her tears.  

She was touched and replied to Satin's caresses.  When two o'clock 

struck the candle was still burning, and a sound of soft, smothered 

laughter and lovers' talk was audible in the room.



But suddenly a loud noise came up from the lower floors of the 

hotel, and Satin, with next to nothing on, got up and listened 

intently.



"The police!" she said, growing very pale.



"Oh, blast our bad luck!  We're bloody well done for!"



Often had she told stories about the raids on hotel made by the 

plainclothes men.  But that particular night neither of them had 

suspected anything when they took shelter in the Rue de Laval.  At 

the sound of the word "police" Nana lost her head.  She jumped out 

of bed and ran across the room with the scared look of a madwoman 

about to jump out of the window.  Luckily, however, the little 

courtyard was roofed with glass, which was covered with an iron-wire 

grating at the level of the girls' bedroom.  At sight of this she 

ceased to hesitate; she stepped over the window prop, and with her 

chemise flying and her legs bared to the night air she vanished in 

the gloom.



"Stop!  Stop!" said Satin in a great fright.  "You'll kill 

yourself."



Then as they began hammering at the door, she shut the window like a 

good-natured girl and threw her friend's clothes down into a 

cupboard.  She was already resigned to her fate and comforted 

herself with the thought that, after all, if she were to be put on 

the official list she would no longer be so "beastly frightened" as 

of yore.  So she pretended to be heavy with sleep.  She yawned; she 

palavered and ended by opening the door to a tall, burly fellow with 

an unkempt beard, who said to her:



"Show your hands!  You've got no needle pricks on them: you don't 

work.  Now then, dress!"



"But I'm not a dressmaker; I'm a burnisher," Satin brazenly 

declared.



Nevertheless, she dressed with much docility, knowing that argument 

was out of the question.  Cries were ringing through the hotel; a 

girl was clinging to doorposts and refusing to budge an inch.  

Another girl, in bed with a lover, who was answering for her 

legality, was acting the honest woman who had been grossly insulted 

and spoke of bringing an action against the prefect of police.  For 

close on an hour there was a noise of heavy shoes on the stairs, of 

fists hammering on doors, of shrill disputes terminating in sobs, of 

petticoats rustling along the walls, of all the sounds, in fact, 

attendant on the sudden awakening and scared departure of a flock of 

women as they were roughly packed off by three plain-clothes men, 

headed by a little oily-mannered, fair-haired commissary of police.  

After they had gone the hotel relapsed into deep silence.



Nobody had betrayed her; Nana was saved.  Shivering and half dead 

with fear, she came groping back into the room.  Her bare feet were 

cut and bleeding, for they had been torn by the grating.  For a long 

while she remained sitting on the edge of the bed, listening and 

listening.  Toward morning, however, she went to sleep again, and at 

eight o'clock, when she woke up, she escaped from the hotel and ran 

to her aunt's.  When Mme Lerat, who happened just then to be 

drinking her morning coffee with Zoe, beheld her bedraggled plight 

and haggard face, she took note of the hour and at once understood 

the state of the case.



"It's come to it, eh?" she cried.  "I certainly told you that he 

would take the skin off your back one of these days.  Well, well, 

come in; you'll always find a kind welcome here."



Zoe had risen from her chair and was muttering with respectful 

familiarity:



"Madame is restored to us at last.  I was waiting for Madame."



But Mme Lerat insisted on Nana's going and kissing Louiset at once, 

because, she said, the child took delight in his mother's nice ways.  

Louiset, a sickly child with poor blood, was still asleep, and when 

Nana bent over his white, scrofulous face, the memory of all she had 

undergone during the last few months brought a choking lump into her 

throat.



"Oh, my poor little one, my poor little one!" she gasped, bursting 

into a final fit of sobbing.

