





CHAPTER XI





One Sunday the race for the Grand Prix de Paris was being run in the 

Bois de Boulogne beneath skies rendered sultry by the first heats of 

June.  The sun that morning had risen amid a mist of dun-colored 

dust, but toward eleven o'clock, just when the carriages were 

reaching the Longchamps course, a southerly wind had swept away the 

clouds; long streamers of gray vapor were disappearing across the 

sky, and gaps showing an intense blue beyond were spreading from one 

end of the horizon to the other.  In the bright bursts of sunlight 

which alternated with the clouds the whole scene shone again, from 

the field which was gradually filling with a crowd of carriages, 

horsemen and pedestrians, to the still-vacant course, where the 

judge's box stood, together with the posts and the masts for 

signaling numbers, and thence on to the five symmetrical stands of 

brickwork and timber, rising gallery upon gallery in the middle of 

the weighing enclosure opposite.  Beyond these, bathed in the light 

of noon, lay the vast level plain, bordered with little trees and 

shut in to the westward by the wooded heights of Saint-Cloud and the 

Suresnes, which, in their turn, were dominated by the severe 

outlines of Mont-Valerien.



Nana, as excited as if the Grand Prix were going to make her 

fortune, wanted to take up a position by the railing next the 

winning post.  She had arrived very early--she was, in fact, one of 

the first to come--in a landau adorned with silver and drawn, a la 

Daumont, by four splendid white horses.  This landau was a present 

from Count Muffat.  When she had made her appearance at the entrance 

to the field with two postilions jogging blithely on the near horses 

and two footmen perching motionless behind the carriage, the people 

had rushed to look as though a queen were passing.  She sported the 

blue and white colors of the Vandeuvres stable, and her dress was 

remarkable.  It consisted of a little blue silk bodice and tunic, 

which fitted closely to the body and bulged out enormously behind 

her waist, thereby bringing her lower limbs into bold relief in such 

a manner as to be extremely noticeable in that epoch of voluminous 

skirts.  Then there was a white satin dress with white satin sleeves 

and a sash worn crosswise over the shoulders, the whole ornamented 

with silver guipure which shone in the sun.  In addition to this, in 

order to be still more like a jockey, she had stuck a blue toque 

with a white feather jauntily upon her chignon, the fair tresses 

from which flowed down beyond her shoulders and resembled an 

enormous russet pigtail.



Twelve struck.  The public would have to wait more than three hours 

for the Grand Prix to be run.  When the landau had drawn up beside 

the barriers Nana settled herself comfortably down as though she 

were in her own house.  A whim had prompted her to bring Bijou and 

Louiset with her, and the dog crouched among her skirts, shivering 

with cold despite the heat of the day, while amid a bedizenment of 

ribbons and laces the child's poor little face looked waxen and dumb 

and white in the open air.  Meanwhile the young woman, without 

troubling about the people near her, talked at the top of her voice 

with Georges and Philippe Hugon, who were seated opposite on the 

front seat among such a mountain of bouquets of white roses and blue 

myosotis that they were buried up to their shoulders.



"Well then," she was saying, "as he bored me to death, I showed him 

the door.  And now it's two days that he's been sulking."



She was talking of Muffat, but she took care not to confess to the 

young men the real reason for this first quarrel, which was that one 

evening he had found a man's hat in her bedroom.  She had indeed 

brought home a passer-by out of sheer ennui--a silly infatuation.



"You have no idea how funny he is," she continued, growing merry 

over the particulars she was giving.  "He's a regular bigot at 

bottom, so he says his prayers every evening.  Yes, he does.  He's 

under the impression I notice nothing because I go to bed first so 

as not to be in his way, but I watch him out of the corner of my 

eye.  Oh, he jaws away, and then he crosses himself when he turns 

round to step over me and get to the inside of the bed."



"Jove, it's sly," muttered Philippe.  "That's what happens before, 

but afterward, what then?"



She laughed merrily.



"Yes, just so, before and after!  When I'm going to sleep I hear him 

jawing away again.  But the biggest bore of all is that we can't 

argue about anything now without his growing 'pi.'  I've always been 

religious.  Yes, chaff as much as you like; that won't prevent me 

believing what I do believe!  Only he's too much of a nuisance: he 

blubbers; he talks about remorse.  The day before yesterday, for 

instance, he had a regular fit of it after our usual row, and I 

wasn't the least bit reassured when all was over."



But she broke off, crying out:



"Just look at the Mignons arriving.  Dear me, they've brought the 

children!  Oh, how those little chaps are dressed up!"



The Mignons were in a landau of severe hue; there was something 

substantially luxurious about their turnout, suggesting rich retired 

tradespeople.  Rose was in a gray silk gown trimmed with red knots 

and with puffs; she was smiling happily at the joyous behavior of 

Henri and Charles, who sat on the front seat, looking awkward in 

their ill-fitting collegians' tunics.  But when the landau had drawn 

up by the rails and she perceived Nana sitting in triumph among her 

bouquets, with her four horses and her liveries, she pursed up her 

lips, sat bolt upright and turned her head away.  Mignon, on the 

other hand, looking the picture of freshness and gaiety, waved her a 

salutation.  He made it a matter of principle to keep out of 

feminine disagreements.



"By the by," Nana resumed, "d'you know a little old man who's very 

clean and neat and has bad teeth--a Monsieur Venot?  He came to see 

me this morning."



"Monsieur Venot?" said Georges in great astonishment.  "It's 

impossible!  Why, the man's a Jesuit!"



"Precisely; I spotted that.  Oh, you have no idea what our 

conversation was like!  It was just funny!  He spoke to me about the 

count, about his divided house, and begged me to restore a family 

its happiness.  He was very polite and very smiling for the matter 

of that.  Then I answered to the effect that I wanted nothing 

better, and I undertook to reconcile the count and his wife.  You 

know it's not humbug.  I should be delighted to see them all happy 

again, the poor things!  Besides, it would be a relief to me for 

there are days--yes, there are days--when he bores me to death."



The weariness of the last months escaped her in this heartfelt 

outburst.  Moreover, the count appeared to be in big money 

difficulties; he was anxious and it seemed likely that the bill 

which Labordette had put his name to would not be met.



"Dear me, the countess is down yonder," said Georges, letting his 

gaze wander over the stands.



"Where, where?" cried Nana.  "What eyes that baby's got!  Hold my 

sunshade, Philippe."



But with a quick forward dart Georges had outstripped his brother.  

It enchanted him to be holding the blue silk sunshade with its 

silver fringe.  Nana was scanning the scene through a huge pair of 

field glasses.



"Ah yes!  I see her," she said at length.  "In the right-hand stand, 

near a pillar, eh?  She's in mauve, and her daughter in white by her 

side.  Dear me, there's Daguenet going to bow to them."



Thereupon Philippe talked of Daguenet's approaching marriage with 

that lath of an Estelle.  It was a settled matter--the banns were 

being published.  At first the countess had opposed it, but the 

count, they said, had insisted.  Nana smiled.



"I know, I know," she murmured.  "So much the better for Paul.  He's 

a nice boy--he deserves it"



And leaning toward Louiset:



"You're enjoying yourself, eh?  What a grave face!"



The child never smiled.  With a very old expression he was gazing at 

all those crowds, as though the sight of them filled him with 

melancholy reflections.  Bijou, chased from the skirts of the young 

woman who was moving about a great deal, had come to nestle, 

shivering, against the little fellow.



Meanwhile the field was filling up.  Carriages, a compact, 

interminable file of them, were continually arriving through the 

Porte de la Cascade.  There were big omnibuses such as the Pauline, 

which had started from the Boulevard des Italiens, freighted with 

its fifty passengers, and was now going to draw up to the right of 

the stands.  Then there were dogcarts, victorias, landaus, all 

superbly well turned out, mingled with lamentable cabs which jolted 

along behind sorry old hacks, and four-in-hands, sending along their 

four horses, and mail coaches, where the masters sat on the seats 

above and left the servants to take care of the hampers of champagne 

inside, and "spiders," the immense wheels of which were a flash of 

glittering steel, and light tandems, which looked as delicately 

formed as the works of a clock and slipped along amid a peal of 

little bells.  Every few seconds an equestrian rode by, and a swarm 

of people on foot rushed in a scared way among the carriages.  On 

the green the far-off rolling sound which issued from the avenues in 

the Bois died out suddenly in dull rustlings, and now nothing was 

audible save the hubbub of the ever-increasing crowds and cries and 

calls and the crackings of whips in the open.  When the sun, amid 

bursts of wind, reappeared at the edge of a cloud, a long ray of 

golden light ran across the field, lit up the harness and the 

varnished coach panels and touched the ladies' dresses with fire, 

while amid the dusty radiance the coachmen, high up on their boxes, 

flamed beside their great whips.



Labordette was getting out of an open carriage where Gaga, Clarisse 

and Blanche de Sivry had kept a place for him.  As he was hurrying 

to cross the course and enter the weighing enclosure Nana got 

Georges to call him.  Then when he came up:



"What's the betting on me?" she asked laughingly.



She referred to the filly Nana, the Nana who had let herself be 

shamefully beaten in the race for the Prix de Diane and had not even 

been placed in April and May last when she ran for the Prix des Cars 

and the Grande Poule des Produits, both of which had been gained by 

Lusignan, the other horse in the Vandeuvres stable.  Lusignan had 

all at once become prime favorite, and since yesterday he had been 

currently taken at two to one.



"Always fifty to one against," replied Labordette.



"The deuce!  I'm not worth much," rejoined Nana, amused by the jest.  

"I don't back myself then; no, by jingo!  I don't put a single louis 

on myself."



Labordette went off again in a great hurry, but she recalled him.  

She wanted some advice.  Since he kept in touch with the world of 

trainers and jockeys he had special information about various 

stables.  His prognostications had come true a score of times 

already, and people called him the "King of Tipsters."



"Let's see, what horses ought I to choose?" said the young woman.  

"What's the betting on the Englishman?"



"Spirit?  Three to one against.  Valerio II, the same.  As to the 

others, they're laying twenty-five to one against Cosinus, forty to 

one against Hazard, thirty to one against Bourn, thirty-five to one 

against Pichenette, ten to one against Frangipane."



"No, I don't bet on the Englishman, I don't.  I'm a patriot.  

Perhaps Valerio II would do, eh?  The Duc de Corbreuse was beaming a 

little while ago.  Well, no, after all!  Fifty louis on Lusignan; 

what do you say to that?"



Labordette looked at her with a singular expression.  She leaned 

forward and asked him questions in a low voice, for she was aware 

that Vandeuvres commissioned him to arrange matters with the 

bookmakers so as to be able to bet the more easily.  Supposing him 

to have got to know something, he might quite well tell it her.  But 

without entering into explanations Labordette persuaded her to trust 

to his sagacity.  He would put on her fifty louis for her as he 

might think best, and she would not repent of his arrangement.



"All the horses you like!" she cried gaily, letting him take his 

departure, "but no Nana; she's a jade!"



There was a burst of uproarious laughter in the carriage.  The young 

men thought her sally very amusing, while Louiset in his ignorance 

lifted his pale eyes to his mother's face, for her loud exclamations 

surprised him.  However, there was no escape for Labordette as yet.  

Rose Mignon had made a sign to him and was now giving him her 

commands while he wrote figures in a notebook.  Then Clarisse and 

Gaga called him back in order to change their bets, for they had 

heard things said in the crowd, and now they didn't want to have 

anything more to do with Valerio II and were choosing Lusignan.  He 

wrote down their wishes with an impassible expression and at length 

managed to escape.  He could be seen disappearing between two of the 

stands on the other side of the course.



Carriages were still arriving.  They were by this time drawn up five 

rows deep, and a dense mass of them spread along the barriers, 

checkered by the light coats of white horses.  Beyond them other 

carriages stood about in comparative isolation, looking as though 

they had stuck fast in the grass.  Wheels and harness were here, 

there and everywhere, according as the conveyances to which they 

belonged were side by side, at an angle, across and across or head 

to head.  Over such spaces of turf as still remained unoccupied 

cavaliers kept trotting, and black groups of pedestrians moved 

continually.  The scene resembled the field where a fair is being 

held, and above it all, amid the confused motley of the crowd, the 

drinking booths raised their gray canvas roofs which gleamed white 

in the sunshine.  But a veritable tumult, a mob, an eddy of hats, 

surged round the several bookmakers, who stood in open carriages 

gesticulating like itinerant dentists while their odds were pasted 

up on tall boards beside them.



"All the same, it's stupid not to know on what horse one's betting," 

Nana was remarking.  "I really must risk some louis in person."



She had stood up to select a bookmaker with a decent expression of 

face but forgot what she wanted on perceiving a perfect crowd of her 

acquaintance.  Besides the Mignons, besides Gaga, Clarisse and 

Blanche, there were present, to the right and left, behind and in 

the middle of the mass of carriages now hemming in her landau, the 

following ladies: Tatan Nene and Maria Blond in a victoria, Caroline 

Hequet with her mother and two gentlemen in an open carriage, Louise 

Violaine quite alone, driving a little basket chaise decked with 

orange and green ribbons, the colors of the Mechain stables, and 

finally, Lea de Horn on the lofty seat of a mail coach, where a band 

of young men were making a great din.  Farther off, in a HUIT 

RESSORTS of aristocratic appearance, Lucy Stewart, in a very simple 

black silk dress, sat, looking distinguished beside a tall young man 

in the uniform of a naval cadet.  But what most astounded Nana was 

the arrival of Simonne in a tandem which Steiner was driving, while 

a footman sat motionless, with folded arms, behind them.  She looked 

dazzling in white satin striped with yellow and was covered with 

diamonds from waist to hat.  The banker, on his part, was handling a 

tremendous whip and sending along his two horses, which were 

harnessed tandemwise, the leader being a little warm-colored 

chestnut with a mouselike trot, the shaft horse a big brown bay, a 

stepper, with a fine action.



"Deuce take it!" said Nana.  "So that thief Steiner has cleared the 

Bourse again, has he?  I say, isn't Simonne a swell!  It's too much 

of a good thing; he'll get into the clutches of the law!"



Nevertheless, she exchanged greetings at a distance.  Indeed, she 

kept waving her hand and smiling, turning round and forgetting no 

one in her desire to be seen by everybody.  At the same time she 

continued chatting.



"It's her son Lucy's got in tow!  He's charming in his uniform.  

That's why she's looking so grand, of course!  You know she's afraid 

of him and that she passes herself off as an actress.  Poor young 

man, I pity him all the same!  He seems quite unsuspicious."



"Bah," muttered Philippe, laughing, "she'll be able to find him an 

heiress in the country when she likes."



Nana was silent, for she had just noticed the Tricon amid the thick 

of the carriages.  Having arrived in a cab, whence she could not see 

anything, the Tricon had quietly mounted the coach box.  And there, 

straightening up her tall figure, with her noble face enshrined in 

its long curls, she dominated the crowd as though enthroned amid her 

feminine subjects.  All the latter smiled discreetly at her while 

she, in her superiority, pretended not to know them.  She wasn't 

there for business purposes: she was watching the races for the love 

of the thing, as became a frantic gambler with a passion for 

horseflesh.



"Dear me, there's that idiot La Faloise!" said Georges suddenly.



It was a surprise to them all.  Nana did not recognize her La 

Faloise, for since he had come into his inheritance he had grown 

extraordinarily up to date.  He wore a low collar and was clad in a 

cloth of delicate hue which fitted close to his meager shoulders.  

His hair was in little bandeaux, and he affected a weary kind of 

swagger, a soft tone of voice and slang words and phrases which he 

did not take the trouble to finish.



"But he's quite the thing!" declared Nana in perfect enchantment.



Gaga and Clarisse had called La Faloise and were throwing themselves 

at him in their efforts to regain his allegiance, but he left them 

immediately, rolling off in a chaffing, disdainful manner.  Nana 

dazzled him.  He rushed up to her and stood on the carriage step, 

and when she twitted him about Gaga he murmured:



"Oh dear, no!  We've seen the last of the old lot!  Mustn't play her 

off on me any more.  And then, you know, it's you now, Juliet mine!"



He had put his hand to his heart.  Nana laughed a good deal at this 

exceedingly sudden out-of-door declaration.  She continued:



"I say, that's not what I'm after.  You're making me forget that I 

want to lay wagers.  Georges, you see that bookmaker down there, a 

great red-faced man with curly hair?  He's got a dirty blackguard 

expression which I like.  You're to go and choose--Oh, I say, what 

can one choose?"



"I'm not a patriotic soul--oh dear, no!" La Faloise blurted out.  

"I'm all for the Englishman.  It will be ripping if the Englishman 

gains!  The French may go to Jericho!"



Nana was scandalized.  Presently the merits of the several horses 

began to be discussed, and La Faloise, wishing to be thought very 

much in the swim, spoke of them all as sorry jades.  Frangipane, 

Baron Verdier's horse, was by The Truth out of Lenore.  A big bay 

horse he was, who would certainly have stood a chance if they hadn't 

let him get foundered during training.  As to Valerio II from the 

Corbreuse stable, he wasn't ready yet; he'd had the colic in April.  

Oh yes, they were keeping that dark, but he was sure of it, on his 

honor!  In the end he advised Nana to choose Hazard, the most 

defective of the lot, a horse nobody would have anything to do with.  

Hazard, by jingo--such superb lines and such an action!  That horse 

was going to astonish the people.



"No," said Nana, "I'm going to put ten louis on Lusignan and five on 

Boum."



La Faloise burst forth at once:



"But, my dear girl, Boum's all rot!  Don't choose him!  Gasc himself 

is chucking up backing his own horse.  And your Lusignan--never!  

Why, it's all humbug!  By Lamb and Princess--just think!  By Lamb 

and Princess--no, by Jove!  All too short in the legs!"



He was choking.  Philippe pointed out that, notwithstanding this, 

Lusignan had won the Prix des Cars and the Grande Poule des 

Produits.  But the other ran on again.  What did that prove?  

Nothing at all.  On the contrary, one ought to distrust him.  And 

besides, Gresham rode Lusignan; well then, let them jolly well dry 

up!  Gresham had bad luck; he would never get to the post.



And from one end of the field to the other the discussion raging in 

Nana's landau seemed to spread and increase.  Voices were raised in 

a scream; the passion for gambling filled the air, set faces glowing 

and arms waving excitedly, while the bookmakers, perched on their 

conveyances, shouted odds and jotted down amounts right furiously.  

Yet these were only the small fry of the betting world; the big bets 

were made in the weighing enclosure.  Here, then, raged the keen 

contest of people with light purses who risked their five-franc 

pieces and displayed infinite covetousness for the sake of a 

possible gain of a few louis.  In a word, the battle would be 

between Spirit and Lusignan.  Englishmen, plainly recognizable as 

such, were strolling about among the various groups.  They were 

quite at home; their faces were fiery with excitement; they were 

afready triumphant.  Bramah, a horse belonging to Lord Reading, had 

gained the Grand Prix the previous year, and this had been a defeat 

over which hearts were still bleeding.  This year it would be 

terrible if France were beaten anew.  Accordingly all the ladies 

were wild with national pride.  The Vandeuvres stable became the 

rampart of their honor, and Lusignan was pushed and defended and 

applauded exceedingly.  Gaga, Blanche, Caroline and the rest betted 

on Lusignan.  Lucy Stewart abstained from this on account of her 

son, but it was bruited abroad that Rose Mignon had commissioned 

Labordette to risk two hundred louis for her.  The Tricon, as she 

sat alone next her driver, waited till the last moment.  Very cool, 

indeed, amid all these disputes, very far above the ever-increasing 

uproar in which horses' names kept recurring and lively Parisian 

phrases mingled with guttural English exclamations, she sat 

listening and taking notes majestically.



"And Nana?" said Georges.  "Does no one want her?"



Indeed, nobody was asking for the filly; she was not even being 

mentioned.  The outsider of the Vandeuvres's stud was swamped by 

Lusignan's popularity.  But La Faloise flung his arms up, crying:



"I've an inspiration.  I'll bet a louis on Nana."



"Bravo!  I bet a couple," said Georges.



"And I three," added Philippe.



And they mounted up and up, bidding against one another good-

humoredly and naming prices as though they had been haggling over 

Nana at an auction.  La Faloise said he would cover her with gold.  

Besides, everybody was to be made to back her; they would go and 

pick up backers.  But as the three young men were darting off to 

propagandize, Nana shouted after them:



"You know I don't want to have anything to do with her; I don't for 

the world!  Georges, ten louis on Lusignan and five on Valerio II."



Meanwhile they had started fairly off, and she watched them gaily as 

they slipped between wheels, ducked under horses' heads and scoured 

the whole field.  The moment they recognized anyone in a carriage 

they rushed up and urged Nana's claims.  And there were great bursts 

of laughter among the crowd when sometimes they turned back, 

triumphantly signaling amounts with their fingers, while the young 

woman stood and waved her sunshade.  Nevertheless, they made poor 

enough work of it.  Some men let themselves be persuaded; Steiner, 

for instance, ventured three louis, for the sight of Nana stirred 

him.  But the women refused point-blank.  "Thanks," they said; "to 

lose for a certainty!"  Besides, they were in no hurry to work for 

the benefit of a dirty wench who was overwhelming them all with her 

four white horses, her postilions and her outrageous assumption of 

side.  Gaga and Clarisse looked exceedingly prim and asked La 

Faloise whether he was jolly well making fun of them.  When Georges 

boldly presented himself before the Mignons' carriage Rose turned 

her head away in the most marked manner and did not answer him.  One 

must be a pretty foul sort to let one's name be given to a horse!  

Mignon, on the contrary, followed the young man's movements with a 

look of amusement and declared that the women always brought luck.



"Well?" queried Nana when the young men returned after a prolonged 

visit to the bookmakers.



"The odds are forty to one against you," said La Faloise.



"What's that?  Forty to one!" she cried, astounded.  "They were 

fifty to one against me.  What's happened?"



Labordette had just then reappeared.  The course was being cleared, 

and the pealing of a bell announced the first race.  Amid the 

expectant murmur of the bystanders she questioned him about this 

sudden rise in her value.  But he replied evasively; doubtless a 

demand for her had arisen.  She had to content herself with this 

explanation.  Moreover, Labordette announced with a preoccupied 

expression that Vandeuvres was coming if he could get away.



The race was ending unnoticed; people were all waiting for the Grand 

Prix to be run--when a storm burst over the Hippodrome.  For some 

minutes past the sun had disappeared, and a wan twilight had 

darkened over the multitude.  Then the wind rose, and there ensued a 

sudden deluge.  Huge drops, perfect sheets of water, fell.  There 

was a momentary confusion, and people shouted and joked and swore, 

while those on foot scampered madly off to find refuge under the 

canvas of the drinking booths.  In the carriages the women did their 

best to shelter themselves, grasping their sunshades with both 

hands, while the bewildered footmen ran to the hoods.  But the 

shower was already nearly over, and the sun began shining 

brilliantly through escaping clouds of fine rain.  A blue cleft 

opened in the stormy mass, which was blown off over the Bois, and 

the skies seemed to smile again and to set the women laughing in a 

reassured manner, while amid the snorting of horses and the disarray 

and agitation of the drenched multitude that was shaking itself dry 

a broad flush of golden light lit up the field, still dripping and 

glittering with crystal drops.



"Oh, that poor, dear Louiset!" said Nana.  "Are you very drenched, 

my darling?"



The little thing silently allowed his hands to be wiped.  The young 

woman had taken out her handkerchief.  Then she dabbed it over 

Bijou, who was trembling more violently than ever.  It would not 

matter in the least; there were a few drops on the white satin of 

her dress, but she didn't care a pin for them.  The bouquets, 

refreshed by the rain, glowed like snow, and she smelled one 

ecstatically, drenching her lips in it as though it were wet with 

dew.



Meanwhile the burst of rain had suddenly filled the stands.  Nana 

looked at them through her field glasses.  At that distance you 

could only distinguish a compact, confused mass of people, heaped 

up, as it were, on the ascending ranges of steps, a dark background 

relieved by light dots which were human faces.  The sunlight 

filtered in through openings near the roof at each end of the stand 

and detached and illumined portions of the seated multitude, where 

the ladies' dresses seemed to lose their distinguishing colors.  But 

Nana was especially amused by the ladies whom the shower had driven 

from the rows of chairs ranged on the sand at the base of the 

stands.  As courtesans were absolutely forbidden to enter the 

enclosure, she began making exceedingly bitter remarks about all the 

fashionable women therein assembled.  She thought them fearfully 

dressed up, and such guys!



There was a rumor that the empress was entering the little central 

stand, a pavilion built like a chalet, with a wide balcony furnished 

with red armchairs.



"Why, there he is!" said Georges.  "I didn't think he was on duty 

this week."



The stiff and solemn form of the Count Muffat had appeared behind 

the empress.  Thereupon the young men jested and were sorry that 

Satin wasn't there to go and dig him in the ribs.  But Nana's field 

glass focused the head of the Prince of Scots in the imperial stand.



"Gracious, it's Charles!" she cried.



She thought him stouter than formerly.  In eighteen months he had 

broadened, and with that she entered into particulars.  Oh yes, he 

was a big, solidly built fellow!



All round her in the ladies' carriages they were whispering that the 

count had given her up.  It was quite a long story.  Since he had 

been making himself noticeable, the Tuileries had grown scandalized 

at the chamberlain's conduct.  Whereupon, in order ro retain his 

position, he had recently broken it off with Nana.  La Faloise 

bluntly reported this account of matters to the young woman and, 

addressing her as his Juliet, again offered himself.  But she 

laughed merrily and remarked:



"It's idiotic!  You won't know him; I've only to say, 'Come here,' 

for him to chuck up everything."



For some seconds past she had been examining the Countess Sabine and 

Estelle.  Daguenet was still at their side.  Fauchery had just 

arrived and was disturbing the people round him in his desire to 

make his bow to them.  He, too, stayed smilingly beside them.  After 

that Nana pointed with disdainful action at the stands and 

continued:



"Then, you know, those people don't fetch me any longer now!  I know 

'em too well.  You should see 'em behind scenes.  No more honor!  

It's all up with honor!  Filth belowstairs, filth abovestairs, filth 

everywhere.  That's why I won't be bothered about 'em!"



And with a comprehensive gesture she took in everybody, from the 

grooms leading the horses on to the course to the sovereign lady 

busy chatting with with Charles, a prince and a dirty fellow to 

boot.



"Bravo, Nana!  Awfully smart, Nana!" cried La Faloise 

enthusiastically.



The tolling of a bell was lost in the wind; the races continued.  

The Prix d'Ispahan had just been run for and Berlingot, a horse 

belonging to the Mechain stable, had won.  Nana recalled Labordette 

in order to obtain news of the hundred louis, but he burst out 

laughing and refused to let her know the horses he had chosen for 

her, so as not to disturb the luck, as he phrased it.  Her money was 

well placed; she would see that all in good time.  And when she 

confessed her bets to him and told him how she had put ten louis on 

Lusignan and five on Valerio II, he shrugged his shoulders, as who 

should say that women did stupid things whatever happened.  His 

action surprised her; she was quite at sea.



Just then the field grew more animated than before.  Open-air 

lunches were arranged in the interval before the Grand Prix.  There 

was much eating and more drinking in all directions, on the grass, 

on the high seats of the four-in-hands and mail coaches, in the 

victorias, the broughams, the landaus.  There was a universal spread 

of cold viands and a fine disorderly display of champagne baskets 

which footmen kept handing down out of the coach boots.  Corks came 

out with feeble pops, which the wind drowned.  There was an 

interchange of jests, and the sound of breaking glasses imparted a 

note of discord to the high-strung gaiety of the scene.  Gaga and 

Clarisse, together with Blanche, were making a serious repast, for 

they were eating sandwiches on the carriage rug with which they had 

been covering their knees.  Louise Violaine had got down from her 

basket carriage and had joined Caroline Hequet.  On the turf at 

their feet some gentlemen had instituted a drinking bar, whither 

Tatan, Maria, Simonne and the rest came to refresh themselves, while 

high in air and close at hand bottles were being emptied on Lea de 

Horn's mail coach, and, with infinite bravado and gesticulation, a 

whole band were making themselves tipsy in the sunshine, above the 

heads of the crowd.  Soon, however, there was an especially large 

crowd by Nana's landau.  She had risen to her feet and had set 

herself to pour out glasses of champagne for the men who came to pay 

her their respects.  Francois, one of the footmen, was passing up 

the bottles while La Faloise, trying hard to imitate a coster's 

accents, kept pattering away:



"'Ere y're, given away, given away!  There's some for everybody!"



"Do be still, dear boy," Nana ended by saying.  "We look like a set 

of tumblers."



She thought him very droll and was greatly entertained.  At one 

moment she conceived the idea of sending Georges with a glass of 

champagne to Rose Mignon, who was affecting temperance.  Henri and 

Charles were bored to distraction; they would have been glad of some 

champagne, the poor little fellows.  But Georges drank the glassful, 

for he feared an argument.  Then Nana remembered Louiset, who was 

sitting forgotten behind her.  Maybe he was thirsty, and she forced 

him to take a drop or two of wine, which made him cough dreadfully.



"'Ere y'are, 'ere y'are, gemmen!" La Faloise reiterated.  "It don't 

cost two sous; it don't cost one.  We give it away."



But Nana broke in with an exclamation:



"Gracious, there's Bordenave down there!  Call him.  Oh, run, 

please, please do!"



It was indeed Bordenave.  He was strolling about with his hands 

behind his back, wearing a hat that looked rusty in the sunlight and 

a greasy frock coat that was glossy at the seams.  It was Bordenave 

shattered by bankruptcy, yet furious despite all reverses, a 

Bordenave who flaunted his misery among all the fine folks with the 

hardihood becoming a man ever ready to take Dame Fortune by storm.



"The deuce, how smart we are!" he said when Nana extended her hand 

to him like the good-natured wench she was.



Presently, after emptying a glass of champagne, he gave vent to the 

followmg profoundly regretful phrase:



"Ah, if only I were a woman!  But, by God, that's nothing!  Would 

you like to go on the stage again?  I've a notion: I'll hire the 

Gaite, and we'll gobble up Paris between us.  You certainly owe it 

me, eh?"



And he lingered, grumbling, beside her, though glad to see her 

again; for, he said, that confounded Nana was balm to his feelings.  

Yes, it was balm to them merely to exist in her presence!  She was 

his daughter; she was blood of his blood!



The circle increased, for now La Faloise was filling glasses, and 

Georges and Philippe were picking up friends.  A stealthy impulse 

was gradually bringing in the whole field.  Nana would fling 

everyone a laughing smile or an amusing phrase.  The groups of 

tipplers were drawing near, and all the champagne scattered over the 

place was moving in her direction.  Soon there was only one noisy 

crowd, and that was round her landau, where she queened it among 

outstretched glasses, her yellow hair floating on the breeze and her 

snowy face bathed in the sunshine.  Then by way of a finishing touch 

and to make the other women, who were mad at her triumph, simply 

perish of envy, she lifted a brimming glass on high and assumed her 

old pose as Venus Victrix.



But somebody touched her shoulder, and she was surprised, on turning 

round, to see Mignon on the seat.  She vanished from view an instant 

and sat herself down beside him, for he had come to communicate a 

matter of importance.  Mignon had everywhere declared that it was 

ridiculous of his wife to bear Nana a grudge; he thought her 

attitude stupid and useless.



"Look here, my dear," he whispered.  "Be careful: don't madden Rose 

too much.  You understand, I think it best to warn you.  Yes, she's 

got a weapon in store, and as she's never forgiven you the Petite 

Duchesse business--"



"A weapon," said Nana; "what's that blooming well got to do with 

me?"



"Just listen: it's a letter she must have found in Fauchery's 

pocket, a letter written to that screw Fauchery by the Countess 

Muffat.  And, by Jove, it's clear the whole story's in it.  Well 

then, Rose wants to send the letter to the count so as to be 

revenged on him and on you."



"What the deuce has that got to do with me?" Nana repeated.  "It's a 

funny business.  So the whole story about Fauchery's in it!  Very 

well, so much the better; the woman has been exasperating me!  We 

shall have a good laugh!"



"No, I don't wish it," Mignon briskly rejoined.  "There'll be a 

pretty scandal!  Besides, we've got nothing to gain."



He paused, fearing lest he should say too much, while she loudly 

averred that she was most certainly not going to get a chaste woman 

into trouble.



But when he still insisted on his refusal she looked steadily at 

him.  Doubtless he was afraid of seeing Fauchery again introduced 

into his family in case he broke with the countess.  While avenging 

her own wrongs, Rose was anxious for that to happen, since she still 

felt a kindness toward the journalist.  And Nana waxed meditative 

and thought of M. Venot's call, and a plan began to take shape in 

her brain, while Mignon was doing his best to talk her over.



"Let's suppose that Rose sends the letter, eh?  There's food for 

scandal: you're mixed up in the business, and people say you're the 

cause of it all.  Then to begin with, the count separates from his 

wife."



"Why should he?" she said.  "On the contrary--"



She broke off, in her turn.  There was no need for her to think 

aloud.  So in order to be rid of Mignon she looked as though she 

entered into his view of the case, and when he advised her to give 

Rose some proof of her submission--to pay her a short visit on the 

racecourse, for instance, where everybody would see her--she replied 

that she would see about it, that she would think the matter over.



A commotion caused her to stand up again.  On the course the horses 

were coming in amid a sudden blast of wind.  The prize given by the 

city of Paris had just been run for, and Cornemuse had gained it.  

Now the Grand Prix was about to be run, and the fever of the crowd 

increased, and they were tortured by anxiety and stamped and swayed 

as though they wanted to make the minutes fly faster.  At this 

ultimate moment the betting world was surprised and startled by the 

continued shortening of the odds against Nana, the outsider of the 

Vandeuvres stables.  Gentlemen kept returning every few moments with 

a new quotation: the betting was thirty to one against Nana; it was 

twenty-five to one against Nana, then twenty to one, then fifteen to 

one.  No one could understand it.  A filly beaten on all the 

racecourses!  A filly which that same morning no single sportsman 

would take at fifty to one against!  What did this sudden madness 

betoken?  Some laughed at it and spoke of the pretty doing awaiting 

the duffers who were being taken in by the joke.  Others looked 

serious and uneasy and sniffed out something ugly under it all.  

Perhaps there was a "deal" in the offing.  Allusion was made to 

well-known stories about the robberies which are winked at on 

racecourses, but on this occasion the great name of Vandeuvres put a 

stop to all such accusations, and the skeptics in the end prevailed 

when they prophesied that Nana would come in last of all.



"Who's riding Nana?" queried La Faloise.



Just then the real Nana reappeared, whereat the gentlemen lent his 

question an indecent meaning and burst into an uproarious fit of 

laughter.  Nana bowed.



"Price is up," she replied.



And with that the discussion began again.  Price was an English 

celebrity.  Why had Vandeuvres got this jockey to come over, seeing 

that Gresham ordinarily rode Nana?  Besides, they were astonished to 

see him confiding Lusignan to this man Gresham, who, according to La 

Faloise, never got a place.  But all these remarks were swallowed up 

in jokes, contradictions and an extraordinarily noisy confusion of 

opinions.  In order to kill time the company once more set 

themselves to drain bottles of champagne.  Presently a whisper ran 

round, and the different groups opened outward.  It was Vandeuvres.  

Nana affected vexation.



"Dear me, you're a nice fellow to come at this time of day!  Why, 

I'm burning to see the enclosure."



"Well, come along then," he said; "there's still time.  You'll take 

a stroll round with me.  I just happen to have a permit for a lady 

about me."



And he led her off on his arm while she enjoyed the jealous glances 

with which Lucy, Caroline and the others followed her.  The young 

Hugons and La Faloise remained in the landau behind her retreating 

figure and continued to do the honors of her champagne.  She shouted 

to them that she would return immediately.



But Vandeuvres caught sight of Labordette and called him, and there 

was an interchange of brief sentences.



"You've scraped everything up?"



"Yes."



"To what amount?"



"Fifteen hundred louis--pretty well all over the place."



As Nana was visibly listening, and that with much curiosity, they 

held their tongues.  Vandeuvres was very nervous, and he had those 

same clear eyes, shot with little flames, which so frightened her 

the night he spoke of burning himself and his horses together.  As 

they crossed over the course she spoke low and familiarly.



"I say, do explain this to me.  Why are the odds on your filly 

changing?"



He trembled, and this sentence escaped him:



"Ah, they're talking, are they?  What a set those betting men are!  

When I've got the favorite they all throw themselves upon him, and 

there's no chance for me.  After that, when an outsider's asked for, 

they give tongue and yell as though they were being skinned."



"You ought to tell me what's going to happen--I've made my bets," 

she reioined.  "Has Nana a chance?"



A sudden, unreasonable burst of anger overpowered him.



"Won't you deuced well let me be, eh?  Every horse has a chance.  

The odds are shortening because, by Jove, people have taken the 

horse.  Who, I don't know.  I should prefer leaving you if you must 

needs badger me with your idiotic questions."



Such a tone was not germane either to his temperament or his habits, 

and Nana was rather surprised than wounded.  Besides, he was ashamed 

of himself directly afterward, and when she begged him in a dry 

voice to behave politely he apologized.  For some time past he had 

suffered from such sudden changes of temper.  No one in the Paris of 

pleasure or of society was ignorant of the fact that he was playing 

his last trump card today.  If his horses did not win, if, moreover, 

they lost him the considerable sums wagered upon them, it would mean 

utter disaster and collapse for him, and the bulwark of his credit 

and the lofty appearance which, though undermined, he still kept up, 

would come ruining noisily down.  Moreover, no one was ignorant of 

the fact that Nana was the devouring siren who had finished him off, 

who had been the last to attack his crumbling fortunes and to sweep 

up what remained of them.  Stories were told of wild whims and 

fancies, of gold scattered to the four winds, of a visit to Baden-

Baden, where she had not left him enough to pay the hotel bill, of a 

handful of diamonds cast on the fire during an evening of 

drunkenness in order to see whether they would burn like coal.  

Little by little her great limbs and her coarse, plebeian way of 

laughing had gained complete mastery over this elegant, degenerate 

son of an ancient race.  At that time he was risking his all, for he 

had been so utterly overpowered by his taste for ordure and 

stupidity as to have even lost the vigor of his skepticism.  A week 

before Nana had made him promise her a chateau on the Norman coast 

between Havre and Trouville, and now he was staking the very 

foundations of his honor on the fulfillment of his word.  Only she 

was getting on his nerves, and he could have beaten her, so stupid 

did he feel her to be.



The man at the gate, not daring to stop the woman hanging on the 

count's arm, had allowed them to enter the enclosure.  Nana, greatly 

puffed up at the thought that at last she was setting foot on the 

forbidden ground, put on her best behavior and walked slowly by the 

ladies seated at the foot of the stands.  On ten rows of chairs the 

toilets were densely massed, and in the blithe open air their bright 

colors mingled harmoniously.  Chairs were scattered about, and as 

people met one another friendly circles were formed, just as though 

the company had been sitting under the trees in a public garden.  

Children had been allowed to go free and were running from group to 

group, while over head the stands rose tier above crowded tier and 

the light-colored dresses therein faded into the delicate shadows of 

the timberwork.  Nana stared at all these ladies.  She stared 

steadily and markedly at the Countess Sabine.  After which, as she 

was passing in front of the imperial stand, the sight of Muffat, 

looming in all his official stiffness by the side of the empress, 

made her very merry.



"Oh, how silly he looks!" she said at the top of her voice to 

Vandeuvres.  She was anxious to pay everything a visit.  This small 

parklike region, with its green lawns and groups of trees, rather 

charmed her than otherwise.  A vendor of ices had set up a large 

buffet near the entrance gates, and beneath a rustic thatched roof a 

dense throng of people were shouting and gesticulating.  This was 

the ring.  Close by were some empty stalls, and Nana was 

disappointed at discovering only a gendarme's horse there.  Then 

there was the paddock, a small course some hundred meters in 

circumference, where a stable help was walking about Valerio II in 

his horsecloths.  And, oh, what a lot of men on the graveled 

sidewalks, all of them with their tickets forming an orange-colored 

patch in their bottonholes!  And what a continual parade of people 

in the open galleries of the grandstands!  The scene interested her 

for a moment or two, but truly, it was not worth while getting the 

spleen because they didn't admit you inside here.



Daguenet and Fauchery passed by and bowed to her.  She made them a 

sign, and they had to come up.  Thereupon she made hay of the 

weighing-in enclosure.  But she broke off abruptly:



"Dear me, there's the Marquis de Chouard!  How old he's growing!  

That old man's killing himself!  Is he still as mad about it as 

ever?"



Thereupon Daguenet described the old man's last brilliant stroke.  

The story dated from the day before yesterday, and no one knew it as 

yet.  After dangling about for months he had bought her daughter 

Amelie from Gaga for thirty thousand francs, they said.



"Good gracious!  That's a nice business!" cried Nana in disgust. "Go 

in for the regular thing, please!  But now that I come to think of 

it, that must be Lili down there on the grass with a lady in a 

brougham.  I recognized the face.  The old boy will have brought her 

out."



Vandeuvres was not listening; he was impatient and longed to get rid 

of her.  But Fauchery having remarked at parting that if she had not 

seen the bookmakers she had seen nothing, the count was obliged to 

take her to them in spite of his obvious repugnance.  And she was 

perfectly happy at once; that truly was a curious sight, she said!



Amid lawns bordered by young horse-chestnut trees there was a round 

open enclosure, where, forming a vast circle under the shadow of the 

tender green leaves, a dense line of bookmakers was waiting for 

betting men, as though they had been hucksters at a fair.  In order 

to overtop and command the surrounding crowd they had taken up 

positions on wooden benches, and they were advertising their prices 

on the trees beside them.  They had an ever-vigilant glance, and 

they booked wagers in answer to a single sign, a mere wink, so 

rapidly that certain curious onlookers watched them openmouthed, 

without being able to understand it all.  Confusion reigned; prices 

were shouted, and any unexpected change in a quotation was received 

with something like tumult.  Occasionally scouts entered the place 

at a run and redoubled the uproar as they stopped at the entrance to 

the rotunda and, at the tops of their voices, announced departures 

and arrivals.  In this place, where the gambling fever was pulsing 

in the sunshine, such announcements were sure to raise a prolonged 

muttering sound.



"They ARE funny!" murmured Nana, greatly entertained.



"Their features look as if they had been put on the wrong way.  Just 

you see that big fellow there; I shouldn't care to meet him all 

alone in the middle of a wood."



But Vandeuvres pointed her out a bookmaker, once a shopman in a 

fancy repository, who had made three million francs in two years.  

He was slight of build, delicate and fair, and people all round him 

treated him with great respect.  They smiled when they addressed 

him, while others took up positions close by in order to catch a 

glimpse of him.



They were at length leaving the ring when Vandeuvres nodded slightly 

to another bookmaker, who thereupon ventured to call him.  It was 

one of his former coachmen, an enormous fellow with the shoulders of 

an ox and a high color.  Now that he was trying his fortunes at race 

meetings on the strength of some mysteriously obtained capital, the 

count was doing his utmost to push him, confiding to him his secret 

bets and treating him on all occasions as a servant to whom one 

shows one's true character.  Yet despite this protection, the man 

had in rapid succession lost very heavy sums, and today he, too, was 

playing his last card.  There was blood in his eyes; he looked fit 

to drop with apoplexy.



"Well, Marechal," queried the count in the lowest of voices, "to 

what amount have you laid odds?"



"To five thousand louis, Monsieur le Comte," replied the bookmaker, 

likewise lowering his voice.  "A pretty job, eh?  I'll confess to 

you that I've increased the odds; I've made it three to one."



Vandeuvres looked very much put out.



"No, no, I don't want you to do that.  Put it at two to one again 

directly.  I shan't tell you any more, Marechal."



"Oh, how can it hurt, Monsieur le Comte, at this time o' day?" 

rejoined the other with the humble smile befitting an accomplice.  

"I had to attract the people so as to lay your two thousand louis."



At this Vandeuvres silenced him.  But as he was going off Marechal 

remembered something and was sorry he had not questioned him about 

the shortening of the odds on the filly.  It would be a nice 

business for him if the filly stood a chance, seeing that he had 

just laid fifty to one about her in two hundreds.



Nana, though she did not understand a word of what the count was 

whispering, dared not, however, ask for new explanations.  He seemed 

more nervous than before and abruptly handed her over to Labordette, 

whom they came upon in front of the weighing-in room.



"You'll take her back," he said.  "I've got something on hand.  Au 

revoir!"



And he entered the room, which was narrow and low-pitched and half 

filled with a great pair of scales.  It was like a waiting room in a 

suburban station, and Nana was again hugely disillusioned, for she 

had been picturing to herself something on a very vast scale, a 

monumental machine, in fact, for weighing horses.  Dear me, they 

only weighed the jockeys!  Then it wasn't worth while making such a 

fuss with their weighing!  In the scale a jockey with an idiotic 

expression was waiting, harness on knee, till a stout man in a frock 

coat should have done verifying his weight.  At the door a stable 

help was holding a horse, Cosinus, round which a silent and deeply 

interested throng was clustering.



The course was about to be cleared.  Labordette hurried Nana but 

retraced his steps in order to show her a little man talking with 

Vandeuvres at some distance from the rest.



"Dear me, there's Price!" he said.



"Ah yes, the man who's mounting me," she murmured laughingly.



And she declared him to be exquisitely ugly.  All jockeys struck her 

as looking idiotic, doubtless, she said, because they were prevented 

from growing bigger.  This particular jockey was a man of forty, and 

with his long, thin, deeply furrowed, hard, dead countenance, he 

looked like an old shriveled-up child.  His body was knotty and so 

reduced in size that his blue jacket with its white sleeves looked 

as if it had been thrown over a lay figure.



"No," she resumed as she walked away, "he would never make me very 

happy, you know."



A mob of people were still crowding the course, the turf of which 

had been wet and trampled on till it had grown black.  In front of 

the two telegraphs, which hung very high up on their cast-iron 

pillars, the crowd were jostling together with upturned faces, 

uproariously greeting the numbers of the different horses as an 

electric wire in connection with the weighing room made them appear.  

Gentlemen were pointing at programs: Pichenette had been scratched 

by his owner, and this caused some noise.  However, Nana did not do 

more than cross over the course on Labordette's arm.  The bell 

hanging on the flagstaff was ringing persistently to warn people to 

leave the course.



"Ah, my little dears," she said as she got up into her landau again, 

"their enclosure's all humbug!"



She was welcomed with acclamation; people around her clapped their 

hands.



"Bravo, Nana!  Nana's ours again!"



What idiots they were, to be sure!  Did they think she was the sort 

to cut old friends?  She had come back just at the auspicious 

moment.  Now then, 'tenshun!  The race was beginning!  And the 

champagne was accordingly forgotten, and everyone left off drinking.



But Nana was astonished to find Gaga in her carriage, sitting with 

Bijou and Louiset on her knees.  Gaga had indeed decided on this 

course of action in order to be near La Faloise, but she told Nana 

that she had been anxious to kiss Baby.  She adored children.



"By the by, what about Lili?" asked Nana.  "That's certainly she 

over there in that old fellow's brougham.  They've just told me 

something very nice!"



Gaga had adopted a lachrymose expression.



"My dear, it's made me ill," she said dolorously.  "Yesterday I had 

to keep my bed, I cried so, and today I didn't think I should be 

able to come.  You know what my opinions were, don't you?  I didn't 

desire that kind of thing at all.  I had her educated in a convent 

with a view to a good marriage.  And then to think of the strict 

advice she had and the constant watching!  Well, my dear, it was she 

who wished it.  We had such a scene--tears--disagreeable speeches!  

It even got to such a point that I caught her a box on the ear.  She 

was too much bored by existence, she said; she wanted to get out of 

it.  By and by, when she began to say, ''Tisn't you, after all, 

who've got the right to prevent me,' I said to her: 'you're a 

miserable wretch; you're bringing dishonor upon us.  Begone!'  And 

it was done.  I consented to arrange about it.  But my last hope's 

blooming well blasted, and, oh, I used to dream about such nice 

things!"



The noise of a quarrel caused them to rise.  It was Georges in the 

act of defending Vandeuvres against certain vague rumors which were 

circulating among the various groups.



"Why should you say that he's laying off his own horse?" the young 

man was exclaiming.  "Yesterday in the Salon des Courses he took the 

odds on Lusignan for a thousand louis."



"Yes, I was there," said Philippe in affirmation of this.  "And he 

didn't put a single louis on Nana.  If the betting's ten to one 

against Nana he's got nothing to win there.  It's absurd to imagine 

people are so calculating.  Where would his interest come in?"



Labordette was listening with a quiet expression.  Shrugging his 

shoulders, he said:



"Oh, leave them alone; they must have their say.  The count has 

again laid at least as much as five hundred louis on Lusignan, and 

if he's wanted Nana to run to a hundred louis it's because an owner 

ought always to look as if he believes in his horses."



"Oh, bosh!  What the deuce does that matter to us?" shouted La 

Faloise with a wave of his arms.  "Spirit's going to win!  Down with 

France--bravo, England!"



A long shiver ran through the crowd, while a fresh peal from the 

bell announced the arrival of the horses upon the racecourse.  At 

this Nana got up and stood on one of the seats of her carriage so as 

to obtain a better view, and in so doing she trampled the bouquets 

of roses and myosotis underfoot.  With a sweeping glance she took in 

the wide, vast horizon.  At this last feverish moment the course was 

empty and closed by gray barriers, between the posts of which stood 

a line of policemen.  The strip of grass which lay muddy in front of 

her grew brighter as it stretched away and turned into a tender 

green carpet in the distance.  In the middle landscape, as she 

lowered her eyes, she saw the field swarming with vast numbers of 

people, some on tiptoe, others perched on carriages, and all heaving 

and jostling in sudden passionate excitement.



Horses were neighing; tent canvases flapped, while equestrians urged 

their hacks forward amid a crowd of pedestrians rushing to get 

places along the barriers.  When Nana turned in the direction of the 

stands on the other side the faces seemed diminished, and the dense 

masses of heads were only a confused and motley array, filling 

gangways, steps and terraces and looming in deep, dark, serried 

lines against the sky.  And beyond these again she over looked the 

plain surrounding the course.  Behind the ivy-clad mill to the 

right, meadows, dotted over with great patches of umbrageous wood, 

stretched away into the distance, while opposite to her, as far as 

the Seine flowing at the foot of a hill, the avenues of the park 

intersected one another, filled at that moment with long, motionless 

files of waiting carriages; and in the direction of Boulogne, on the 

left, the landscape widened anew and opened out toward the blue 

distances of Meudon through an avenue of paulownias, whose rosy, 

leafless tops were one stain of brilliant lake color.  People were 

still arriving, and a long procession of human ants kept coming 

along the narrow ribbon of road which crossed the distance, while 

very far away, on the Paris side, the nonpaying public, herding like 

sheep among the wood, loomed in a moving line of little dark spots 

under the trees on the skirts of the Bois.



Suddenly a cheering influence warmed the hundred thousand souls who 

covered this part of the plain like insects swarming madly under the 

vast expanse of heaven.  The sun, which had been hidden for about a 

quarter of an hour, made his appearance again and shone out amid a 

perfect sea of light.  And everything flamed afresh: the women's 

sunshades turned into countless golden targets above the heads of 

the crowd.  The sun was applauded, saluted with bursts of laughter.  

And people stretched their arms out as though to brush apart the 

clouds.



Meanwhile a solitary police officer advanced down the middle of the 

deserted racecourse, while higher up, on the left, a man appeared 

with a red flag in his hand.



"It's the starter, the Baron de Mauriac," said Labordette in reply 

to a question from Nana.  All round the young woman exclamations 

were bursting from the men who were pressing to her very carriage 

step.  They kept up a disconnected conversation, jerking out phrases 

under the immediate influence of passing impressions.  Indeed, 

Philippe and Georges, Bordenave and La Faloise, could not be quiet.



"Don't shove!  Let me see!  Ah, the judge is getting into his box.  

D'you say it's Monsieur de Souvigny?  You must have good eyesight--

eh?--to be able to tell what half a head is out of a fakement like 

that!  Do hold your tongue--the banner's going up.  Here they are--

'tenshun!  Cosinus is the first!"



A red and yellow banner was flapping in mid-air at the top of a 

mast.  The horses came on the course one by one; they were led by 

stableboys, and the jockeys were sitting idle-handed in the saddles, 

the sunlight making them look like bright dabs of color.  After 

Cosinus appeared Hazard and Boum.  Presently a murmur of approval 

greeted Spirit, a magnificent big brown bay, the harsh citron color 

and black of whose jockey were cheerlessly Britannic.  Valerio II 

scored a success as he came in; he was small and very lively, and 

his colors were soft green bordered with pink.  The two Vandeuvres 

horses were slow to make their appearance, but at last, in 

Frangipane's rear, the blue and white showed themselves.  But 

Lusignan, a very dark bay of irreproachable shape, was almost 

forgotten amid the astonishment caused by Nana.  People had not seen 

her looking like this before, for now the sudden sunlight was dyeing 

the chestnut filly the brilliant color of a girl's red-gold hair.  

She was shining in the light like a new gold coin; her chest was 

deep; her head and neck tapered lightly from the delicate, high-

strung line of her long back.



"Gracious, she's got my hair!" cried Nana in an ecstasy.  "You bet 

you know I'm proud of it!"



The men clambered up on the landau, and Bordenave narrowly escaped 

putting his foot on Louiset, whom his mother had forgotten.  He took 

him up with an outburst of paternal grumbling and hoisted him on his 

shoulder, muttering at the same time:



"The poor little brat, he must be in it too!  Wait a bit, I'll show 

you Mamma.  Eh?  Look at Mummy out there."



And as Bijou was scratching his legs, he took charge of him, too, 

while Nana, rejoicing in the brute that bore her name, glanced round 

at the other women to see how they took it.  They were all raging 

madly.  Just then on the summit of her cab the Tricon, who had not 

moved till that moment, began waving her hand and giving her 

bookmaker her orders above the heads of the crowd.  Her instinct had 

at last prompted her; she was backing Nana.



La Faloise meanwhile was making an insufferable noise.  He was 

getting wild over Frangipane.



"I've an inspiration," he kept shouting.  "Just look at Frangipane.  

What an action, eh?  I back Frangipane at eight to one.  Who'll take 

me?"



"Do keep quiet now," said Labordette at last.  "You'll be sorry for 

it if you do."



"Frangipane's a screw," Philippe declared.  "He's been utterly blown 

upon already.  You'll see the canter."



The horses had gone up to the right, and they now started for the 

preliminary canter, passing in loose order before the stands.  

Thereupon there was a passionate fresh burst of talk, and people all 

spoke at once.



"Lusignan's too long in the back, but he's very fit.  Not a cent, I 

tell you, on Valerio II; he's nervous--gallops with his head up--

it's a bad sign.  Jove!  Burne's riding Spirit.  I tell you, he's 

got no shoulders.  A well-made shoulder--that's the whole secret.  

No, decidedly, Spirit's too quiet.  Now listen, Nana, I saw her 

after the Grande Poule des Produits, and she was dripping and 

draggled, and her sides were trembling like one o'clock.  I lay 

twenty louis she isn't placed!  Oh, shut up!  He's boring us with 

his Frangipane.  There's no time to make a bet now; there, they're 

off!"



Almost in tears, La Faloise was struggling to find a bookmaker.  He 

had to be reasoned with.  Everyone craned forward, but the first go-

off was bad, the starter, who looked in the distance like a slim 

dash of blackness, not having lowered his flag.  The horses came 

back to their places after galloping a moment or two.  There were 

two more false starts.  At length the starter got the horses 

together and sent them away with such address as to elicit shouts of 

applause.



"Splendid!  No, it was mere chance!  Never mind--it's done it!"



The outcries were smothered by the anxiety which tortured every 

breast.  The betting stopped now, and the game was being played on 

the vast course itself.  Silence reigned at the outset, as though 

everyone were holding his breath.  White faces and trembling forms 

were stretched forward in all directions.  At first Hazard and 

Cosinus made the running at the head of the rest; Valerio II 

followed close by, and the field came on in a confused mass behind.  

When they passed in front of the stands, thundering over the ground 

in their course like a sudden stormwind, the mass was already some 

fourteen lengths in extent.  Frangipane was last, and Nana was 

slightly behind Lusignan and Spirit.



"Egad!" muttered Labordette, "how the Englishman is pulling it off 

out there!"



The whole carriageload again burst out with phrases and 

exclamations.  Everyone rose on tiptoe and followed the bright 

splashes of color which were the jockeys as they rushed through the 

sunlight.



At the rise Valerio II took the lead, while Cosinus and Hazard lost 

ground, and Lusignan and Spirit were running neck and neck with Nana 

still behind them.



"By jingo, the Englishman's gained!  It's palpable!" said Bordenave.  

"Lusignan's in difficulties, and Valerio II can't stay."



"Well, it will be a pretty biz if the Englishman wins!" cried 

Philippe in an access of patriotic grief.



A feeling of anguish was beginning to choke all that crowded 

multitude.  Another defeat!  And with that a strange ardent prayer, 

which was almost religious, went up for Lusignan, while people 

heaped abuse on Spirit and his dismal mute of a jockey.  Among the 

crowd scattered over the grass the wind of excitement put up whole 

groups of people and set their boot soles flashing in air as they 

ran.  Horsemen crossed the green at a furious gallop.  And Nana, who 

was slowly revolving on her own axis, saw beneath her a surging 

waste of beasts and men, a sea of heads swayed and stirred all round 

the course by the whirlwind of the race, which clove the horizon 

with the bright lightning flash of the jockeys.  She had been 

following their movement from behind while the cruppers sped away 

and the legs seemed to grow longer as they raced and then diminished 

till they looked slender as strands of hair.  Now the horses were 

running at the end of the course, and she caught a side view of them 

looking minute and delicate of outline against the green distances 

of the Bois.  Then suddenly they vanished behind a great clump of 

trees growing in the middle of the Hippodrome.



"Don't talk about it!" cried Georges, who was still full of hope.  

"It isn't over yet.  The Englishman's touched."



But La Faloise was again seized with contempt for his country and 

grew positively outrageous in his applause of Spirit.  Bravo!  That 

was right!  France needed it!  Spirit first and Frangipane second--

that would be a nasty one for his native land!  He exasperated 

Labordette, who threatened seriously to throw him off the carriage.



"Let's see how many minutes they'll be about it," said Bordenave 

peaceably, for though holding up Louiset, he had taken out his 

watch.



One after the other the horses reappeared from behind the clump of 

trees.  There was stupefaction; a long murmur arose among the crowd.  

Valerio II was still leading, but Spirit was gaining on him, and 

behind him Lusignan had slackened while another horse was taking his 

place.  People could not make this out all at once; they were 

confused about the colors.  Then there was a burst of exclamations.



"But it's Nana!  Nana?  Get along!  I tell you Lusignan hasn't 

budged.  Dear me, yes, it's Nana.  You can certainly recognize her 

by her golden color.  D'you see her now?  She's blazing away.  

Bravo, Nana!  What a ripper she is!  Bah, it doesn't matter a bit: 

she's making the running for Lusignan!"



For some seconds this was everybody's opinion.  But little by little 

the filly kept gaining and gaining, spurting hard all the while.  

Thereupon a vast wave of feeling passed over the crowd, and the tail 

of horses in the rear ceased to interest.  A supreme struggle was 

beginning between Spirit, Nana, Lusignan and Valerio II.  They were 

pointed out; people estimated what ground they had gained or lost in 

disconnected, gasping phrases.  And Nana, who had mounted up on the 

coach box, as though some power had lifted her thither, stood white 

and trembling and so deeply moved as not to be able to speak.  At 

her side Labordette smiled as of old.



"The Englishman's in trouble, eh?" said Philippe joyously.  "He's 

going badly."



"In any case, it's all up with Lusignan," shouted La Faloise.  

"Valerio II is coming forward.  Look, there they are all four 

together."



The same phrase was in every mouth.



"What a rush, my dears!  By God, what a rush!"



The squad of horses was now passing in front of them like a flash of 

lightning.  Their approach was perceptible--the breath of it was as 

a distant muttering which increased at every second.  The whole 

crowd had thrown themselves impetuously against the barriers, and a 

deep clamor issued from innumerable chests before the advance of the 

horses and drew nearer and nearer like the sound of a foaming tide.  

It was the last fierce outburst of colossal partisanship; a hundred 

thousand spectators were possessed by a single passion, burning with 

the same gambler's lust, as they gazed after the beasts, whose 

galloping feet were sweeping millions with them.  The crowd pushed 

and crushed--fists were clenched; people gaped, openmouthed; every 

man was fighting for himself; every man with voice and gesture was 

madly speeding the horse of his choice.  And the cry of all this 

multitude, a wild beast's cry despite the garb of civilization, grew 

ever more distinct:



"Here they come!  Here they come!  Here they come!"



But Nana was still gaining ground, and now Valerio II was distanced, 

and she was heading the race, with Spirit two or three necks behind.  

The rolling thunder of voices had increased.  They were coming in; a 

storm of oaths greeted them from the landau.



"Gee up, Lusignan, you great coward!  The Englishman's stunning!  Do 

it again, old boy; do it again!  Oh, that Valerio!  It's sickening!  

Oh, the carcass!  My ten louis damned well lost!  Nana's the only 

one!  Bravo, Nana!  Bravo!"



And without being aware of it Nana, upon her seat, had begun jerking 

her hips and waist as though she were racing herself.  She kept 

striking her side--she fancied it was a help to the filly.  With 

each stroke she sighed with fatigue and said in low, anguished 

tones:



"Go it, go it!"



Then a splendid sight was witnessed.  Price, rising in his stirrups 

and brandishing his whip, flogged Nana with an arm of iron.  The old 

shriveled-up child with his long, hard, dead face seemed to breath 

flame.  And in a fit of furious audacity and triumphant will he put 

his heart into the filly, held her up, lifted her forward, drenched 

in foam, with eyes of blood.  The whole rush of horses passed with a 

roar of thunder: it took away people's breaths; it swept the air 

with it while the judge sat frigidly waiting, his eye adjusted to 

its task.  Then there was an immense re-echoing burst of 

acclamation.  With a supreme effort Price had just flung Nana past 

the post, thus beating Spirit by a head.



There was an uproar as of a rising tide.  "Nana!  Nana!  Nana!"  The 

cry rolled up and swelled with the violence of a tempest, till 

little by little it filled the distance, the depths of the Bois as 

far as Mont Valerien, the meadows of Longchamps and the Plaine de 

Boulogne.  In all parts of the field the wildest enthusiasm declared 

itself.  "Vive Nana!  Vive la France!  Down with England!"  The 

women waved their sunshades; men leaped and spun round, vociferating 

as they did so, while others with shouts of nervous laughter threw 

their hats in the air.  And from the other side of the course the 

enclosure made answer; the people on the stands were stirred, though 

nothing was distinctly visible save a tremulous motion of the air, 

as though an invisible flame were burning in a brazier above the 

living mass of gesticulating arms and little wildly moving faces, 

where the eyes and gaping mouths looked like black dots.  The noise 

did not cease but swelled up and recommenced in the recesses of 

faraway avenues and among the people encamped under the trees, till 

it spread on and on and attained its climax in the imperial stand, 

where the empress herself had applauded.  "Nana!  Nana!  Nana!"  The 

cry rose heavenward in the glorious sunlight, whose golden rain beat 

fiercely on the dizzy heads of the multitude.



Then Nana, looming large on the seat of her landau, fancied that it 

was she whom they were applauding.  For a moment or two she had 

stood devoid of motion, stupefied by her triumph, gazing at the 

course as it was invaded by so dense a flood of people that the turf 

became invisible beneath the sea of black hats.  By and by, when 

this crowd had become somewhat less disorderly and a lane had been 

formed as far as the exit and Nana was again applauded as she went 

off with Price hanging lifelessly and vacantly over her neck, she 

smacked her thigh energetically, lost all self-possession, triumphed 

in crude phrases:



"Oh, by God, it's me; it's me.  Oh, by God, what luck!"



And, scarce knowing how to give expression to her overwhelming joy, 

she hugged and kissed Louiset, whom she now discovered high in the 

air on Bordenave's shoulder.



"Three minutes and fourteen seconds," said the latter as he put his 

watch back in his pocket.



Nana kept hearing her name; the whole plain was echoing it back to 

her.  Her people were applauding her while she towered above them in 

the sunlight, in the splendor of her starry hair and white-and-sky-

blue dress.  Labordette, as he made off, had just announced to her a 

gain of two thousand louis, for he had put her fifty on Nana at 

forty to one.  But the money stirred her less than this unforeseen 

victory, the fame of which made her queen of Paris.  All the other 

ladies were losers.  With a raging movement Rose Mignon had snapped 

her sunshade, and Caroline Hequet and Clarisse and Simonne--nay, 

Lucy Stewart herself, despite the presence of her son--were swearing 

low in their exasperation at that great wench's luck, while the 

Tricon, who had made the sign of the cross at both start and finish, 

straightened up her tall form above them, went into an ecstasy over 

her intuition and damned Nana admiringly as became an experienced 

matron.



Meanwhile round the landau the crush of men increased.  The band of 

Nana's immediate followers had made a fierce uproar, and now 

Georges, choking with emotion, continued shouting all by himself in 

breaking tones.  As the champagne had given out, Philippe, taking 

the footmen with him, had run to the wine bars.  Nana's court was 

growing and growing, and her present triumph caused many loiterers 

to join her.  Indeed, that movement which had made her carriage a 

center of attraction to the whole field was now ending in an 

apotheosis, and Queen Venus was enthroned amid suddenly maddened 

subjects.  Bordenave, behind her, was muttering oaths, for he 

yearned to her as a father.  Steiner himself had been reconquered--

he had deserted Simonne and had hoisted himself upon one of Nana's 

carriage steps.  When the champagne had arrived, when she lifted her 

brimming glass, such applause burst forth, and "Nana!  Nana!  Nana!" 

was so loudly repeated that the crowd looked round in astonishment 

for the filly, nor could any tell whether it was the horse or the 

woman that filled all hearts.



While this was going on Mignon came hastening up in defiance of 

Rose's terrible frown.  That confounded girl simply maddened him, 

and he wanted to kiss her.  Then after imprinting a paternal salute 

on both her cheeks:



"What bothers me," he said, "is that now Rose is certainly going to 

send the letter.  She's raging, too, fearfully."



"So much the better!  It'll do my business for me!" Nana let slip.



But noting his utter astonishment, she hastily continued:



"No, no, what am I saying?  Indeed, I don't rightly know what I'm 

saying now!  I'm drunk."



And drunk, indeed, drunk with joy, drunk with sunshine, she still 

raised her glass on high and applauded herself.



"To Nana!  To Nana!" she cried amid a redoubled uproar of laughter 

and bravoes, which little by little overspread the whole Hippodrome.



The races were ending, and the Prix Vaublanc was run for.  Carriages 

began driving off one by one.  Meanwhile, amid much disputing, the 

name of Vandeuvres was again mentioned.  It was quite evident now: 

for two years past Vandeuvres had been preparing his final stroke 

and had accordingly told Gresham to hold Nana in, while he had only 

brought Lusignan forward in order to make play for the filly.  The 

losers were vexed; the winners shrugged their shoulders.  After all, 

wasn't the thing permissible?  An owner was free to run his stud in 

his own way.  Many others had done as he had!  In fact, the majority 

thought Vandeuvres had displayed great skill in raking in all he 

could get about Nana through the agency of friends, a course of 

action which explained the sudden shortening of the odds.  People 

spoke of his having laid two thousand louis on the horse, which, 

supposing the odds to be thirty to one against, gave him twelve 

hundred thousand francs, an amount so vast as to inspire respect and 

to excuse everything.



But other rumors of a very serious nature were being whispered 

about: they issued in the first instance from the enclosure, and the 

men who returned thence were full of exact particulars.  Voices were 

raised; an atrocious scandal began to be openly canvassed.  That 

poor fellow Vandeuvres was done for; he had spoiled his splendid hit 

with a piece of flat stupidity, an idiotic robbery, for he had 

commissioned Marechal, a shady bookmaker, to lay two thousand louis 

on his account against Lusignan, in order thereby to get back his 

thousand and odd openly wagered louis.  It was a miserable business, 

and it proved to be the last rift necessary to the utter breakup of 

his fortune.  The bookmaker being thus warned that the favorite 

would not win, had realized some sixty thousand francs over the 

horse.  Only Labordette, for lack of exact and detailed 

instructions, had just then gone to him to put two hundred louis on 

Nana, which the bookmaker, in his ignorance of the stroke actually 

intended, was still quoting at fifty to one against.  Cleared of one 

hundred thousand francs over the filly and a loser to the tune of 

forty thousand, Marechal, who felt the world crumbling under his 

feet, had suddenly divined the situation when he saw the count and 

Labordette talking together in front of the enclosure just after the 

race was over.  Furious, as became an ex-coachman of the count's, 

and brutally frank as only a cheated man can be, he had just made a 

frightful scene in public, had told the whole story in atrocious 

terms and had thrown everyone into angry excitement.  It was further 

stated that the stewards were about to meet.



Nana, whom Philippe and Georges were whisperingly putting in 

possession of the facts, gave vent to a series of reflections and 

yet ceased not to laugh and drink.  After all, it was quite likely; 

she remembered such things, and then that Marechal had a dirty, 

hangdog look.  Nevertheless, she was still rather doubtful when 

Labordette appeared.  He was very white.



"Well?" she asked in a low voice.



"Bloody well smashed up!" he replied simply.



And he shrugged his shoulders.  That Vandeuvres was a mere child!  

She made a bored little gesture.



That evening at the Bal Mabille Nana obtained a colossal success.  

When toward ten o'clock she made her appearance, the uproar was 

afready formidable.  That classic night of madness had brought 

together all that was young and pleasure loving, and now this smart 

world was wallowing in the coarseness and imbecility of the 

servants' hall.  There was a fierce crush under the festoons of gas 

lamps, and men in evening coats and women in outrageous low-necked 

old toilets, which they did not mind soiling, were howling and 

surging to and fro under the maddening influence of a vast drunken 

fit.  At a distance of thirty paces the brass instruments of the 

orchestra were inaudible.  Nobody was dancing.  Stupid witticisms, 

repeated no one knew why, were going the round of the various 

groups.  People were straining after wit without succeeding in being 

funny.  Seven women, imprisoned in the cloakroom, were crying to be 

set free.  A shallot had been found, put up to auction and knocked 

down at two louis.  Just then Nana arrived, still wearing her blue-

and-white racecourse costume, and amid a thunder of applause the 

shallot was presented to her.  People caught hold of her in her own 

despite, and three gentlemen bore her triumphantly into the garden, 

across ruined grassplots and ravaged masses of greenery.  As the 

bandstand presented an obstacle to her advance, it was taken by 

storm, and chairs and music stands were smashed.  A paternal police 

organized the disorder.



It was only on Tuesday that Nana recovered from the excitements of 

victory.  That morning she was chatting with Mme Lerat, the old lady 

having come in to bring her news of Louiset, whom the open air had 

upset.  A long story, which was occupying the attention of all 

Paris, interested her beyond measure.  Vandeuvres, after being 

warned off all racecourses and posted at the Cercle Imperial on the 

very evening after the disaster, had set fire to his stable on the 

morrow and had burned himself and his horses to death.



"He certainly told me he was going to," the young woman kept saying.  

"That man was a regular maniac!  Oh, how they did frighten me when 

they told me about it yesterday evening!  You see, he might easily 

have murdered me some fine night.  And besides, oughtn't he to have 

given me a hint about his horse?  I should at any rate have made my 

fortune!  He said to Labordette that if I knew about the matter I 

would immediately inform my hairdresser and a whole lot of other 

men.  How polite, eh?  Oh dear, no, I certainly can't grieve much 

for him."



After some reflection she had grown very angry.  Just then 

Labordette came in; he had seen about her bets and was now the 

bearer of some forty thousand francs.  This only added to her bad 

temper, for she ought to have gained a million.  Labordette, who 

during the whole of this episode had been pretending entire 

innocence, abandoned Vandeuvres in decisive terms.  Those old 

families, he opined, were worn out and apt to make a stupid ending.



"Oh dear no!" said Nana.  "It isn't stupid to burn oneself in one's 

stable as he did.  For my part, I think he made a dashing finish; 

but, oh, you know, I'm not defending that story about him and 

Marechal.  It's too silly.  Just to think that Blanche has had the 

cheek to want to lay the blame of it on me!  I said to her: 'Did I 

tell him to steal?'  Don't you think one can ask a man for money 

without urging him to commit crime?  If he had said to me, 'I've got 

nothing left,' I should have said to him, 'All right, let's part.'  

And the matter wouldn't have gone further."



"Just so," said the aunt gravely "When men are obstinate about a 

thing, so much the worse for them!"



"But as to the merry little finish up, oh, that was awfully smart!" 

continued Nana.  "It appears to have been terrible enough to give 

you the shudders!  He sent everybody away and boxed himself up in 

the place with a lot of petroleum.  And it blazed!  You should have 

seen it!  Just think, a great big affair, almost all made of wood 

and stuffed with hay and straw!  The flames simply towered up, and 

the finest part of the business was that the horses didn't want to 

be roasted.  They could be heard plunging, throwing themselves 

against the doors, crying aloud just like human beings.  Yes, people 

haven't got rid of the horror of it yet."



Labordette let a low, incredulous whistle escape him.  For his part, 

he did not believe in the death of Vandeuvres.  Somebody had sworn 

he had seen him escaping through a window.  He had set fire to his 

stable in a fit of aberration, but when it had begun to grow too 

warm it must have sobered him.  A man so besotted about the women 

and so utterly worn out could not possibly die so pluckily.



Nana listened in her disillusionment and could only remark:



"Oh, the poor wretch, it was so beautiful!"

