





CHAPTER XIII





Toward the end of September Count Muffat, who was to dine at Nana's 

that evening, came at nightfall to inform her of a summons to the 

Tuileries.  The lamps in the house had not been lit yet, and the 

servants were laughing uproariously in the kitchen regions as he 

softly mounted the stairs, where the tall windows gleamed in warm 

shadow.  The door of the drawing room up-stairs opened noiselessly.  

A faint pink glow was dying out on the ceiling of the room, and the 

red hangings, the deep divans, the lacquered furniture, with their 

medley of embroidered fabrics and bronzes and china, were already 

sleeping under a slowly creeping flood of shadows, which drowned 

nooks and corners and blotted out the gleam of ivory and the glint 

of gold.  And there in the darkness, on the white surface of a wide, 

outspread petticoat, which alone remained clearly visible, he saw 

Nana lying stretched in the arms of Georges.  Denial in any shape or 

form was impossible.  He gave a choking cry and stood gaping at 

them.



Nana had bounded up, and now she pushed him into the bedroom in 

order to give the lad time to escape.



"Come in," she murmured with reeling senses, "I'll explain."



She was exasperated at being thus surprised.  Never before had she 

given way like this in her own house, in her own drawing room, when 

the doors were open.  It was a long story: Georges and she had had a 

disagreement; he had been mad with jealousy of Philippe, and he had 

sobbed so bitterly on her bosom that she had yielded to him, not 

knowing how else to calm him and really very full of pity for him at 

heart.  And on this solitary occasion, when she had been stupid 

enough to forget herself thus with a little rascal who could not 

even now bring her bouquets of violets, so short did his mother keep 

him--on this solitary occasion the count turned up and came straight 

down on them.  'Gad, she had very bad luck!  That was what one got 

if one was a good-natured wench!



Meanwhile in the bedroom, into which she had pushed Muffat, the 

darkness was complete.  Whereupon after some groping she rang 

furiously and asked for a lamp.  It was Julien's fault too!  If 

there had been a lamp in the drawing room the whole affair would not 

have happened.  It was the stupid nightfall which had got the better 

of her heart.



"I beseech you to be reasonable, my pet," she said when Zoe had 

brought in the lights.



The count, with his hands on his knees, was sitting gazing at the 

floor.  He was stupefied by what he had just seen.  He did not cry 

out in anger.  He only trembled, as though overtaken by some horror 

which was freezing him.  This dumb misery touched the young woman, 

and she tried to comfort him.



"Well, yes, I've done wrong.  It's very bad what I did.  You see I'm 

sorry for my fault.  It makes me grieve very much because it annoys 

you.  Come now, be nice, too, and forgive me."



She had crouched down at his feet and was striving to catch his eye 

with a look of tender submission.  She was fain to know whether he 

was very vexed with her.  Presently, as he gave a long sigh and 

seemed to recover himself, she grew more coaxing and with grave 

kindness of manner added a final reason:



"You see, dearie, you must try and understand how it is: I can't 

refuse it to my poor friends."



The count consented to give way and only insisted that Georges 

should be dismissed once for all.  But all his illusions had 

vanished, and he no longer believed in her sworn fidelity.  Next day 

Nana would deceive him anew, and he only remained her miserable 

possessor in obedience to a cowardly necessity and to terror at the 

thought of living without her.



This was the epoch in her existence when Nana flared upon Paris with 

redoubled splendor.  She loomed larger than heretofore on the 

horizon of vice and swayed the town with her impudently flaunted 

splendor and that contempt of money which made her openly squander 

fortunes.  Her house had become a sort of glowing smithy, where her 

continual desires were the flames and the slightest breath from her 

lips changed gold into fine ashes, which the wind hourly swept away.  

Never had eye beheld such a rage of expenditure.  The great house 

seemed to have been built over a gulf in which men--their worldly 

possessions, their fortunes, their very names--were swallowed up 

without leaving even a handful of dust behind them.  This courtesan, 

who had the tastes of a parrot and gobbled up radishes and burnt 

almonds and pecked at the meat upon her plate, had monthly table 

bills amounting to five thousand francs.  The wildest waste went on 

in the kitchen: the place, metaphorically speaking was one great 

river which stove in cask upon cask of wine and swept great bills 

with it, swollen by three or four successive manipulators.  

Victorine and Francois reigned supreme in the kitchen, whither they 

invited friends.  In addition to these there was quite a little 

tribe of cousins, who were cockered up in their homes with cold 

meats and strong soup.  Julien made the trades-people give him 

commissions, and the glaziers never put up a pane of glass at a cost 

of a franc and a half but he had a franc put down to himself.  

Charles devoured the horses' oats and doubled the amount of their 

provender, reselling at the back door what came in at the carriage 

gate, while amid the general pillage, the sack of the town after the 

storm, Zoe, by dint of cleverness, succeeded in saving appearances 

and covering the thefts of all in order the better to slur over and 

make good her own.  But the household waste was worse than the 

household dishonesty.  Yesterday's food was thrown into the gutter, 

and the collection of provisions in the house was such that the 

servants grew disgusted with it.  The glass was all sticky with 

sugar, and the gas burners flared and flared till the rooms seemed 

ready to explode.  Then, too, there were instances of negligence and 

mischief and sheer accident--of everything, in fact, which can 

hasten the ruin of a house devoured by so many mouths.  Upstairs in 

Madame's quarters destruction raged more fiercely still.  Dresses, 

which cost ten thousand francs and had been twice worn, were sold by 

Zoe; jewels vanished as though they had crumbled deep down in their 

drawers; stupid purchases were made; every novelty of the day was 

brought and left to lie forgotten in some corner the morning after 

or swept up by ragpickers in the street.  She could not see any very 

expensive object without wanting to possess it, and so she 

constantly surrounded herself with the wrecks of bouquets and costly 

knickknacks and was the happier the more her passing fancy cost.  

Nothing remained intact in her hands; she broke everything, and this 

object withered, and that grew dirty in the clasp of her lithe white 

fingers.  A perfect heap of nameless debris, of twisted shreds and 

muddy rags, followed her and marked her passage.  Then amid this 

utter squandering of pocket money cropped up a question about the 

big bills and their settlement.  Twenty thousand francs were due to 

the modiste, thirty thousand to the linen draper, twelve thousand to 

the bootmaker.  Her stable devoured fifty thousand for her, and in 

six months she ran up a bill of a hundred and twenty thousand francs 

at her ladies' tailor.  Though she had not enlarged her scheme of 

expenditure, which Labordette reckoned at four hundred thousand 

francs on an average, she ran up that same year to a million.  She 

was herself stupefied by the amount and was unable to tell whither 

such a sum could have gone.  Heaps upon heaps of men, barrowfuls of 

gold, failed to stop up the hole, which, amid this ruinous luxury, 

continually gaped under the floor of her house.



Meanwhile Nana had cherished her latest caprice.  Once more 

exercised by the notion that her room needed redoing, she fancied 

she had hit on something at last.  The room should be done in velvet 

of the color of tea roses, with silver buttons and golden cords, 

tassels and fringes, and the hangings should be caught up to the 

ceiling after the manner of a tent.  This arrangement ought to be 

both rich and tender, she thought, and would form a splendid 

background to her blonde vermeil-tinted skin.  However, the bedroom 

was only designed to serve as a setting to the bed, which was to be 

a dazzling affair, a prodigy.  Nana meditated a bed such as had 

never before existed; it was to be a throne, an altar, whither Paris 

was to come in order to adore her sovereign nudity.  It was to be 

all in gold and silver beaten work--it should suggest a great piece 

of jewelry with its golden roses climbing on a trelliswork of 

silver.  On the headboard a band of Loves should peep forth laughing 

from amid the flowers, as though they were watching the voluptuous 

dalliance within the shadow of the bed curtains.  Nana had applied 

to Labordette who had brought two goldsmiths to see her.  They were 

already busy with the designs.  The bed would cost fifty thousand 

francs, and Muffat was to give it her as a New Year's present.



What most astonished the young woman was that she was endlessly 

short of money amid a river of gold, the tide of which almost 

enveloped her.  On certain days she was at her wit's end for want of 

ridiculously small sums--sums of only a few louis.  She was driven 

to borrow from Zoe, or she scraped up cash as well as she could on 

her own account.  But before resignedly adopting extreme measures 

she tried her friends and in a joking sort of way got the men to 

give her all they had about them, even down to their coppers.  For 

the last three months she had been emptying Philippe's pockets 

especially, and now on days of passionate enjoyment he never came 

away but he left his purse behind him.  Soon she grew bolder and 

asked him for loans of two hundred francs, three hundred francs--

never more than that--wherewith to pay the interest of bills or to 

stave off outrageous debts.  And Philippe, who in July had been 

appointed paymaster to his regiment, would bring the money the day 

after, apologizing at the same time for not being rich, seeing that 

good Mamma Hugon now treated her sons with singular financial 

severity.  At the close of three months these little oft-renewed 

loans mounted up to a sum of ten thousand francs.  The captain still 

laughed his hearty-sounding laugh, but he was growing visibly 

thinner, and sometimes he seemed absent-minded, and a shade of 

suffering would pass over his face.  But one look from Nana's eyes 

would transfigure him in a sort of sensual ecstasy.  She had a very 

coaxing way with him and would intoxicate him with furtive kisses 

and yield herself to him in sudden fits of self-abandonment, which 

tied him to her apron strings the moment he was able to escape from 

his military duties.



One evening, Nana having announced that her name, too, was Therese 

and that her fete day was the fifteenth of October, the gentlemen 

all sent her presents.  Captain Philippe brought his himself; it was 

an old comfit dish in Dresden china, and it had a gold mount.  He 

found her alone in her dressing room.  She had just emerged from the 

bath, had nothing on save a great red-and-white flannel bathing wrap 

and was very busy examining her presents, which were ranged on a 

table.  She had already broken a rock-crystal flask in her attempts 

to unstopper it.



"Oh, you're too nice!" she said.  "What is it?  Let's have a peep!  

What a baby you are to spend your pennies in little fakements like 

that!"



She scolded him, seeing that he was not rich, but at heart she was 

delighted to see him spending his whole substance for her.  Indeed, 

this was the only proof of love which had power to touch her.  

Meanwhile she was fiddling away at the comfit dish, opening it and 

shutting it in her desire to see how it was made.



"Take care," he murmured, "it's brittle."



But she shrugged her shoulders.  Did he think her as clumsy as a 

street porter?  And all of a sudden the hinge came off between her 

fingers and the lid fell and was broken.  She was stupefied and 

remained gazing at the fragments as she cried:



"Oh, it's smashed!"



Then she burst out laughing.  The fragments lying on the floor 

tickled her fancy.  Her merriment was of the nervous kind, the 

stupid, spiteful laughter of a child who delights in destruction.  

Philippe had a little fit of disgust, for the wretched girl did not 

know what anguish this curio had cost him.  Seeing him thoroughly 

upset, she tried to contain herself.



"Gracious me, it isn't my fault!  It was cracked; those old things 

barely hold together.  Besides, it was the cover!  Didn't you see 

the bound it gave?



And she once more burst into uproarious mirth.



But though he made an effort to the contrary, tears appeared in the 

young man's eyes, and with that she flung her arms tenderly round 

his neck.



"How silly you are!  You know I love you all the same.  If one never 

broke anything the tradesmen would never sell anything.  All that 

sort of thing's made to be broken.  Now look at this fan; it's only 

held together with glue!"



She had snatched up a fan and was dragging at the blades so that the 

silk was torn in two.  This seemed to excite her, and in order to 

show that she scorned the other presents, the moment she had ruined 

his she treated herself to a general massacre, rapping each 

successive object and proving clearly that not one was solid in that 

she had broken them all.  There was a lurid glow in her vacant eyes, 

and her lips, slightly drawn back, displayed her white teeth.  Soon, 

when everything was in fragments, she laughed cheerily again and 

with flushed cheeks beat on the table with the flat of her hands, 

lisping like a naughty little girl:



"All over!  Got no more!  Got no more!"



Then Philippe was overcome by the same mad excitement, and, pushing 

her down, he merrily kissed her bosom.  She abandoned herself to him 

and clung to his shoulders with such gleeful energy that she could 

not remember having enjoyed herself so much for an age past.  

Without letting go of him she said caressingly:



"I say, dearie, you ought certainly to bring me ten louis tomorrow.  

It's a bore, but there's the baker's bill worrying me awfully."



He had grown pale.  Then imprinting a final kiss on her forehead, he 

said simply:



"I'll try."



Silence reigned.  She was dressing, and he stood pressing his 

forehead against the windowpanes.  A minute passed, and he returned 

to her and deliberately continued:



"Nana, you ought to marry me."



This notion straightway so tickled the young woman that she was 

unable to finish tying on her petticoats.



"My poor pet, you're ill!  D'you offer me your hand because I ask 

you for ten louis?  No, never!  I'm too fond of you.  Good gracious, 

what a silly question!"



And as Zoe entered in order to put her boots on, they ceased talking 

of the matter.  The lady's maid at once espied the presents lying 

broken in pieces on the table.  She asked if she should put these 

things away, and, Madame having bidden her get rid of them, she 

carried the whole collection off in the folds of her dress.  In the 

kitchen a sorting-out process began, and Madame's debris were shared 

among the servants.



That day Georges had slipped into the house despite Nana's orders to 

the contrary.  Francois had certainly seen him pass, but the 

servants had now got to laugh among themselves at their good lady's 

embarrassing situations.  He had just slipped as far as the little 

drawing room when his brother's voice stopped him, and, as one 

powerless to tear himself from the door, he overheard everything 

that went on within, the kisses, the offer of marriage.  A feeling 

of horror froze him, and he went away in a state bordering on 

imbecility, feeling as though there were a great void in his brain.  

It was only in his own room above his mother's flat in the Rue 

Richelieu that his heart broke in a storm of furious sobs.  This 

time there could be no doubt about the state of things; a horrible 

picture of Nana in Philippe's arms kept rising before his mind's 

eye.  It struck him in the light of an incest.  When he fancied 

himself calm again the remembrance of it all would return, and in 

fresh access of raging jealousy he would throw himself on the bed, 

biting the coverlet, shouting infamous accusations which maddened 

him the more.  Thus the day passed.  In order to stay shut up in his 

room he spoke of having a sick headache.  But the night proved more 

terrible still; a murder fever shook him amid continual nightmares.  

Had his brother lived in the house, he would have gone and killed 

him with the stab of a knife.  When day returned he tried to reason 

things out.  It was he who ought to die, and he determined to throw 

himself out of the window when an omnibus was passing.  

Nevertheless, he went out toward ten o'clock and traversed Paris, 

wandered up and down on the bridges and at the last moment felt an 

unconquerable desire to see Nana once more.  With one word, perhaps, 

she would save him.  And three o'clock was striking when he entered 

the house in the Avenue de Villiers.



Toward noon a frightful piece of news had simply crushed Mme Hugon.  

Philippe had been in prison since the evening of the previous day, 

accused of having stolen twelve thousand francs from the chest of 

his regiment.  For the last three months he had been withdrawing 

small sums therefrom in the hope of being able to repay them, while 

he had covered the deficit with false money.  Thanks to the 

negligence of the administrative committee, this fraud had been 

constantly successful.  The old lady, humbled utterly by her child's 

crime, had at once cried out in anger against Nana.  She knew 

Philippe's connection with her, and her melancholy had been the 

result of this miserable state of things which kept her in Paris in 

constant dread of some final catastrophe.  But she had never looked 

forward to such shame as this, and now she blamed herself for 

refusing him money, as though such refusal had made her accessory to 

his act.  She sank down on an armchair; her legs were seized with 

paralysis, and she felt herself to be useless, incapable of action 

and destined to stay where she was till she died.  But the sudden 

thought of Georges comforted her.  Georges was still left her; he 

would be able to act, perhaps to save them.  Thereupon, without 

seeking aid of anyone else--for she wished to keep these matters 

shrouded in the bosom of her family--she dragged herself up to the 

next story, her mind possessed by the idea that she still had 

someone to love about her.  But upstairs she found an empty room.  

The porter told her that M. Georges had gone out at an early hour.  

The room was haunted by the ghost of yet another calamity; the bed 

with its gnawed bedclothes bore witness to someone's anguish, and a 

chair which lay amid a heap of clothes on the ground looked like 

something dead.  Georges must be at that woman's house, and so with 

dry eyes and feet that had regained their strength Mme Hugon went 

downstairs.  She wanted her sons; she was starting to reclaim them.



Since morning Nana had been much worried.  First of all it was the 

baker, who at nine o'clock had turned up, bill in hand.  It was a 

wretched story.  He had supplied her with bread to the amount of a 

hundred and thirty-three francs, and despite her royal housekeeping 

she could not pay it.  In his irritation at being put off he had 

presented himself a score of times since the day he had refused 

further credit, and the servants were now espousing his cause.  

Francois kept saying that Madame would never pay him unless he made 

a fine scene; Charles talked of going upstairs, too, in order to get 

an old unpaid straw bill settled, while Victorine advised them to 

wait till some gentleman was with her, when they would get the money 

out of her by suddenly asking for it in the middle of conversation.  

The kitchen was in a savage mood: the tradesmen were all kept posted 

in the course events were taking, and there were gossiping 

consultations, lasting three or four hours on a stretch, during 

which Madame was stripped, plucked and talked over with the wrathful 

eagerness peculiar to an idle, overprosperous servants' hall.  

Julien, the house steward, alone pretended to defend his mistress.  

She was quite the thing, whatever they might say!  And when the 

others accused him of sleeping with her he laughed fatuously, 

thereby driving the cook to distraction, for she would have liked to 

be a man in order to "spit on such women's backsides," so utterly 

would they have disgusted her.  Francois, without informing Madame 

of it, had wickedly posted the baker in the hall, and when she came 

downstairs at lunch time she found herself face to face with him.  

Taking the bill, she told him to return toward three o'clock, 

whereupon, with many foul expressions, he departed, vowing that he 

would have things properly settled and get his money by hook or by 

crook.



Nana made a very bad lunch, for the scene had annoyed her.  Next 

time the man would have to be definitely got rid of.  A dozen times 

she had put his money aside for him, but it had as constantly melted 

away, sometimes in the purchase of flowers, at others in the shape 

of a subscription got up for the benefit of an old gendarme.  

Besides, she was counting on Philippe and was astonished not to see 

him make his appearance with his two hundred francs.  It was regular 

bad luck, seeing that the day before yesterday she had again given 

Satin an outfit, a perfect trousseau this time, some twelve hundred 

francs' worth of dresses and linen, and now she had not a louis 

remaining.



Toward two o'clock, when Nana was beginning to be anxious, 

Labordette presented himself.  He brought with him the designs for 

the bed, and this caused a diversion, a joyful interlude which made 

the young woman forget all her troubles.  She clapped her hands and 

danced about.  After which, her heart bursting wish curiosity, she 

leaned over a table in the drawing room and examined the designs, 

which Labordette proceeded to explain to her.



"You see," he said, "this is the body of the bed.  In the middle 

here there's a bunch of roses in full bloom, and then comes a 

garland of buds and flowers.  The leaves are to be in yellow and the 

roses in red-gold.  And here's the grand design for the bed's head; 

Cupids dancing in a ring on a silver trelliswork."



But Nana interrupted him, for she was beside herself with ecstasy.



"Oh, how funny that little one is, that one in the corner, with his 

behind in the air!  Isn't he now?  And what a sly laugh!  They've 

all got such dirty, wicked eyes!  You know, dear boy, I shall never 

dare play any silly tricks before THEM!"



Her pride was flattered beyond measure.  The goldsmiths had declared 

that no queen anywhere slept in such a bed.  However, a difficulty 

presented itself.  Labordette showed her two designs for the 

footboard, one of which reproduced the pattern on the sides, while 

the other, a subject by itself, represented Night wrapped in her 

veil and discovered by a faun in all her splendid nudity.  He added 

that if she chose this last subject the goldsmiths intended making 

Night in her own likeness.  This idea, the taste of which was rather 

risky, made her grow white with pleasure, and she pictured herself 

as a silver statuette, symbolic of the warm, voluptuous delights of 

darkness.



"Of course you will only sit for the head and shoulders," said 

Labordette.



She looked quietly at him.



"Why?  The moment a work of art's in question I don't mind the 

sculptor that takes my likeness a blooming bit!"



Of course it must be understood that she was choosing the subject.  

But at this he interposed.



"Wait a moment; it's six thousand francs extra."



"It's all the same to me, by Jove!" she cried, bursting into a 

laugh.  "Hasn't my little rough got the rhino?"



Nowadays among her intimates she always spoke thus of Count Muffat, 

and the gentlemen had ceased to inquire after him otherwise.



"Did you see your little rough last night?" they used to say.



"Dear me, I expected to find the little rough here!"



It was a simple familiarity enough, which, nevertheless, she did not 

as yet venture on in his presence.



Labordette began rolling up the designs as he gave the final 

explanations.  The goldsmiths, he said, were undertaking to deliver 

the bed in two months' time, toward the twenty-fifth of December, 

and next week a sculptor would come to make a model for the Night.  

As she accompanied him to the door Nana remembered the baker and 

briskly inquired:



"By the by, you wouldn't be having ten louis about you?"



Labordette made it a solemn rule, which stood him in good stead, 

never to lend women money.  He used always to make the same reply.



"No, my girl, I'm short.  But would you like me to go to your little 

rough?"



She refused; it was useless.  Two days before she had succeeded in 

getting five thousand francs out of the count.  However, she soon 

regretted her discreet conduct, for the moment Labordette had gone 

the baker reappeared, though it was barely half-past two, and with 

many loud oaths roughly settled himself on a bench in the hall.  The 

young woman listened to him from the first floor.  She was pale, and 

it caused her especial pain to hear the servants' secret rejoicings 

swelling up louder and louder till they even reached her ears.  Down 

in the kitchen they were dying of laughter.  The coachman was 

staring across from the other side of the court; Francois was 

crossing the hall without any apparent reason.  Then he hurried off 

to report progress, after sneering knowingly at the baker.  They 

didn't care a damn for Madame; the walls were echoing to their 

laughter, and she felt that she was deserted on all hands and 

despised by the servants' hall, the inmates of which were watching 

her every movement and liberally bespattering her with the filthiest 

of chaff.  Thereupon she abandoned the intention of borrowing the 

hundred and thirty-three francs from Zoe; she already owed the maid 

money, and she was too proud to risk a refusal now.  Such a burst of 

feeling stirred her that she went back into her room, loudly 

remarking:



"Come, come, my girl, don't count on anyone but yourself.  Your 

body's your own property, and it's better to make use of it than to 

let yourself be insulted."



And without even summoning Zoe she dressed herself with feverish 

haste in order to run round to the Tricon's.  In hours of great 

embarrassment this was her last resource.  Much sought after and 

constantly solicited by the old lady, she would refuse or resign 

herself according to her needs, and on these increasingly frequent 

occasions when both ends would not meet in her royally conducted 

establishment, she was sure to find twenty-five louis awaiting her 

at the other's house.  She used to betake herself to the Tricon's 

with the ease born of use, just as the poor go to the pawnshop.



But as she left her own chamber Nana came suddenly upon Georges 

standing in the middle of the drawing room.  Not noticing his waxen 

pallor and the somber fire in his wide eyes, she gave a sigh of 

relief.



"Ah, you've come from your brother."



"No," said the lad, growing yet paler.



At this she gave a despairing shrug.  What did he want?  Why was he 

barring her way?  She was in a hurry--yes, she was.  Then returning 

to where he stood:



"You've no money, have you?"



"No."



"That's true.  How silly of me!  Never a stiver; not even their 

omnibus fares Mamma doesn't wish it!  Oh, what a set of men!"



And she escaped.  But he held her back; he wanted to speak to her.  

She was fairly under way and again declared she had no time, but he 

stopped her with a word.



"Listen, I know you're going to marry my brother."



Gracious!  The thing was too funny!  And she let herself down into a 

chair in order to laugh at her ease.



"Yes," continued the lad, "and I don't wish it.  It's I you're going 

to marry.  That's why I've come."



"Eh, what?  You too?" she cried.  "Why, it's a family disease, is 

it?  No, never!  What a fancy, to be sure!  Have I ever asked you to 

do anything so nasty?  Neither one nor t'other of you!  No, never!"



The lad's face brightened.  Perhaps he had been deceiving himself!  

He continued:



"Then swear to me that you don't go to bed with my brother."



"Oh, you're beginning to bore me now!" said Nana, who had risen with 

renewed impatience.  "It's amusing for a little while, but when I 

tell you I'm in a hurry--I go to bed with your brother if it pleases 

me.  Are you keeping me--are you paymaster here that you insist on 

my making a report?  Yes, I go to bed with your brother."



He had caught hold of her arm and squeezed it hard enough to break 

it as he stuttered:



"Don't say that!  Don't say that!"



With a slight blow she disengaged herself from his grasp.



"He's maltreating me now!  Here's a young ruffian for you!  My 

chicken, you'll leave this jolly sharp.  I used to keep you about 

out of niceness.  Yes, I did!  You may stare!  Did you think I was 

going to be your mamma till I died?  I've got better things to do 

than to bring up brats."



He listened to her stark with anguish, yet in utter submission.  Her 

every word cut him to the heart so sharply that he felt he should 

die.  She did not so much as notice his suffering and continued 

delightedly to revenge herself on him for the annoyance of the 

morning.



"It's like your brother; he's another pretty Johnny, he is!  He 

promised me two hundred francs.  Oh, dear me; yes, I can wait for 

'em.  It isn't his money I care for!  I've not got enough to pay for 

hair oil.  Yes, he's leaving me in a jolly fix!  Look here, d'you 

want to know how matters stand?  Here goes then: it's all owing to 

your brother that I'm going out to earn twenty-five louis with 

another man."



At these words his head spun, and he barred her egress.  He cried; 

he besought her not to go, clasping his hands together and blurting 

out:



"Oh no!  Oh no!"



"I want to, I do," she said.  "Have you the money?"



No, he had not got the money.  He would have given his life to have 

the money!  Never before had he felt so miserable, so useless, so 

very childish.  All his wretched being was shaken with weeping and 

gave proof of such heavy suffering that at last she noticed it and 

grew kind.  She pushed him away softly.



"Come, my pet, let me pass; I must.  Be reasonable.  You're a baby 

boy, and it was very nice for a week, but nowadays I must look after 

my own affairs.  Just think it over a bit.  Now your brother's a 

man; what I'm saying doesn't apply to him.  Oh, please do me a 

favor; it's no good telling him all this.  He needn't know where I'm 

going.  I always let out too much when I'm in a rage."



She began laughing.  Then taking him in her arms and kissing him on 

the forehead:



"Good-by, baby," she said; "it's over, quite over between us; d'you 

understand?  And now I'm off!"



And she left him, and he stood in the middle of the drawing room.  

Her last words rang like the knell of a tocsin in his ears: "It's 

over, quite over!"  And he thought the ground was opening beneath 

his feet.  There was a void in his brain from which the man awaiting 

Nana had disappeared.  Philippe alone remained there in the young 

woman's bare embrace forever and ever.  She did not deny it: she 

loved him, since she wanted to spare him the pain of her infidelity.  

It was over, quite over.  He breathed heavily and gazed round the 

room, suffocating beneath a crushing weight.  Memories kept 

recurring to him one after the other--memories of merry nights at La 

Mignotte, of amorous hours during which he had fancied himself her 

child, of pleasures stolen in this very room.  And now these things 

would never, never recur!  He was too small; he had not grown up 

quickly enough; Philippe was supplanting him because he was a 

bearded man.  So then this was the end; he could not go on living.  

His vicious passion had become transformed into an infinite 

tenderness, a sensual adoration, in which his whole being was 

merged.  Then, too, how was he to forget it all if his brother 

remained--his brother, blood of his blood, a second self, whose 

enjoyment drove him mad with jealousy?  It was the end of all 

things; he wanted to die.



All the doors remained open, as the servants noisily scattered over 

the house after seeing Madame make her exit on foot.  Downstairs on 

the bench in the hall the baker was laughing with Charles and 

Francois.  Zoe came running across the drawing room and seemed 

surprised at sight of Georges.  She asked him if he were waiting for 

Madame.  Yes, he was waiting for her; he had for-gotten to give her 

an answer to a question.  And when he was alone he set to work and 

searched.  Finding nothing else to suit his purpose, he took up in 

the dressing room a pair of very sharply pointed scissors with which 

Nana had a mania for ceaselessly trimming herself, either by 

polishing her skin or cutting off little hairs.  Then for a whole 

hour he waited patiently, his hand in his pocket and his fingers 

tightly clasped round the scissors.



"Here's Madame," said Zoe, returning.  She must have espied her 

through the bedroom window.



There was a sound of people racing through the house, and laughter 

died away and doors were shut.  Georges heard Nana paying the baker 

and speaking in the curtest way.  Then she came upstairs.



"What, you're here still!" she said as she noticed him.  "Aha!  

We're going to grow angry, my good man!"



He followed her as she walked toward her bedroom.



"Nana, will you marry me?"



She shrugged her shoulders.  It was too stupid; she refused to 

answer any more and conceived the idea of slamming the door in his 

face.



"Nana, will you marry me?"



She slammed the door.  He opened it with one hand while he brought 

the other and the scissors out of his pocket.  And with one great 

stab he simply buried them in his breast.



Nana, meanwhile, had felt conscious that something dreadful would 

happen, and she had turned round.  When she saw him stab himself she 

was seized with indignation.



"Oh, what a fool he is!  What a fool!  And with my scissors!  Will 

you leave off, you naughty little rogue?  Oh, my God!  Oh, my God!"



She was scared.  Sinking on his knees, the boy had just given 

himself a second stab, which sent him down at full length on the 

carpet.  He blocked the threshold of the bedroom.  With that Nana 

lost her head utterly and screamed with all her might, for she dared 

not step over his body, which shut her in and prevented her from 

running to seek assistance.



"Zoe!  Zoe!  Come at once.  Make him leave off.  It's getting 

stupid--a child like that!  He's killing himself now!  And in my 

place too!  Did you ever see the like of it?"



He was frightening her.  He was all white, and his eyes were shut.  

There was scarcely any bleeding--only a little blood, a tiny stain 

which was oozing down into his waistcoat.  She was making up her 

mind to step over the body when an apparition sent her starting 

back.  An old lady was advancing through the drawing-room door, 

which remained wide open opposite.  And in her terror she recognized 

Mme Hugon but could not explain her presence.  Still wearing her 

gloves and hat, Nana kept edging backward, and her terror grew so 

great that she sought to defend herself, and in a shaky voice:



"Madame," she cried, "it isn't I; I swear to you it isn't.  He 

wanted to marry me, and I said no, and he's killed himself!"



Slowly Mme Hugon drew near--she was in black, and her face showed 

pale under her white hair.  In the carriage, as she drove thither, 

the thought of Georges had vanished and that of Philippe's misdoing 

had again taken complete possession of her.  It might be that this 

woman could afford explanations to the judges which would touch 

them, and so she conceived the project of begging her to bear 

witness in her son's favor.  Downstairs the doors of the house stood 

open, but as she mounted to the first floor her sick feet failed 

her, and she was hesitating as to which way to go when suddenly 

horror-stricken cries directed her.  Then upstairs she found a man 

lying on the floor with bloodstained shirt.  It was Georges--it was 

her other child.



Nana, in idiotic tones, kept saying:



"He wanted to marry me, and I said no, and he's killed himself."



Uttering no cry, Mme Hugon stooped down.  Yes, it was the other one; 

it was Georges.  The one was brought to dishonor, the other 

murdered!  It caused her no surprise, for her whole life was ruined.  

Kneeling on the carpet, utterly forgetting where she was, noticing 

no one else, she gazed fixedly at her boy's face and listened with 

her hand on his heart.  Then she gave a feeble sigh--she had felt 

the heart beating.  And with that she lifted her head and 

scrutinized the room and the woman and seemed to remember.  A fire 

glowed forth in her vacant eyes, and she looked so great and 

terrible in her silence that Nana trembled as she continued to 

defend herself above the body that divided them.



"I swear it, madame!  If his brother were here he could explain it 

to you."



"His brother has robbed--he is in prison," said the mother in a hard 

voice.



Nana felt a choking sensation.  Why, what was the reason of it all?  

The other had turned thief now!  They were mad in that family!  She 

ceased struggling in self-defense; she seemed no longer mistress in 

her own house and allowed Mme Hugon to give what orders she liked.  

The servants had at last hurried up, and the old lady insisted on 

their carrying the fainting Georges down to her carriage.  She 

preferred killing him rather than letting him remain in that house.  

With an air of stupefaction Nana watched the retreating servants as 

they supported poor, dear Zizi by his legs and shoulders.  The 

mother walked behind them in a state of collapse; she supported 

herself against the furniture; she felt as if all she held dear had 

vanished in the void.  On the landing a sob escaped her; she turned 

and twice ejaculated:



"Oh, but you've done us infinite harm!  You've done us infinite 

harm!"



That was all.  In her stupefaction Nana had sat down; she still wore 

her gloves and her hat.  The house once more lapsed into heavy 

silence; the carriage had driven away, and she sat motionless, not 

knowing what to do next.  her head swimming after all she had gone 

through.  A quarter of an hour later Count Muffat found her thus, 

but at sight of him she relieved her feelings in an overflowing 

current of talk.  She told him all about the sad incident, repeated 

the same details twenty times over, picked up the bloodstained 

scissors in order to imitate Zizi's gesture when he stabbed himself.  

And above all she nursed the idea of proving her own innocence.



"Look you here, dearie, is it my fault?  If you were the judge would 

you condemn me?  I certainly didn't tell Philippe to meddle with the 

till any more than I urged that wretched boy to kill himself.  I've 

been most unfortunate throughout it all.  They come and do stupid 

things in my place; they make me miserable; they treat me like a 

hussy."



And she burst into tears.  A fit of nervous expansiveness rendered 

her soft and doleful, and her immense distress melted her utterly.



"And you, too, look as if you weren't satisfied.  Now do just ask 

Zoe if I'm at all mixed up in it.  Zoe, do speak: explain to 

Monsieur--"



The lady's maid, having brought a towel and a basin of water out of 

the dressing room, had for some moments past been rubbing the carpet 

in order to remove the bloodstains before they dried.



"Oh, monsieur, " she declared, "Madame is utterly miserable!"



Muffat was still stupefied; the tragedy had frozen him, and his 

imagination was full of the mother weeping for her sons.  He knew 

her greatness of heart and pictured her in her widow's weeds, 

withering solitarily away at Les Fondettes.  But Nana grew ever more 

despondent, for now the memory of Zizi lying stretched on the floor, 

with a red hole in his shirt, almost drove her senseless.



"He used to be such a darling, so sweet and caressing.  Oh, you 

know, my pet--I'm sorry if it vexes you--I loved that baby!  I can't 

help saying so; the words must out.  Besides, now it ought not to 

hurt you at all.  He's gone.  You've got what you wanted; you're 

quite certain never to surprise us again."



And this last reflection tortured her with such regret that he ended 

by turning comforter.  Well, well, he said, she ought to be brave; 

she was quite right; it wasn't her fault!  But she checked her 

lamentations of her own accord in order to say:



"Listen, you must run round and bring me news of him.  At once!  I 

wish it!"



He took his hat and went to get news of Georges.  When he returned 

after some three quarters of an hour he saw Nana leaning anxiously 

out of a window, and he shouted up to her from the pavement that the 

lad was not dead and that they even hoped to bring him through.  At 

this she immediately exchanged grief for excess of joy and began to 

sing and dance and vote existence delightful.  Zoe, meanwhile, was 

still dissatisfied with her washing.  She kept looking at the stain, 

and every time she passed it she repeated:



"You know it's not gone yet, madame."



As a matter of fact, the pale red stain kept reappearing on one of 

the white roses in the carpet pattern.  It was as though, on the 

very threshold of the room, a splash of blood were barring the 

doorway.



"Bah!" said the joyous Nana.  "That'l be rubbed out under people's 

feet."



After the following day Count Muffat had likewise forgotten the 

incident.  For a moment or two, when in the cab which drove him to 

the Rue Richelieu, he had busily sworn never to return to that 

woman's house.  Heaven was warning him; the misfortunes of Philippe 

and Georges were, he opined, prophetic of his proper ruin.  But 

neither the sight of Mme Hugon in tears nor that of the boy burning 

with fever had been strong enough to make him keep his vow, and the 

short-lived horror of the situation had only left behind it a sense 

of secret delight at the thought that he was now well quit of a 

rival, the charm of whose youth had always exasperated him.  His 

passion had by this time grown exclusive; it was, indeed, the 

passion of a man who has had no youth.  He loved Nana as one who 

yearned to be her sole possessor, to listen to her, to touch her, to 

be breathed on by her.  His was now a supersensual tenderness, 

verging on pure sentiment; it was an anxious affection and as such 

was jealous of the past and apt at times to dream of a day of 

redemption and pardon received, when both should kneel before God 

the Father.  Every day religion kept regaining its influence over 

him.  He again became a practicing Christian; he confessed himself 

and communicated, while a ceaseless struggle raged within him, and 

remorse redoubled the joys of sin and of repentance.  Afterward, 

when his director gave him leave to spend his passion, he had made a 

habit of this daily perdition and would redeem the same by ecstasies 

of faith, which were full of pious humility.  Very naively he 

offered heaven, by way of expiatory anguish, the abominable torment 

from which he was suffering.  This torment grew and increased, and 

he would climb his Calvary with the deep and solemn feelings of a 

believer, though steeped in a harlot's fierce sensuality.  That 

which made his agony most poignant was this woman's continued 

faithlessness.  He could not share her with others, nor did he 

understand her imbecile caprices.  Undying, unchanging love was what 

he wished for.  However, she had sworn, and he paid her as having 

done so.  But he felt that she was untruthful, incapable of common 

fidelity, apt to yield to friends, to stray passers-by, like a good-

natured animal, born to live minus a shift.



One morning when he saw Foucarmont emerging from her bedroom at an 

unusual hour, he made a scene about it.  But in her weariness of his 

jealousy she grew angry directly.  On several occasions ere that she 

had behaved rather prettily.  Thus the evening when he surprised her 

with Georges she was the first to regain her temper and to confess 

herself in the wrong.  She had loaded him with caresses and dosed 

him with soft speeches in order to make him swallow the business.  

But he had ended by boring her to death with his obstinate refusals 

to understand the feminine nature, and now she was brutal.



"Very well, yes!  I've slept with Foucarmont.  What then?  That's 

flattened you out a bit, my little rough, hasn't it?"



It was the first time she had thrown "my little rough" in his teeth.  

The frank directness of her avowal took his breath away, and when he 

began clenching his fists she marched up to him and looked him full 

in the face.



"We've had enough of this, eh?  If it doesn't suit you you'll do me 

the pleasure of leaving the house.  I don't want you to go yelling 

in my place.  Just you get it into your noodle that I mean to be 

quite free.  When a man pleases me I go to bed with him.  Yes, I do--

that's my way!  And you must make up your mind directly.  Yes or 

no!  If it's no, out you may walk!"



She had gone and opened the door, but he did not leave.  That was 

her way now of binding him more closely to her.  For no reason 

whatever, at the slightest approach to a quarrel she would tell him 

he might stop or go as he liked, and she would accompany her 

permission with a flood of odious reflections.  She said she could 

always find better than he; she had only too many from whom to 

choose; men in any quantity could be picked up in the street, and 

men a good deal smarter, too, whose blood boiled in their veins.  At 

this he would hang his head and wait for those gentler moods when 

she wanted money.  She would then become affectionate, and he would 

forget it all, one night of tender dalliance making up for the 

tortures of a whole week.  His reconciliation with his wife had 

rendered his home unbearable.  Fauchery, having again fallen under 

Rose's dominion, the countess was running madly after other loves.  

She was entering on the forties, that restless, feverish time in the 

life of women, and ever hysterically nervous, she now filled her 

mansion with the maddening whirl of her fashionable life.  Estelle, 

since her marriage, had seen nothing of her father; the undeveloped, 

insignificant girl had suddenly become a woman of iron will, so 

imperious withal that Daguenet trembled in her presence.  In these 

days he accompanied her to mass: he was converted, and he raged 

against his father-in-law for ruining them with a courtesan.  M. 

Venot alone still remained kindly inclined toward the count, for he 

was biding his time.  He had even succeeded in getting into Nana's 

immediate circle.  In fact, he frequented both houses, where you 

encountered his continual smile behind doors.  So Muffat, wretched 

at home, driven out by ennui and shame, still preferred to live in 

the Avenue de Villiers, even though he was abused there.



Soon there was but one question between Nana and the count, and that 

was "money."  One day after having formally promised her ten 

thousand francs he had dared keep his appointment empty handed.  For 

two days past she had been surfeiting him with love, and such a 

breach of faith, such a waste of caresses, made her ragingly 

abusive.  She was white with fury.



"So you've not got the money, eh?  Then go back where you came from, 

my little rough, and look sharp about it!  There's a bloody fool for 

you!  He wanted to kiss me again!  Mark my words--no money, no 

nothing!"



He explained matters; he would be sure to have the money the day 

after tomorrow.  But she interrupted him violently:



"And my bills!  They'll sell me up while Monsieur's playing the 

fool.  Now then, look at yourself.  D'ye think I love you for your 

figure?  A man with a mug like yours has to pay the women who are 

kind enough to put up with him.  By God, if you don't bring me that 

ten thousand francs tonight you shan't even have the tip of my 

little finger to suck.  I mean it!  I shall send you back to your 

wife!"



At night he brought the ten thousand francs.  Nana put up her lips, 

and he took a long kiss which consoled him for the whole day of 

anguish.  What annoyed the young woman was to have him continually 

tied to her apron strings.  She complained to M. Venot, begging him 

to take her little rough off to the countess.  Was their 

reconciliation good for nothing then?  She was sorry she had mixed 

herself up in it, since despite everything he was always at her 

heels.  On the days when, out of anger, she forgot her own interest, 

she swore to play him such a dirty trick that he would never again 

be able to set foot in her place.  But when she slapped her leg and 

yelled at him she might quite as well have spat in his face too: he 

would still have stayed and even thanked her.  Then the rows about 

money matters kept continually recurring.  She demanded money 

savagely; she rowed him over wretched little amounts; she was 

odiously stingy with every minute of her time; she kept fiercely 

informing him that she slept with him for his money, not for any 

other reasons, and that she did not enjoy it a bit, that, in fact, 

she loved another and was awfully unfortunate in needing an idiot of 

his sort!  They did not even want him at court now, and there was 

some talk of requiring him to send in his resignation.  The empress 

had said, "He is too disgusting."  It was true enough.  So Nana 

repeated the phrase by way of closure to all their quarrels.



"Look here!  You disgust me!"



Nowadays she no longer minded her ps and qs; she had regained the 

most perfect freedom.



Every day she did her round of the lake, beginning acquaintanceships 

which ended elsewhere.  Here was the happy hunting ground par 

excellence, where courtesans of the first water spread their nets in 

open daylight and flaunted themselves amid the tolerating smiles and 

brilliant luxury of Paris.  Duchesses pointed her out to one another 

with a passing look--rich shopkeepers' wives copied the fashion of 

her hats.  Sometimes her landau, in its haste to get by, stopped a 

file of puissant turnouts, wherein sat plutocrats able to buy up all 

Europe or Cabinet ministers with plump fingers tight-pressed to the 

throat of France.  She belonged to this Bois society, occupied a 

prominent place in it, was known in every capital and asked about by 

every foreigner.  The splendors of this crowd were enhanced by the 

madness of her profligacy as though it were the very crown, the 

darling passion, of the nation.  Then there were unions of a night, 

continual passages of desire, which she lost count of the morning 

after, and these sent her touring through the grand restaurants and 

on fine days, as often as not, to "Madrid."  The staffs of all the 

embassies visited her, and she, Lucy Stewart, Caroline Hequet and 

Maria Blond would dine in the society of gentlemen who murdered the 

French language and paid to be amused, engaging them by the evening 

with orders to be funny and yet proving so blase and so worn out 

that they never even touched them.  This the ladies called "going on 

a spree," and they would return home happy at having been despised 

and would finish the night in the arms of the lovers of their 

choice.



When she did not actually throw the men at his head Count Muffat 

pretended not to know about all this.  However, he suffered not a 

little from the lesser indignities of their daily life.  The mansion 

in the Avenue de Villiers was becoming a hell, a house full of mad 

people, in which every hour of the day wild disorders led to hateful 

complications.  Nana even fought with her servants.  One moment she 

would be very nice with Charles, the coachman.  When she stopped at 

a restaurant she would send him out beer by the waiter and would 

talk with him from the inside of her carriage when he slanged the 

cabbies at a block in the traffic, for then he struck her as funny 

and cheered her up.  Then the next moment she called him a fool for 

no earthly reason.  She was always squabbling over the straw, the 

bran or the oats; in spite of her love for animals she thought her 

horses ate too much.  Accordingly one day when she was settling up 

she accused the man of robbing her.  At this Charles got in a rage 

and called her a whore right out; his horses, he said, were 

distinctly better than she was, for they did not sleep with 

everybody.  She answered him in the same strain, and the count had 

to separate them and give the coachman the sack.  This was the 

beginning of a rebellion among the servants.  When her diamonds had 

been stolen Victorine and Francois left.  Julien himself 

disappeared, and the tale ran that the master had given him a big 

bribe and had begged him to go, because he slept with the mistress.  

Every week there were new faces in the servants' hall.  Never was 

there such a mess; the house was like a passage down which the scum 

of the registry offices galloped, destroying everything in their 

path.  Zoe alone kept her place; she always looked clean, and her 

only anxiety was how to organize this riot until she had got enough 

together to set up on her own account in fulfillment of a plan she 

had been hatching for some time past.



These, again, were only the anxieties he could own to.  The count 

put up with the stupidity of Mme Maloir, playing bezique with her in 

spite of her musty smell.  He put up with Mme Lerat and her 

encumbrances, with Louiset and the mournful complaints peculiar to a 

child who is being eaten up with the rottenness inherited from some 

unknown father.  But he spent hours worse than these.  One evening 

he had heard Nana angrily telling her maid that a man pretending to 

be rich had just swindled her--a handsome man calling himself an 

American and owning gold mines in his own country, a beast who had 

gone off while she was asleep without giving her a copper and had 

even taken a packet of cigarette papers with him.  The count had 

turned very pale and had gone downstairs again on tiptoe so as not 

to hear more.  But later he had to hear all.  Nana, having been 

smitten with a baritone in a music hall and having been thrown over 

by him, wanted to commit suicide during a fit of sentimental 

melancholia.  She swallowed a glass of water in which she had soaked 

a box of matches.  This made her terribly sick but did not kill her.  

The count had to nurse her and to listen to the whole story of her 

passion, her tearful protests and her oaths never to take to any man 

again.  In her contempt for those swine, as she called them, she 

could not, however, keep her heart free, for she always had some 

sweetheart round her, and her exhausted body inclined to 

incomprehensible fancies and perverse tastes.  As Zoe designedly 

relaxed her efforts the service of the house had got to such a pitch 

that Muffat did not dare to push open a door, to pull a curtain or 

to unclose a cupboard.  The bells did not ring; men lounged about 

everywhere and at every moment knocked up against one another.  He 

had now to cough before entering a room, having almost caught the 

girl hanging round Francis' neck one evening that he had just gone 

out of the dressing room for two minutes to tell the coachman to put 

the horses to, while her hairdresser was finishing her hair.  She 

gave herself up suddenly behind his back; she took her pleasure in 

every corner, quickly, with the first man she met.  Whether she was 

in her chemise or in full dress did not matter.  She would come back 

to the count red all over, happy at having cheated him.  As for him, 

he was plagued to death; it was an abominable infliction!



In his jealous anguish the unhappy man was comparatively at peace 

when he left Nana and Satin alone together.  He would have willingly 

urged her on to this vice, to keep the men off her.  But all was 

spoiled in this direction too.  Nana deceived Satin as she deceived 

the count, going mad over some monstrous fancy or other and picking 

up girls at the street corners.  Coming back in her carriage, she 

would suddenly be taken with a little slut that she saw on the 

pavement; her senses would be captivated, her imagination excited.  

She would take the little slut in with her, pay her and send her 

away again.  Then, disguised as a man, she would go to infamous 

houses and look on at scenes of debauch to while away hours of 

boredom.  And Satin, angry at being thrown over every moment, would 

turn the house topsy-turvy with the most awful scenes.  She had at 

last acquired a complete ascendancy over Nana, who now respected 

her.  Muffat even thought of an alliance between them.  When he 

dared not say anything he let Satin loose.  Twice she had compelled 

her darling to take up with him again, while he showed himself 

obliging and effaced himself in her favor at the least sign.  But 

this good understanding lasted no time, for Satin, too, was a little 

cracked.  On certain days she would very nearly go mad and would 

smash everything, wearing herself out in tempest of love and anger, 

but pretty all the time.  Zoe must have excited her, for the maid 

took her into corners as if she wanted to tell her about her great 

design of which she as yet spoke to no one.



At times, however, Count Muffat was still singularly revolted.  He 

who had tolerated Satin for months, who had at last shut his eyes to 

the unknown herd of men that scampered so quickly through Nana's 

bedroom, became terribly enraged at being deceived by one of his own 

set or even by an acquaintance.  When she confessed her relations 

with Foucarmont he suffered so acutely, he thought the treachery of 

the young man so base, that he wished to insult him and fight a 

duel.  As he did not know where to find seconds for such an affair, 

he went to Labordette.  The latter, astonished, could not help 

laughing.



"A duel about Nana?  But, my dear sir, all Paris would be laughing 

at you.  Men do not fight for Nana; it would be ridiculous."



The count grew very pale and made a violent gesture.



"Then I shall slap his face in the open street."



For an hour Labordette had to argue with him.  A blow would make the 

affair odious; that evening everyone would know the real reason of 

the meeting; it would be in all the papers.  And Labordette always 

finished with the same expression:



"It is impossible; it would be ridiculous."



Each time Muffat heard these words they seemed sharp and keen as a 

stab.  He could not even fight for the woman he loved; people would 

have burst out laughing.  Never before had he felt more bitterly the 

misery of his love, the contrast between his heavy heart and the 

absurdity of this life of pleasure in which it was now lost.  This 

was his last rebellion; he allowed Labordette to convince him, and 

he was present afterward at the procession of his friends, who lived 

there as if at home.



Nana in a few months finished them up greedily, one after the other.  

The growing needs entailed by her luxurious way of life only added 

fuel to her desires, and she finished a man up at one mouthful.  

First she had Foucarmont, who did not last a fortnight.  He was 

thinking of leaving the navy, having saved about thirty thousand 

francs in his ten years of service, which he wished to invest in the 

United States.  His instincts, which were prudential, even miserly, 

were conquered; he gave her everything, even his signature to notes 

of hand, which pledged his future.  When Nana had done with him he 

was penniless.  But then she proved very kind; she advised him to 

return to his ship.  What was the good of getting angry?  Since he 

had no money their relations were no longer possible.  He ought to 

understand that and to be reasonable.  A ruined man fell from her 

hands like a ripe fruit, to rot on the ground by himself.



Then Nana took up with Steiner without disgust but without love.  

She called him a dirty Jew; she seemed to be paying back an old 

grudge, of which she had no distinct recollection.  He was fat; he 

was stupid, and she got him down and took two bites at a time in 

order the quicker to do for this Prussian.  As for him, he had 

thrown Simonne over.  His Bosphorous scheme was getting shaky, and 

Nana hastened the downfall by wild expenses.  For a month he 

struggled on, doing miracles of finance.  He filled Europe with 

posters, advertisements and prospectuses of a colossal scheme and 

obtained money from the most distant climes.  All these savings, the 

pounds of speculators and the pence of the poor, were swallowed up 

in the Avenue de Villiers.  Again he was partner in an ironworks in 

Alsace, where in a small provincial town workmen, blackened with 

coal dust and soaked with sweat, day and night strained their sinews 

and heard their bones crack to satisfy Nana's pleasures.  Like a 

huge fire she devoured all the fruits of stock-exchange swindling 

and the profits of labor.  This time she did for Steiner; she 

brought him to the ground, sucked him dry to the core, left him so 

cleaned out that he was unable to invent a new roguery.  When his 

bank failed he stammered and trembled at the idea of prosecution.  

His bankruptcy had just been published, and the simple mention of 

money flurried him and threw him into a childish embarrassment.  And 

this was he who had played with millions.  One evening at Nana's he 

began to cry and asked her for a loan of a hundred francs wherewith 

to pay his maidservant.  And Nana, much affected and amused at the 

end of this terrible old man who had squeezed Paris for twenty 

years, brought it to him and said:



"I say, I'm giving it you because it seems so funny!  But listen to 

me, my boy, you are too old for me to keep.  You must find something 

else to do."



Then Nana started on La Faloise at once.  He had for some time been 

longing for the honor of being ruined by her in order to put the 

finishing stroke on his smartness.  He needed a woman to launch him 

properly; it was the one thing still lacking.  In two months all 

Paris would be talking of him, and he would see his name in the 

papers.  Six weeks were enough.  His inheritance was in landed 

estate, houses, fields, woods and farms.  He had to sell all, one 

after the other, as quickly as he could.  At every mouthful Nana 

swallowed an acre.  The foliage trembling in the sunshine, the wide 

fields of ripe grain, the vineyards so golden in September, the tall 

grass in which the cows stood knee-deep, all passed through her 

hands as if engulfed by an abyss.  Even fishing rights, a stone 

quarry and three mills disappeared.  Nana passed over them like an 

invading army or one of those swarms of locusts whose flight scours 

a whole province.  The ground was burned up where her little foot 

had rested.  Farm by farm, field by field, she ate up the man's 

patrimony very prettily and quite inattentively, just as she would 

have eaten a box of sweet-meats flung into her lap between 

mealtimes.  There was no harm in it all; they were only sweets!  But 

at last one evening there only remained a single little wood.  She 

swallowed it up disdainfully, as it was hardly worth the trouble 

opening one's mouth for.  La Faloise laughed idiotically and sucked 

the top of his stick.  His debts were crushing him; he was not worth 

a hundred francs a year, and he saw that he would be compelled to go 

back into the country and live with his maniacal uncle.  But that 

did not matter; he had achieved smartness; the Figaro had printed 

his name twice.  And with his meager neck sticking up between the 

turndown points of his collar and his figure squeezed into all too 

short a coat, he would swagger about, uttering his parrotlike 

exclamations and affecting a solemn listlessness suggestive of an 

emotionless marionette.  He so annoyed Nana that she ended by 

beating him.



Meanwhile Fauchery had returned, his cousin having brought him.  

Poor Fauchery had now set up housekeeping.  After having thrown over 

the countess he had fallen into Rose's hands, and she treated him as 

a lawful wife would have done.  Mignon was simply Madame's major-

domo.  Installed as master of the house, the journalist lied to Rose 

and took all sorts of precautions when he deceived her.  He was as 

scrupulous as a good husband, for he really wanted to settle down at 

last.  Nana's triumph consisted in possessing and in ruining a 

newspaper that he had started with a friend's capital.  She did not 

proclaim her triumph; on the contrary, she delighted in treating him 

as a man who had to be circumspect, and when she spoke of Rose it 

was as "poor Rose."  The newspaper kept her in flowers for two 

months.  She took all the provincial subscriptions; in fact, she 

took everything, from the column of news and gossip down to the 

dramatic notes.  Then the editorial staff having been turned topsy-

turvy and the management completely disorganized, she satisfied a 

fanciful caprice and had a winter garden constructed in a corner of 

her house: that carried off all the type.  But then it was no joke 

after all!  When in his delight at the whole business Mignon came to 

see if he could not saddle Fauchery on her altogether, she asked him 

if he took her for a fool.  A penniless fellow living by his 

articles and his plays--not if she knew it!  That sort of 

foolishness might be all very well for a clever woman like her poor, 

dear Rose!  She grew distrustful: she feared some treachery on 

Mignon's part, for he was quite capable of preaching to his wife, 

and so she gave Fauchery his CONGE as he now only paid her in fame.



But she always recollected him kindly.  They had both enjoyed 

themselves so much at the expense of that fool of a La Faloise!  

They would never have thought of seeing each other again if the 

delight of fooling such a perfect idiot had not egged them on!  It 

seemed an awfully good joke to kiss each other under his very nose.  

They cut a regular dash with his coin; they would send him off full 

speed to the other end of Paris in order to be alone and then when 

he came back, they would crack jokes and make allusions he could not 

understand.  One day, urged by the journalist, she bet that she 

would smack his face, and that she did the very same evening and 

went on to harder blows, for she thought it a good joke and was glad 

of the opportunity of showing how cowardly men were.  She called him 

her "slapjack" and would tell him to come and have his smack!  The 

smacks made her hands red, for as yet she was not up to the trick.  

La Faloise laughed in his idiotic, languid way, though his eyes were 

full of tears.  He was delighted at such familiarity; he thought it 

simply stunning.



One night when he had received sundry cuffs and was greatly excited:



"Now, d'you know," he said, "you ought to marry me.  We should be as 

jolly as grigs together, eh?"



This was no empty suggestion.  Seized with a desire to astonish 

Paris, he had been slyly projecting this marriage.  "Nana's husband!  

Wouldn't that sound smart, eh?"  Rather a stunning apotheosis that!  

But Nana gave him a fine snubbing.



"Me marry you!  Lovely!  If such an idea had been tormenting me I 

should have found a husband a long time ago!  And he'd have been a 

man worth twenty of you, my pippin!  I've had a heap of proposals.  

Why, look here, just reckon 'em up with me: Philippe, Georges, 

Foucarmont, Steiner--that makes four, without counting the others 

you don't know.  It's a chorus they all sing.  I can't be nice, but 

they forthwith begin yelling, 'Will you marry me?  Will you marry 

me?'"



She lashed herself up and then burst out in fine indignation:



"Oh dear, no!  I don't want to!  D'you think I'm built that way?  

Just look at me a bit!  Why, I shouldn't be Nana any longer if I 

fastened a man on behind!  And, besides, it's too foul!"



And she spat and hiccuped with disgust, as though she had seen all 

the dirt in the world spread out beneath her.



One evening La Faloise vanished, and a week later it became known 

that he was in the country with an uncle whose mania was botany.  He 

was pasting his specimens for him and stood a chance of marrying a 

very plain, pious cousin.  Nana shed no tears for him.  She simply 

said to the count:



"Eh, little rough, another rival less!  You're chortling today.  But 

he was becoming serious!  He wanted to marry me."



He waxed pale, and she flung her arms round his neck and hung there, 

laughing, while she emphasized every little cruel speech with a 

caress.



"You can't marry Nana!  Isn't that what's fetching you, eh?  When 

they're all bothering me with their marriages you're raging in your 

corner.  It isn't possible; you must wait till your wife kicks the 

bucket.  Oh, if she were only to do that, how you'd come rushing 

round!  How you'd fling yourself on the ground and make your offer 

with all the grand accompaniments--sighs and tears and vows!  

Wouldn't it be nice, darling, eh?"



Her voice had become soft, and she was chaffing him in a ferociously 

wheedling manner.  He was deeply moved and began blushing as he paid 

her back her kisses.  Then she cried:



"By God, to think I should have guessed!  He's thought about it; 

he's waiting for his wife to go off the hooks!  Well, well, that's 

the finishing touch!  Why, he's even a bigger rascal than the 

others!"



Muffat had resigned himself to "the others."  Nowadays he was 

trusting to the last relics of his personal dignity in order to 

remain "Monsieur" among the servants and intimates of the house, the 

man, in fact, who because he gave most was the official lover.  And 

his passion grew fiercer.  He kept his position because he paid for 

it, buying even smiles at a high price.  He was even robbed and he 

never got his money's worth, but a disease seemed to be gnawing his 

vitals from which he could not prevent himself suffering.  Whenever 

he entered Nana's bedroom he was simply content to open the windows 

for a second or two in order to get rid of the odors the others left 

behind them, the essential smells of fair-haired men and dark, the 

smoke of cigars, of which the pungency choked him.  This bedroom was 

becoming a veritable thoroughfare, so continually were boots wiped 

on its threshold.  Yet never a man among them was stopped by the 

bloodstain barring the door.  Zoe was still preoccupied by this 

stain; it was a simple mania with her, for she was a clean girl, and 

it horrified her to see it always there.  Despite everything her 

eyes would wander in its direction, and she now never entered 

Madame's room without remarking:



"It's strange that don't go.  All the same, plenty of folk come in 

this way."



Nana kept receiving the best news from Georges, who was by that time 

already convalescent in his mother's keeping at Les Fondettes, and 

she used always to make the same reply.



"Oh, hang it, time's all that's wanted.  It's apt to grow paler as 

feet cross it."



As a matter of fact, each of the gentlemen, whether Foucarmont, 

Steiner, La Faloise or Fauchery, had borne away some of it on their 

bootsoles.  And Muffat, whom the bloodstain preoccupied as much as 

it did Zoe, kept studying it in his own despite, as though in its 

gradual rosy disappearance he would read the number of men that 

passed.  He secretly dreaded it and always stepped over it out of a 

vivid fear of crushing some live thing, some naked limb lying on the 

floor.



But in the bedroom within he would grow dizzy and intoxicated and 

would forget everything--the mob of men which constantly crossed it, 

the sign of mourning which barred its door.  Outside, in the open 

air of the street, he would weep occasionally out of sheer shame and 

disgust and would vow never to enter the room again.  And the moment 

the portiere had closed behind him he was under the old influence 

once more and felt his whole being melting in the damp warm air of 

the place, felt his flesh penetrated by a perfume, felt himself 

overborne by a voluptuous yearning for self-annihilation.  Pious and 

habituated to ecstatic experiences in sumptuous chapels, he there 

re-encountered precisely the same mystical sensations as when he 

knelt under some painted window and gave way to the intoxication of 

organ music and incense.  Woman swayed him as jealously and 

despotically as the God of wrath, terrifying him, granting him 

moments of delight, which were like spasms in their keenness, in 

return for hours filled with frightful, tormenting visions of hell 

and eternal tortures.  In Nana's presence, as in church, the same 

stammering accents were his, the same prayers and the same fits of 

despair--nay, the same paroxysms of humility peculiar to an accursed 

creature who is crushed down in the mire from whence he has sprung.  

His fleshly desires, his spiritual needs, were confounded together 

and seemed to spring from the obscure depths of his being and to 

bear but one blossom on the tree of his existence.  He abandoned 

himself to the power of love and of faith, those twin levers which 

move the world.  And despite all the struggles of his reason this 

bedroom of Nana's always filled him with madness, and he would sink 

shuddering under the almighty dominion of sex, just as he would 

swoon before the vast unknown of heaven.



Then when she felt how humble he was Nana grew tyrannously 

triumphant.  The rage for debasing things was inborn in her.  It did 

not suffice her to destroy them; she must soil them too.  Her 

delicate hands left abominable traces and themselves decomposed 

whatever they had broken.  And he in his imbecile condition lent 

himself to this sort of sport, for he was possessed by vaguely 

remembered stories of saints who were devoured by vermin and in turn 

devoured their own excrements.  When once she had him fast in her 

room and the doors were shut, she treated herself to a man's infamy.  

At first they joked together, and she would deal him light blows and 

impose quaint tasks on him, making him lisp like a child and repeat 

tags of sentences.



"Say as I do: 'tonfound it!  Ickle man damn vell don't tare about 

it!"



He would prove so docile as to reproduce her very accent.



"'Tonfound it!  Ickle man damn vell don't tare about it!"



Or again she would play bear, walking on all fours on her rugs when 

she had only her chemise on and turning round with a growl as though 

she wanted to eat him.  She would even nibble his calves for the fun 

of the thing.  Then, getting up again:



"It's your turn now; try it a bit.  I bet you don't play bear like 

me."



It was still charming enough.  As bear she amused him with her white 

skin and her fell of ruddy hair.  He used to laugh and go down on 

all fours, too, and growl and bite her calves, while she ran from 

him with an affectation of terror.



"Are we beasts, eh?" she would end by saying.  "You've no notion how 

ugly you are, my pet!  Just think if they were to see you like that 

at the Tuileries!"



But ere long these little games were spoiled.  It was not cruelty in 

her case, for she was still a good-natured girl; it was as though a 

passing wind of madness were blowing ever more strongly in the shut-

up bedroom.  A storm of lust disordered their brains, plunged them 

into the delirious imaginations of the flesh.  The old pious terrors 

of their sleepless nights were now transforming themselves into a 

thirst for bestiality, a furious longing to walk on all fours, to 

growl and to bite.  One day when he was playing bear she pushed him 

so roughly that he fell against a piece of furniture, and when she 

saw the lump on his forehead she burst into involuntary laughter.  

After that her experiments on La Faloise having whetted her 

appetite, she treated him like an animal, threshing him and chasing 

him to an accompaniment of kicks.



"Gee up!  Gee up!  You're a horse.  Hoi!  Gee up!  Won't you hurry 

up, you dirty screw?"



At other times he was a dog.  She would throw her scented 

handkerchief to the far end of the room, and he had to run and pick 

it up with his teeth, dragging himself along on hands and knees.



"Fetch it, Caesar!  Look here, I'll give you what for if you don't 

look sharp!  Well done, Caesar!  Good dog!  Nice old fellow!  Now 

behave pretty!"



And he loved his abasement and delighted in being a brute beast.  He 

longed to sink still further and would cry:



"Hit harder.  On, on!  I'm wild!  Hit away!"



She was seized with a whim and insisted on his coming to her one 

night clad in his magnificent chamberlain's costume.  Then how she 

did laugh and make fun of him when she had him there in all his 

glory, with the sword and the cocked hat and the white breeches and 

the full-bottomed coat of red cloth laced with gold and the symbolic 

key hanging on its left-hand skirt.  This key made her especially 

merry and urged her to a wildly fanciful and extremely filthy 

discussion of it.  Laughing without cease and carried away by her 

irreverence for pomp and by the joy of debasing him in the official 

dignity of his costume, she shook him, pinched him, shouted, "Oh, 

get along with ye, Chamberlain!" and ended by an accompaniment of 

swinging kicks behind.  Oh, those kicks!  How heartily she rained 

them on the Tuileries and the majesty of the imperial court, 

throning on high above an abject and trembling people.  That's what 

she thought of society!  That was her revenge!  It was an affair of 

unconscious hereditary spite; it had come to her in her blood.  Then 

when once the chamberlain was undressed and his coat lay spread on 

the ground she shrieked, "Jump!"  And he jumped.  She shrieked, 

"Spit!"  And he spat.  With a shriek she bade him walk on the gold, 

on the eagles, on the decorations, and he walked on them.  Hi tiddly 

hi ti!  Nothing was left; everything was going to pieces.  She 

smashed a chamberlain just as she smashed a flask or a comfit box, 

and she made filth of him, reduced him to a heap of mud at a street 

corner.



Meanwhile the goldsmiths had failed to keep their promise, and the 

bed was not delivered till one day about the middle of January.  

Muffat was just then in Normandy, whither he had gone to sell a last 

stray shred of property, but Nana demanded four thousand francs 

forthwith.  He was not due in Paris till the day after tomorrow, but 

when his business was once finished he hastened his return and 

without even paying a flying visit in the Rue Miromesnil came direct 

to the Avenue de Villiers.  Ten o'clock was striking.  As he had a 

key of a little door opening on the Rue Cardinet, he went up 

unhindered.  In the drawing room upstairs Zoe, who was polishing the 

bronzes, stood dumfounded at sight of him, and not knowing how to 

stop him, she began with much circumlocution, informing him that M. 

Venot, looking utterly beside himself, had been searching for him 

since yesterday and that he had already come twice to beg her to 

send Monsieur to his house if Monsieur arrived at Madame's before 

going home.  Muffat listened to her without in the least 

understanding the meaning of her recital; then he noticed her 

agitation and was seized by a sudden fit of jealousy of which he no 

longer believed himself capable.  He threw himself against the 

bedroom door, for he heard the sound of laughter within.  The door 

gave; its two flaps flew asunder, while Zoe withdrew, shrugging her 

shoulders.  So much the worse for Madame!  As Madame was bidding 

good-by to her wits, she might arrange matters for herself.



And on the threshold Muffat uttered a cry at the sight that was 

presented to his view.



"My God!  My God!"



The renovated bedroom was resplendent in all its royal luxury.  

Silver buttons gleamed like bright stars on the tea-rose velvet of 

the hangings.  These last were of that pink flesh tint which the 

skies assume on fine evenings, when Venus lights her fires on the 

horizon against the clear background of fading daylight.  The golden 

cords and tassels hanging in corners and the gold lace-work 

surrounding the panels were like little flames of ruddy strands of 

loosened hair, and they half covered the wide nakedness of the room 

while they emphasized its pale, voluptuous tone.  Then over against 

him there was the gold and silver bed, which shone in all the fresh 

splendor of its chiseled workmanship, a throne this of sufficient 

extent for Nana to display the outstretched glory of her naked 

limbs, an altar of Byzantine sumptuousness, worthy of the almighty 

puissance of Nana's sex, which at this very hour lay nudely 

displayed there in the religious immodesty befitting an idol of all 

men's worship.  And close by, beneath the snowy reflections of her 

bosom and amid the triumph of the goddess, lay wallowing a shameful, 

decrepit thing, a comic and lamentable ruin, the Marquis de Chouard 

in his nightshirt.



The count had clasped his hands together and, shaken by a paroxysmal 

shuddering, he kept crying:



"My God!  My God!"



It was for the Marquis de Chouard, then, that the golden roses 

flourished on the side panels, those bunches of golden roses 

blooming among the golden leaves; it was for him that the Cupids 

leaned forth with amorous, roguish laughter from their tumbling ring 

on the silver trelliswork.  And it was for him that the faun at his 

feet discovered the nymph sleeping, tired with dalliance, the figure 

of Night copied down to the exaggerated thighs--which caused her to 

be recognizable of all--from Nana's renowned nudity.  Cast there 

like the rag of something human which has been spoiled and dissolved 

by sixty years of debauchery, he suggested the charnelhouse amid the 

glory of the woman's dazzling contours.  Seeing the door open, he 

had risen up, smitten with sudden terror as became an infirm old 

man.  This last night of passion had rendered him imbecile; he was 

entering on his second childhood; and, his speech failing him, he 

remained in an attitude of flight, half-paralyzed, stammering, 

shivering, his nightshirt half up his skeleton shape, and one leg 

outside the clothes, a livid leg, covered with gray hair.  Despite 

her vexation Nana could not keep from laughing.



"Do lie down!  Stuff yourself into the bed," she said, pulling him 

back and burying him under the coverlet, as though he were some 

filthy thing she could not show anyone.



Then she sprang up to shut the door again.  She was decidedly never 

lucky with her little rough.  He was always coming when least 

wanted.  And why had he gone to fetch money in Normandy?  The old 

man had brought her the four thousand francs, and she had let him 

have his will of her.  She pushed back the two flaps of the door and 

shouted:



"So much the worse for you!  It's your fault.  Is that the way to 

come into a room?  I've had enough of this sort of thing.  Ta ta!"



Muffat remained standing before the closed door, thunderstruck by 

what he had just seen.  His shuddering fit increased.  It mounted 

from his feet to his heart and brain.  Then like a tree shaken by a 

mighty wind, he swayed to and fro and dropped on his knees, all his 

muscles giving way under him.  And with hands despairingly 

outstretched he stammered:



"This is more than I can bear, my God!  More than I can bear!"



He had accepted every situation but he could do so no longer.  He 

had come to the end of his strength and was plunged in the dark void 

where man and his reason are together overthrown.  In an extravagant 

access of faith he raised his hands ever higher and higher, 

searching for heaven, calling on God.



"Oh no, I do not desire it!  Oh, come to me, my God!  Succor me; 

nay, let me die sooner!  Oh no, not that man, my God!  It is over; 

take me, carry me away, that I may not see, that I may not feel any 

longer!  Oh, I belong to you, my God!  Our Father which art in 

heaven--"



And burning with faith, he continued his supplication, and an ardent 

prayer escaped from his lips.  But someone touched him on the 

shoulder.  He lifted his eyes; it was M. Venot.  He was surprised to 

find him praying before that closed door.  Then as though God 

Himself had responded to his appeal, the count flung his arms round 

the little old gentleman's neck.  At last he could weep, and he 

burst out sobbing and repeated:



"My brother, my brother."



All his suffering humanity found comfort in that cry.  He drenched 

M. Venot's face with tears; he kissed him, uttering fragmentary 

ejaculations.



"Oh, my brother, how I am suffering!  You only are left me, my 

brother.  Take me away forever--oh, for mercy's sake, take me away!"



Then M. Venot pressed him to his bosom and called him "brother" 

also.  But he had a fresh blow in store for him.  Since yesterday he 

had been searching for him in order to inform him that the Countess 

Sabine, in a supreme fit of moral aberration, had but now taken 

flight with the manager of one of the departments in a large, fancy 

emporium.  It was a fearful scandal, and all Paris was already 

talking about it.  Seeing him under the influence of such religious 

exaltation, Venot felt the opportunity to be favorable and at once 

told him of the meanly tragic shipwreck of his house.  The count was 

not touched thereby.  His wife had gone?  That meant nothing to him; 

they would see what would happen later on.  And again he was seized 

with anguish, and gazing with a look of terror at the door, the 

walls, the ceiling, he continued pouring forth his single 

supplication:



"Take me away!  I cannot bear it any longer!  Take me away!"



M. Venot took him away as though he had been a child.  From that day 

forth Muffat belonged to him entirely; he again became strictly 

attentive to the duties of religion; his life was utterly blasted.  

He had resigned his position as chamberlain out of respect for the 

outraged modesty of the Tuileries, and soon Estelle, his daughter, 

brought an action against him for the recovery of a sum of sixty 

thousand francs, a legacy left her by an aunt to which she ought to 

have succeeded at the time of her marriage.  Ruined and living 

narrowly on the remains of his great fortune, he let himself be 

gradually devoured by the countess, who ate up the husks Nana had 

rejected.  Sabine was indeed ruined by the example of promiscuity 

set her by her husband's intercourse with the wanton.  She was prone 

to every excess and proved the ultimate ruin and destruction of his 

very hearth.  After sundry adventures she had returned home, and he 

had taken her back in a spirit of Christian resignation and 

forgiveness.  She haunted him as his living disgrace, but he grew 

more and more indifferent and at last ceased suffering from these 

distresses.  Heaven took him out of his wife's hands in order to 

restore him to the arms of God, and so the voluptuous pleasures he 

had enjoyed with Nana were prolonged in religious ecstasies, 

accompanied by the old stammering utterances, the old prayers and 

despairs, the old fits of humility which befit an accursed creature 

who is crushed beneath the mire whence he sprang.  In the recesses 

of churches, his knees chilled by the pavement, he would once more 

experience the delights of the past, and his muscles would twitch, 

and his brain would whirl deliciously, and the satisfaction of the 

obscure necessities of his existence would be the same as of old.



On the evening of the final rupture Mignon presented himself at the 

house in the Avenue de Villiers.  He was growing accustomed to 

Fauchery and was beginning at last to find the presence of his 

wife's husband infinitely advantageous to him.  He would leave all 

the little household cares to the journalist and would trust him in 

the active superintendence of all their affairs.  Nay, he devoted 

the money gained by his dramatic successes to the daily expenditure 

of the family, and as, on his part, Fauchery behaved sensibly, 

avoiding ridiculous jealousy and proving not less pliant than Mignon 

himself whenever Rose found her opportunity, the mutual 

understanding between the two men constantly improved.  In fact, 

they were happy in a partnership which was so fertile in all kinds 

of amenities, and they settled down side by side and adopted a 

family arrangement which no longer proved a stumbling block.  The 

whole thing was conducted according to rule; it suited admirably, 

and each man vied with the other in his efforts for the common 

happiness.  That very evening Mignon had come by Fauchery's advice 

to see if he could not steal Nana's lady's maid from her, the 

journalist having formed a high opinion of the woman's extraordinary 

intelligence.  Rose was in despair; for a month past she had been 

falling into the hands of inexperienced girls who were causing her 

continual embarrassment.  When Zoe received him at the door he 

forthwith pushed her into the dining room.  But at his opening 

sentence she smiled.  The thing was impossible, she said, for she 

was leaving Madame and establishing herself on her own account.  And 

she added with an expression of discreet vanity that she was daily 

receiving offers, that the ladies were fighting for her and that Mme 

Blanche would give a pile of gold to have her back.



Zoe was taking the Tricon's establishment.  It was an old project 

and had been long brooded over.  It was her ambition to make her 

fortune thereby, and she was investing all her savings in it.  She 

was full of great ideas and meditated increasing the business and 

hiring a house and combining all the delights within its walls.  It 

was with this in view that she had tried to entice Satin, a little 

pig at that moment dying in hospital, so terribly had she done for 

herself.



Mignon still insisted with his offer and spoke of the risks run in 

the commercial life, but Zoe, without entering into explanations 

about the exact nature of her establishment, smiled a pinched smile, 

as though she had just put a sweetmeat in her mouth, and was content 

to remark:



"Oh, luxuries always pay.  You see, I've been with others quite long 

enough, and now I want others to be with me."



And a fierce look set her lip curling.  At last she would be 

"Madame," and for the sake of earning a few louis all those women 

whose slops she had emptied during the last fifteen years would 

prostrate themselves before her.



Mignon wished to be announced, and Zoe left him for a moment after 

remarking that Madame had passed a miserable day.  He had only been 

at the house once before, and he did not know it at all.  The dining 

room with its Gobelin tapestry, its sideboard and its plate filled 

him with astonishment.  He opened the doors familiarly and visited 

the drawing room and the winter garden, returning thence into the 

hall.  This overwhelming luxury, this gilded furniture, these silks 

and velvets, gradually filled him with such a feeling of admiration 

that it set his heart beating.  When Zoe came down to fetch him she 

offered to show him the other rooms, the dressing room, that is to 

say, and the bedroom.  In the latter Mignon's feelings overcame him; 

he was carried away by them; they filled him with tender enthusiasm.



That damned Nana was simply stupefying him, and yet he thought he 

knew a thing or two.  Amid the downfall of the house and the 

servants' wild, wasteful race to destruction, massed-up riches still 

filled every gaping hole and overtopped every ruined wall.  And 

Mignon, as he viewed this lordly monument of wealth, began recalling 

to mind the various great works he had seen.  Near Marseilles they 

had shown him an aqueduct, the stone arches of which bestrode an 

abyss, a Cyclopean work which cost millions of money and ten years 

of intense labor.  At Cherbourg he had seen the new harbor with its 

enormous works, where hundreds of men sweated in the sun while 

cranes filled the sea with huge squares of rock and built up a wall 

where a workman now and again remained crushed into bloody pulp.  

But all that now struck him as insignificant.  Nana excited him far 

more.  Viewing the fruit of her labors, he once more experienced the 

feelings of respect that had overcome him one festal evening in a 

sugar refiner's chateau.  This chateau had been erected for the 

refiner, and its palatial proportions and royal splendor had been 

paid for by a single material--sugar.  It was with something quite 

different, with a little laughable folly, a little delicate nudity--

it was with this shameful trifle, which is so powerful as to move 

the universe, that she alone, without workmen, without the 

inventions of engineers, had shaken Paris to its foundations and had 

built up a fortune on the bodies of dead men.



"Oh, by God, what an implement!"



Mignon let the words escape him in his ecstasy, for he felt a return 

of personal gratitude.



Nana had gradually lapsed into a most mournful condition.  To begin 

with, the meeting of the marquis and the count had given her a 

severe fit of feverish nervousness, which verged at times on 

laughter.  Then the thought of this old man going away half dead in 

a cab and of her poor rough, whom she would never set eyes on again 

now that she had driven him so wild, brought on what looked like the 

beginnings of melancholia.  After that she grew vexed to hear about 

Satin's illness.  The girl had disappeared about a fortnight ago and 

was now ready to die at Lariboisiere, to such a damnable state had 

Mme Robert reduced her.  When she ordered the horses to be put to in 

order that she might have a last sight of this vile little wretch 

Zoe had just quietly given her a week's notice.  The announcement 

drove her to desperation at once!  It seemed to her she was losing a 

member of her own family.  Great heavens!  What was to become of her 

when left alone?  And she besought Zoe to stay, and the latter, much 

flattered by Madame's despair, ended by kissing her to show that she 

was not going away in anger.  No, she had positively to go: the 

heart could have no voice in matters of business.



But that day was one of annoyances.  Nana was thoroughly disgusted 

and gave up the idea of going out.  She was dragging herself wearily 

about the little drawing room when Labordette came up to tell her of 

a splendid chance of buying magnificent lace and in the course of 

his remarks casually let slip the information that Georges was dead.  

The announcement froze her.



"Zizi dead!" she cried.



And involuntarily her eyes sought the pink stain on the carpet, but 

it had vanished at last; passing footsteps had worn it away.  

Meanwhile Labordette entered into particulars.  It was not exactly 

known how he died.  Some spoke of a wound reopening, others of 

suicide.  The lad had plunged, they said, into a tank at Les 

Fondettes.  Nana kept repeating:



"Dead!  Dead!"



She had been choking with grief since morning, and now she burst out 

sobbing and thus sought relief.  Hers was an infinite sorrow: it 

overwhelmed her with its depth and immensity.  Labordette wanted to 

comfort her as touching Georges, but she silenced him with a gesture 

and blurted out:



"It isn't only he; it's everything, everything.  I'm very wretched.  

Oh yes, I know!  They'll again be saying I'm a hussy.  To think of 

the mother mourning down there and of the poor man who was groaning 

in front of my door this morning and of all the other people that 

are now ruined after running through all they had with me!  That's 

it; punish Nana; punish the beastly thing!  Oh, I've got a broad 

back!  I can hear them as if I were actually there!  'That dirty 

wench who lies with everybody and cleans out some and drives others 

to death and causes a whole heap of people pain!'"



She was obliged to pause, for tears choked her utterance, and in her 

anguish she flung herself athwart a divan and buried her face in a 

cushion.  The miseries she felt to be around her, miseries of which 

she was the cause, overwhelmed her with a warm, continuous stream of 

self-pitying tears, and her voice failed as she uttered a little 

girl's broken plaint:



"Oh, I'm wretched!  Oh, I'm wretched!  I can't go on like this: it's 

choking me.  It's too hard to be misunderstood and to see them all 

siding against you because they're stronger.  However, when you've 

got nothing to reproach yourself with and your conscious is clear, 

why, then I say, 'I won't have it!  I won't have it!'"



In her anger she began rebeling against circumstances, and getting 

up, she dried her eyes, and walked about in much agitation.



"I won't have it!  They can say what they like, but it's not my 

fault!  Am I a bad lot, eh?  I give away all I've got; I wouldn't 

crush a fly!  It's they who are bad!  Yes, it's they!  I never 

wanted to be horrid to them.  And they came dangling after me, and 

today they're kicking the bucket and begging and going to ruin on 

purpose."



Then she paused in front of Labordette and tapped his shoulders.



"Look here," she said, "you were there all along; now speak the 

truth: did I urge them on?  Weren't there always a dozen of 'em 

squabbling who could invent the dirtiest trick?  They used to 

disgust me, they did!  I did all I knew not to copy them: I was 

afraid to.  Look here, I'll give you a single instance: they all 

wanted to marry me!  A pretty notion, eh?  Yes, dear boy, I could 

have been countess or baroness a dozen times over and more, if I'd 

consented.  Well now, I refused because I was reasonable.  Oh yes, I 

saved 'em some crimes and other foul acts!  They'd have stolen, 

murdered, killed father and mother.  I had only to say one word, and 

I didn't say it.  You see what I've got for it today.  There's 

Daguenet, for instance; I married that chap off!  I made a position 

for the beggarly fellow after keeping him gratis for weeks!  And I 

met him yesterday, and he looks the other way!  Oh, get along, you 

swine!  I'm less dirty than you!"



She had begun pacing about again, and now she brought her fist 

violently down on a round table.



"By God it isn't fair!  Society's all wrong.  They come down on the 

women when it's the men who want you to do things.  Yes, I can tell 

you this now: when I used to go with them--see?  I didn't enjoy it; 

no, I didn't enjoy it one bit.  It bored me, on my honor.  Well 

then, I ask you whether I've got anything to do with it!  Yes, they 

bored me to death!  If it hadn't been for them and what they made of 

me, dear boy, I should be in a convent saying my prayers to the good 

God, for I've always had my share of religion.  Dash it, after all, 

if they have dropped their money and their lives over it, what do I 

care?  It's their fault.  I've had nothing to do with it!"



"Certainly not," said Labordette with conviction.



Zoe ushered in Mignon, and Nana received him smilingly.  She had 

cried a good deal, but it was all over now.  Still glowing with 

enthusiasm, he complimented her on her installation, but she let him 

see that she had had enough of her mansion and that now she had 

other projects and would sell everything up one of these days.  Then 

as he excused himself for calling on the ground that he had come 

about a benefit performance in aid of old Bose, who was tied to his 

armchair by paralysis, she expressed extreme pity and took two 

boxes.  Meanwhile Zoe announced that the carriage was waiting for 

Madame, and she asked for her hat and as she tied the strings told 

them about poor, dear Satin's mishap, adding:



"I'm going to the hospital.  Nobody ever loved me as she did.  Oh, 

they're quite right when they accuse the men of heartlessness!  Who 

knows?  Perhaps I shan't see her alive.  Never mind, I shall ask to 

see her: I want to give her a kiss."



Labordette and Mignon smiled, and as Nana was no longer melancholy 

she smiled too.  Those two fellows didn't count; they could enter 

into her feelings.  And they both stood and admired her in silent 

abstraction while she finished buttoning her gloves.  She alone kept 

her feet amid the heaped-up riches of her mansion, while a whole 

generation of men lay stricken down before her.  Like those antique 

monsters whose redoubtable domains were covered with skeletons, she 

rested her feet on human skulls.  She was ringed round with 

catastrophes.  There was the furious immolation of Vandeuvres; the 

melancholy state of Foucarmont, who was lost in the China seas; the 

smashup of Steiner, who now had to live like an honest man; the 

satisfied idiocy of La Faloise, and the tragic shipwreck of the 

Muffats.  Finally there was the white corpse of Georges, over which 

Philippe was now watching, for he had come out of prison but 

yesterday.  She had finished her labor of ruin and death.  The fly 

that had flown up from the ordure of the slums, bringing with it the 

leaven of social rottenness, had poisoned all these men by merely 

alighting on them.  It was well done--it was just.  She had avenged 

the beggars and the wastrels from whose caste she issued.  And 

while, metaphorically speaking, her sex rose in a halo of glory and 

beamed over prostrate victims like a mounting sun shining brightly 

over a field of carnage, the actual woman remained as unconscious as 

a splendid animal, and in her ignorance of her mission was the good-

natured courtesan to the last.  She was still big; she was still 

plump; her health was excellent, her spirits capital.  But this went 

for nothing now, for her house struck her as ridiculous.  It was too 

small; it was full of furniture which got in her way.  It was a 

wretched business, and the long and the short of the matter was she 

would have to make a fresh start.  In fact, she was meditating 

something much better, and so she went off to kiss Satin for the 

last time.  She was in all her finery and looked clean and solid and 

as brand new as if she had never seen service before.

