




CHAPTER VI





Count Muffat, accompanied by his wife and daughter, had arrived 

overnight at Les Fondettes, where Mme Hugon, who was staying there 

with only her son Georges, had invited them to come and spend a 

week.  The house, which had been built at the end of the eighteenth 

century, stood in the middle of a huge square enclosure.  It was 

perfectly unadorned, but the garden possessed magnificent shady 

trees and a chain of tanks fed by running spring water.  It stood at 

the side of the road which leads from Orleans to Paris and with its 

rich verdure and high-embowered trees broke the monotony of that 

flat countryside, where fields stretched to the horizon's verge.



At eleven o'clock, when the second lunch bell had called the whole 

household together, Mme Hugon, smiling in her kindly maternal way, 

gave Sabine two great kisses, one on each cheek, and said as she did 

so:



"You know it's my custom in the country.  Oh, seeing you here makes 

me feel twenty years younger.  Did you sleep well in your old room?"



Then without waiting for her reply she turned to Estelle:



"And this little one, has she had a nap too?  Give me a kiss, my 

child."



They had taken their seats in the vast dining room, the windows of 

which looked out on the park.  But they only occupied one end of the 

long table, where they sat somewhat crowded together for company's 

sake.  Sabine, in high good spirits, dwelt on various childish 

memories which had been stirred up within her--memories of months 

passed at Les Fondettes, of long walks, of a tumble into one of the 

tanks on a summer evening, of an old romance of chivalry discovered 

by her on the top of a cupboard and read during the winter before 

fires made of vine branches.  And Georges, who had not seen the 

countess for some months, thought there was something curious about 

her.  Her face seemed changed, somehow, while, on the other hand, 

that stick of an Estelle seemed more insignificant and dumb and 

awkward than ever.



While such simple fare as cutlets and boiled eggs was being 

discussed by the company, Mme Hugon, as became a good housekeeper, 

launched out into complaints.  The butchers, she said, were becoming 

impossible.  She bought everything at Orleans, and yet they never 

brought her the pieces she asked for.  Yet, alas, if her guests had 

nothing worth eating it was their own fault: they had come too late 

in the season.



"There's no sense in it," she said.  "I've been expecting you since 

June, and now we're half through September.  You see, it doesn't 

look pretty."



And with a movement she pointed to the trees on the grass outside, 

the leaves of which were beginning to turn yellow.  The day was 

covered, and the distance was hidden by a bluish haze which was 

fraught with a sweet and melancholy peacefulness.



"Oh, I'm expecting company," she continued.  "We shall be gayer 

then!  The first to come will be two gentlemen whom Georges has 

invited--Monsieur Fauchery and Monsieur Daguenet; you know them, do 

you not?  Then we shall have Monsieur de Vandeuvres, who has 

promised me a visit these five years past.  This time, perhaps, 

he'll make up his mind!"



"Oh, well and good!" said the countess, laughing.  "If we only can 

get Monsieur de Vandeuvres!  But he's too much engaged."



"And Philippe?" queried Muffat.



"Philippe has asked for a furlough," replied the old lady, "but 

without doubt you won't be at Les Fondettes any longer when he 

arrives."



The coffee was served.  Paris was now the subject of conversation, 

and Steiner's name was mentioned, at which Mme Hugon gave a little 

cry.



"Let me see," she said; "Monsieur Steiner is that stout man I met at 

your house one evening.  He's a banker, is he not?  Now there's a 

detestable man for you!  Why, he's gone and bought an actress an 

estate about a league from here, over Gumieres way, beyond the 

Choue.  The whole countryside's scandalized.  Did you know about 

that, my friend?"



"I knew nothing about it," replied Muffat.  "Ah, then, Steiner's 

bought a country place in the neighborhood!"



Hearing his mother broach the subject, Georges looked into his 

coffee cup, but in his astonishment at the count's answer he glanced 

up at him and stared.  Why was he lying so glibly?  The count, on 

his side, noticed the young fellow's movement and gave him a 

suspicious glance.  Mme Hugon continued to go into details: the 

country place was called La Mignotte.  In order to get there one had 

to go up the bank of the Choue as far as Gumieres in order to cross 

the bridge; otherwise one got one's feet wet and ran the risk of a 

ducking.



"And what is the actress's name?" asked the countess.



"Oh, I wasn't told," murmured the old lady.  "Georges, you were 

there the morning the gardener spoke to us about it."



Georges appeared to rack his brains.  Muffat waited, twirling a 

teaspoon between his fingers.  Then the countess addressed her 

husband:



"Isn't Monsieur Steiner with that singer at the Varietes, that 

Nana?"



"Nana, that's the name!  A horrible woman!" cried Mme Hugon with 

growing annoyance.  "And they are expecting her at La Mignotte.  

I've heard all about it from the gardener.  Didn't the gardener say 

they were expecting her this evening, Georges?"



The count gave a little start of astonishment, but Georges replied 

with much vivacity:



"Oh, Mother, the gardener spoke without knowing anything about it.  

Directly afterward the coachman said just the opposite.  Nobody's 

expected at La Mignotte before the day after tomorrow."



He tried hard to assume a natural expression while he slyly watched 

the effect of his remarks on the count.  The latter was twirling his 

spoon again as though reassured.  The countess, her eyes fixed 

dreamily on the blue distances of the park, seemed to have lost all 

interest in the conversation.  The shadow of a smile on her lips, 

she seemed to be following up a secret thought which had been 

suddenly awakened within her.  Estelle, on the other hand, sitting 

stiffly on her chair, had heard all that had been said about Nana, 

but her white, virginal face had not betrayed a trace of emotion.



"Dear me, dear me!  I've got no right to grow angry," murmured Mme 

Hugon after a pause, and with a return to her old good humor she 

added:



"Everybody's got a right to live.  If we meet this said lady on the 

road we shall not bow to her--that's all!"



And as they got up from table she once more gently upbraided the 

Countess Sabine for having been so long in coming to her that year.  

But the countess defended herself and threw the blame of the delays 

upon her husband's shoulders.  Twice on the eve of departure, when 

all the trunks were locked, he counterordered their journey on the 

plea of urgent business.  Then he had suddenly decided to start just 

when the trip seemed shelved.  Thereupon the old lady told them how 

Georges in the same way had twice announced his arrival without 

arriving and had finally cropped up at Les Fondettes the day before 

yesterday, when she was no longer expecting him.  They had come down 

into the garden, and the two men, walking beside the ladies, were 

listening to them in consequential silence.



"Never mind," said Mme Hugon, kissing her son's sunny locks, "Zizi 

is a very good boy to come and bury himself in the country with his 

mother.  He's a dear Zizi not to forget me!"



In the afternoon she expressed some anxiety, for Georges, directly 

after leaving the table, had complained of a heavy feeling in his 

head and now seemed in for an atrocious sick headache.  Toward four 

o'clock he said he would go upstairs to bed: it was the only remedy.  

After sleeping till tomorrow morning he would be perfectly himself 

again.  His mother was bent on putting him to bed herself, but as 

she left the room he ran and locked the door, explaining that he was 

shutting himself in so that no one should come and disturb him.  

Then caressingly he shouted, "Good night till tomorrow, little 

Mother!" and promised to take a nap.  But he did not go to bed again 

and with flushed cheeks and bright eyes noiselessly put on his 

clothes.  Then he sat on a chair and waited.  When the dinner bell 

rang he listened for Count Muffat, who was on his way to the dining 

room, and ten minutes later, when he was certain that no one would 

see him, he slipped from the window to the ground with the 

assistance of a rain pipe.  His bedroom was situated on the first 

floor and looked out upon the rear of the house.  He threw himself 

among some bushes and got out of the park and then galloped across 

the fields with empty stomach and heart beating with excitement.  

Night was closing in, and a small fine rain was beginning to fall.



It was the very evening that Nana was due at La Mignotte.  Ever 

since in the preceding May Steiner had bought her this country place 

she had from time to time been so filled with the desire of taking 

possession that she had wept hot tears about, but on each of these 

occasions Bordenave had refused to give her even the shortest leave 

and had deferred her holiday till September on the plea that he did 

not intend putting an understudy in her place, even for one evening, 

now that the exhibition was on.  Toward the close of August he spoke 

of October.  Nana was furious and declared that she would be at La 

Mignotte in the middle of September.  Nay, in order to dare 

Bordenave, she even invited a crowd of guests in his very presence.  

One afternoon in her rooms, as Muffat, whose advances she still 

adroitly resisted, was beseeching her with tremulous emotion to 

yield to his entreaties, she at length promised to be kind, but not 

in Paris, and to him, too, she named the middle of September.  Then 

on the twelfth she was seized by a desire to be off forthwith with 

Zoe as her sole companion.  It might be that Bordenave had got wind 

of her intentions and was about to discover some means of detaining 

her.  She was delighted at the notion of putting him in a fix, and 

she sent him a doctor's certificate.  When once the idea had entered 

her head of being the first to get to La Mignotte and of living 

there two days without anybody knowing anything about it, she rushed 

Zoe through the operation of packing and finally pushed her into a 

cab, where in a sudden burst of extreme contrition she kissed her 

and begged her pardon.  It was only when they got to the station 

refreshment room that she thought of writing Steiner of her 

movements.  She begged him to wait till the day after tomorrow 

before rejoining her if he wanted to find her quite bright and 

fresh.  And then, suddenly conceiving another project, she wrote a 

second letter, in which she besought her aunt to bring little Louis 

to her at once.  It would do Baby so much good!  And how happy they 

would be together in the shade of the trees!  In the railway 

carriage between Paris and Orleans she spoke of nothing else; her 

eyes were full of tears; she had an unexpected attack of maternal 

tenderness and mingled together flowers, birds and child in her 

every sentence.



La Mignotte was more than three leagues away from the station, and 

Nana lost a good hour over the hire of a carriage, a huge, 

dilapidated calash, which rumbled slowly along to an accompaniment 

of rattling old iron.  She had at once taken possession of the 

coachman, a little taciturn old man whom she overwhelmed with 

questions.  Had he often passed by La Mignotte?  It was behind this 

hill then?  There ought to be lots of trees there, eh?  And the 

house could one see it at a distance?  The little old man answered 

with a succession of grunts.  Down in the calash Nana was almost 

dancing with impatience, while Zoe, in her annoyance at having left 

Paris in such a hurry, sat stiffly sulking beside her.  The horse 

suddenly stopped short, and the young woman thought they had reached 

their destination.  She put her head out of the carriage door and 

asked:



"Are we there, eh?"



By way of answer the driver whipped up his horse, which was in the 

act of painfully climbing a hill.  Nana gazed ecstatically at the 

vast plain beneath the gray sky where great clouds were banked up.



"Oh, do look, Zoe!  There's greenery!  Now, is that all wheat?  Good 

lord, how pretty it is!"



"One can quite see that Madame doesn't come from the country," was 

the servant's prim and tardy rejoinder.  "As for me, I knew the 

country only too well when I was with my dentist.  He had a house at 

Bougival.  No, it's cold, too, this evening.  It's damp in these 

parts."



They were driving under the shadow of a wood, and Nana sniffed up 


the scent of the leaves as a young dog might.  All of a sudden at a 

turn of the road she caught sight of the corner of a house among the 

trees.  Perhaps it was there!  And with that she began a 

conversation with the driver, who continued shaking his head by way 

of saying no.  Then as they drove down the other side of the hill he 

contented himself by holding out his whip and muttering, "'Tis down 

there."



She got up and stretched herself almost bodily out of the carriage 

door.



"Where is it?  Where is it?" she cried with pale cheeks, but as yet 

she saw nothing.



At last she caught sight of a bit of wall.  And then followed a 

succession of little cries and jumps, the ecstatic behavior of a 

woman overcome by a new and vivid sensation.



"I see it!  I see it, Zoe!  Look out at the other side.  Oh, there's 

a terrace with brick ornaments on the roof!  And there's a hothouse 

down there!  But the place is immense.  Oh, how happy I am!  Do 

look, Zoe!  Now, do look!"



The carriage had bthin a wall.  Then the view 

of the kitchen garden entirely engrossed her attention.  She darted 

back, jostling the lady's maid at the top of the stairs and bursting 

out:



"It's full of cabbages!  Oh, such woppers!  And lettuces and sorrel 

and onions and everything!  Come along, make haste!"



The rain was falling more heavily now, and she opened her white silk 

sunshade and ran down the garden walks. 



"Madame will catch cold," cried Zoe, who had stayed quietly behind 

under the awning over the garden door.



But Madame wanted to see things, and at each new discovery there was 

a burst of wonderment.



"Zoe, here's spinach!  Do come.  Oh, look at the artichokes!  They 

are funny.  So they grow in the ground, do they?  Now, what can that 

be?  I don't know it.  Do come, Zoe, perhaps you know."



The lady's maid never budged an inch.  Madame must really be raving 

mad.  For now the rain was coming down in torrents, and the little 

white silk sunshade was aly this time pulled up before the park gates.  A 

side door was opened, and the gardener, a tall, dry fellow, made his 

appearance, cap in hand.  Nana made an effort to regain her dignity, 

for the driver seemed now to be suppressing a laugh behind his dry, 

speechless lips.  She refrained from setting off at a run and 

listened to the gardener, who was a very talkative fellow.  He 

begged Madame to excuse the disorder in which she found everything, 

seeing that he had only received Madame's letter that very morning.  

But despite all his efforts, she flew off at a tangent and walked so 

quickly that Zoe could scarcely follow her.  At the end of the 

avenue she paused for a moment in order to take the house in at a 

glance.  It was a great pavilionlike building in the Italian manner, 

and it was flanked by a smaller construction, which a rich 

Englishman, after two years' residence in Naples, had caused to be 

erected and had forthwith become disgusted with.



"I'll take Madame over the house," said the gardener.



But she had outrun him entirely, and she shouted back that he was 

not to put himself out and that she would go over the house by 

herself.  She preferred doing that, she said.  And without removing 

her hat she dashed into the different rooms, calling to Zoe as she 

did so, shouting her impressions from one end of each corridor to 

the other and filling the empty house, which for long months had 

been uninhabited, with exclamations and bursts of laughter.  In the 

first place, there was the hall.  It was a little damp, but that 

didn't matter; one wasn't going to sleep in it.  Then came the 

drawing room, quite the thing, the drawing room, with its windows 

opening on the lawn.  Only the red upholsteries there were hideous; 

she would alter all that.  As to the dining room-well, it was a 

lovely dining room, eh?  What big blowouts you might give in Paris 

if you had a dining room as large as that!  As she was going 

upstairs to the first floor it occurred to her that she had not seen 

the kitchen, and she went down again and indulged in ecstatic 

exclamations.  Zoe ought to admire the beautiful dimensions of the 

sink and the width of the hearth, where you might have roasted a 

sheep!  When she had gone upstairs again her bedroom especially 

enchanted her.  It had been hung with delicate rose-colored Louis 

XVI cretonne by an Orleans upholsterer.  Dear me, yes!  One ought to 

sleep jolly sound in such a room as that; why, it was a real best 

bedroom!  Then came four or five guest chambers and then some 

splendid garrets, which would be extremely convenient for trunks and 

boxes.  Zoe looked very gruff and cast a frigid glance into each of 

the rooms as she lingered in Madame's wake.  She saw Nana 

disappearing up the steep garret ladder and said, "Thanks, I haven't 

the least wish to break my legs."  But the sound of a voice reached 

her from far away; indeed, it seemed to come whistling down a 

chimney.



"Zoe, Zoe, where are you?  Come up, do!  You've no idea!  It's like 

fairyland!"



Zoe went up, grumbling.  On the roof she found her mistress leaning 

against the brickwork balustrade and gazing at the valley which 

spread out into the silence.  The horizon was immeasurably wide, but 

it was now covered by masses of gray vapor, and a fierce wind was 

driving fine rain before it.  Nana had to hold her hat on with both 

hands to keep it from being blown away while her petticoats streamed 

out behind her, flapping like a flag.



"Not if I know it!" said Zoe, drawing her head in at once.  "Madame 

will be blown away.  What beastly weather!"



Madame did not hear what she said.  With her head over the 

balustrade she was gazing at the grounds beneath.  They consisted of 

seven or eight acres of land enclosed wiready dark with it.  Nor did it shelter 

Madame, whose skirts were wringing wet.  But that didn't put her out 

in the smallest degree, and in the pouring rain she visited the 

kitchen garden and the orchard, stopping in front of every fruit 

tree and bending over every bed of vegetables.  Then she ran and 

looked down the well and lifted up a frame to see what was 

underneath it and was lost in the contemplation of a huge pumpkin.  

She wanted to go along every single garden walk and to take 

immediate possession of all the things she had been wont to dream of 

in the old days, when she was a slipshod work-girl on the Paris 

pavements.  The rain redoubled, but she never heeded it and was only 

miserable at the thought that the daylight was fading.  She could 

not see clearly now and touched things with her fingers to find out 

what they were.  Suddenly in the twilight she caught sight of a bed 

of strawberries, and all that was childish in her awoke.



"Strawberries!  Strawberries!  There are some here; I can feel them.  

A plate, Zoe!  Come and pick strawberries."



And dropping her sunshade, Nana crouched down in the mire under the 

full force of the downpour.  With drenched hands she began gathering 

the fruit among the leaves.  But Zoe in the meantime brought no 

plate, and when the young woman rose to her feet again she was 

frightened.  She thought she had seen a shadow close to her.



"It's some beast!" she screamed.



But she stood rooted to the path in utter amazement.  It was a man, 

and she recognized him.



"Gracious me, it's Baby!  What ARE you doing there, baby?"



"'Gad, I've come--that's all!" replied Georges.



Her head swam.



"You knew I'd come through the gardener telling you?  Oh, that poor 

child!  Why, he's soaking!"



"Oh, I'll explain that to you!  The rain caught me on my way here, 

and then, as I didn't wish to go upstream as far as Gumieres, I 

crossed the Choue and fell into a blessed hole."



Nana forgot the strawberries forthwith.  She was trembling and full 

of pity.  That poor dear Zizi in a hole full of water!  And she drew 

him with her in the direction of the house and spoke of making up a 

roaring fire.



"You know," he murmured, stopping her among the shadows, "I was in 

hiding because I was afraid of being scolded, like in Paris, when I 

come and see you and you're not expecting me."



She made no reply but burst out laughing and gave him a kiss on the 

forehead.  Up till today she had always treated him like a naughty 

urchin, never taking his declarations seriously and amusing herself 

at his expense as though he were a little man of no consequence 

whatever.  There was much ado to install him in the house.  She 

absolutely insisted on the fire being lit in her bedroom, as being 

the most comfortable place for his reception.  Georges had not 

surprised Zoe, who was used to all kinds of encounters, but the 

gardener, who brought the wood upstairs, was greatly nonplused at 

sight of this dripping gentleman to whom he was certain he had not 

opened the front door.  He was, however, dismissed, as he was no 

longer wanted.



A lamp lit up the room, and the fire burned with a great bright 

flame.



"He'll never get dry, and he'll catch cold," said Nana, seeing 

Georges beginning to shiver.



And there  and with his 

delicate young arms showing and his bright damp hair falling almost 

to his shoulders, he looked just like a girl.



"Why, he's as slim as I am!" said Nana, putting her arm round his 

waist.  "Zoe, just come here and see how it suits him.  It's were no men's trousers in her house! 

She was on the point 

of calling the gardener back when an idea struck her.  Zoe, who was 

unpacking the trunks in the dressing room, brought her mistress a 

change of underwear, consisting of a shift and some petticoats with 

a dressing jacket.



"Oh, that's first rate!" cried the young woman.  "Zizi can put 'em 

all on.  You're not angry with me, eh?  When your clothes are dry 

you can put them on again, and then off with you, as fast as fast 

can be, so as not to have a scolding from your mamma.  Make haste!  

I'm going to change my things, too, in the dressing room."



Ten minutes afterward, when she reappeared in a tea gown, she 

clasped her hands in a perfect ecstasy.



"Oh, the darling!  How sweet he looks dressed like a little woman!"



He had simply slipped on a long nightgown with an insertion front, a 

pair of worked drawers and the dressing jacket, which was a long 

cambric garment trimmed with lace.  Thus attiredmade 

for him, eh?  All except the bodice part, which is too large.  He 

hasn't got as much as I have, poor, dear Zizi!"



"Oh, to be sure, I'm a bit wanting there," murmured Georges with a 

smile.



All three grew very merry about it.  Nana had set to work buttoning 

the dressing jacket from top to bottom so as to make him quite 

decent.  Then she turned him round as though he were a doll, gave 

him little thumps, made the skirt stand well out behind.  After 

which she asked him questions.  Was he comfortable?  Did he feel 

warm?  Zounds, yes, he was comfortable!  Nothing fitted more closely 

and warmly than a woman's shift; had he been able, he would always 

have worn one.  He moved round and about therein, delighted with the 

fine linen and the soft touch of that unmanly garment, in the folds 

of which he thought he discovered some of Nana's own warm life.



Meanwhile Zoe had taken the soaked clothes down to the kitchen in 

order to dry them as quickly as possible in front of a vine-branch 

fire.  Then Georges, as he lounged in an easy chair, ventured to 

make a confession.



"I say, are you going to feed this evening?  I'm dying of hunger.  I 

haven't dined."



Nana was vexed.  The great silly thing to go sloping off from 

Mamma's with an empty stomach, just to chuck himself into a hole 

full of water!  But she was as hungry as a hunter too.  They 

certainly must feed!  Only they would have to eat what they could 

get.  Whereupon a round table was rolled up in front of the fire, 

and the queerest of dinners was improvised thereon.  Zoe ran down to 

the gardener's, he having cooked a mess of cabbage soup in case 

Madame should not dine at Orleans before her arrival.  Madame, 

indeed, had forgotten to tell him what he was to get ready in the 

letter she had sent him.  Fortunately the cellar was well furnished.  

Accordingly they had cabbage soup, followed by a piece of bacon.  

Then Nana rummaged in her handbag and found quite a heap of 

provisions which she had taken the precaution of stuffing into it.  

There was a Strasbourg pate, for instance, and a bag of sweet-meats 

and some oranges.  So they both ate away like ogres and, while they 

satisfied their healthy young appetites, treated one another with 

easy good fellowship.  Nana kept calling Georges "dear old girl," a 

form of address which struck her as at once tender and familiar.  At 

dessert, in order not to give Zoe any more trouble, they used the 

same spoon turn and turn about while demolishing a pot of preserves 

they had discovered at the top of a cupboard.



"Oh, you dear old girl!" said Nana, pushing back the round table.  

"I haven't made such a good dinner these ten years past!"



Yet it was growing late, and she wanted to send her boy off for fear 

he should be suspected of all sorts of things.  But he kept 

declaring that he had plenty of time to spare.  For the matter of 

that, his clothes were not drying well, and Zoe averred that it 

would take an hour longer at least, and as she was dropping with 

sleep after the fatigues of the journey, they sent her off to bed.  

After which they were alone in the silent house.



It was a very charming evening.  The fire was dying out amid glowing 

embers, and in the great blue room, where Zoe had made up the bed 

before going upstairs, the air felt a little oppressive.  Nana, 

overcome by the heavy warmth, got up to open the window for a few 

minutes, and as she did so she uttered a little cry.



"Great heavens, how beautiful it is!  Look, dear old girl!"



Georges had come up, and as though the window bar had not been 

sufficiently wide, he put his arm round Nana's waist and rested his 

head against her shoulder.  The weather had undergone a brisk 

change: the skies were clearing, and a full moon lit up the country 

with its golden disk of light.  A sovereign quiet reigned over the 

valley.  It seemed wider and larger as it opened on the immense 

distances of the plain, where the trees loomed like little shadowy 

islands amid a shining and waveless lake.  And Nana grew 

tenderhearted, felt herself a child again.  Most surely she had 

dreamed of nights like this at an epoch which she could not recall.  

Since leaving the train every object of sensation--the wide 

countryside, the green things with their pungent scents, the house, 

the vegetables--had stirred her to such a degree that now it seemed 

to her as if she had left Paris twenty years ago.  Yesterday's 

existence was far, far away, and she was full of sensations of which 

she had no previous experience.  Georges, meanwhile, was giving her 

neck little coaxing kisses, and this again added to her sweet 

unrest.  With hesitating hand she pushed him from her, as though he 

were a child whose affectionate advances were fatiguing, and once 

more she told him that he ought to take his departure.  He did not 

gainsay her.  All in good time--he would go all in good time!



But a bird raised its song and again was silent.  It was a robin in 

an elder tree below the window.



"Wait one moment," whispered Georges; "the lamp's frightening him.  

I'll put it out."



And when he came back and took her waist again he added:



"We'll relight it in a minute."



Then as she listened to the robin and the boy pressed against her 

side, Nana remembered.  Ah yes, it was in novels that she had got to 

know all this!  In other days she would have given her heart to have 

a full moon and robins and a lad dying of love for her.  Great God, 

she could have cried, so good and charming did it all seem to her!  

Beyond a doubt she had been born to live honestly!  So she pushed 

Georges away again, and he grew yet bolder.



"No, let me be.  I don't care about it.  It would be very wicked at 

your age.  Now listen--I'll always be your mamma."



A sudden feeling of shame overcame her.  She was blushing 

exceedingly, and yet not a soul could see her.  The room behind them 

was full of black night while the country stretched before them in 

silence and lifeless solitude.  Never had she known such a sense of 

shame before.  Little by little she felt her power of resistance 

ebbing away, and that despite her embarrassed efforts to the 

contrary.  That disguise of his, that woman's shift and that 

dressing jacket set her laughing again.  It was as though a girl 

friend were teasing her.



"Oh, it's not right; it's not right!" she stammered after a last 

effort.



And with that, in face of the lovely night, she sank like a young 

virgin into the arms of this mere child.  The house slept.



Next morning at Les Fondettes, when the bell rang for lunch, the 

dining-room table was no longer too big for the company.  Fauchery 

and Daguenet had been driven up together in one carriage, and after 

them another had arrived with the Count de Vandeuvres, who had 

followed by the next train.  Georges was the last to come 

downstairs.  He was looking a little pale, and his eyes were sunken, 

but in answer to questions he said that he was much better, though 

he was still somewhat shaken by the violence of the attack.  Mme 

Hugon looked into his eyes with an anxious smile and adjusted his 

hair which had been carelessly combed that morning, but he drew back 

as though embarrassed by this tender little action.  During the meal 

she chaffed Vandeuvres very pleasantly and declared that she had 

expected him for five years past.



"Well, here you are at last!  How have you managed it?"



Vandeuvres took her remarks with equal pleasantry.  He told her that 

he had lost a fabulous sum of money at the club yesterday and 

thereupon had come away with the intention of ending up in the 

country.



"'Pon my word, yes, if only you can find me an heiress in these 

rustic parts!  There must be delightful women hereabouts."



The old lady rendered equal thanks to Daguenet and Fauchery for 

having been so good as to accept her son's invitation, and then to 

her great and joyful surprise she saw the Marquis de Chouard enter 

the room.  A third carriage had brought him.



"Dear me, you've made this your trysting place today!" she cried.  

"You've passed word round!  But what's happening?  For years I've 

never succeeded in bringing you all together, and now you all drop 

in at once.  Oh, I certainly don't complain."



Another place was laid.  Fauchery found himself next the Countess 

Sabine, whose liveliness and gaiety surprised him when he remembered 

her drooping, languid state in the austere Rue Miromesnil drawing 

room.  Daguenet, on the other hand, who was seated on Estelle's 

left, seemed slightly put out by his propinquity to that tall, 

silent girl.  The angularity of her elbows was disagreeable to him.  

Muffat and Chouard had exchanged a sly glance while Vandeuvres 

continued joking about his coming marriage.



"Talking of ladies," Mme Hugon ended by saying, "I have a new 

neighbor whom you probably know."



And she mentioned Nana.  Vandeuvres affected the liveliest 

astonishment.



"Well, that is strange!  Nana's property near here!"



Fauchery and Daguenet indulged in a similar demonstration while the 

Marquis de Chouard discussed the breast of a chicken without 

appearing to comprehend their meaning.  Not one of the men had 

smiled.



"Certainly," continued the old lady, "and the person in question 

arrived at La Mignotte yesterday evening, as I was saying she would.  

I got my information from the gardener this morning."



At these words the gentlemen could not conceal their very real 

surprise.  They all looked up.  Eh?  What?  Nana had come down!  But 

they were only expecting her next day; they were privately under the 

impression that they would arrive before her!  Georges alone sat 

looking at his glass with drooped eyelids and a tired expression.  

Ever since the beginning of lunch he had seemed to be sleeping with 

open eyes and a vague smile on his lips.



"Are you still in pain, my Zizi?" asked his mother, who had been 

gazing at him throughout the meal.



He started and blushed as he said that he was very well now, but the 

worn-out insatiate expression of a girl who has danced too much did 

not fade from his face.



"What's the matter with your neck?" resumed Mme Hugon in an alarmed 

tone.  "It's all red."



He was embarrassed and stammered.  He did not know--he had nothing 

the matter with his neck.  Then drawing his shirt collar up:



"Ah yes, some insect stung me there!"



The Marquis de Chouard had cast a sidelong glance at the little red 

place.  Muffat, too, looked at Georges.  The company was finishing 

lunch and planning various excursions.  Fauchery was growing 

increasingly excited with the Countess Sabine's laughter.  As he was 

passing her a dish of fruit their hands touched, and for one second 

she looked at him with eyes so full of dark meaning that he once 

more thought of the secret which had been communicated to him one 

evening after an uproarious dinner.  Then, too, she was no longer 

the same woman.  Something was more pronounced than of old, and her 

gray foulard gown which fitted loosely over her shoulders added a 

touch of license to her delicate, high-strung elegance.



When they rose from the table Daguenet remained behind with Fauchery 

in order to impart to him the following crude witticism about 

Estelle: "A nice broomstick that to shove into a man's hands!"  

Nevertheless, he grew serious when the journalist told him the 

amount she was worth in the way of dowry.



"Four hundred thousand francs."



"And the mother?" queried Fauchery.  "She's all right, eh?"



"Oh, SHE'LL work the oracle!  But it's no go, my dear man!"



"Bah!  How are we to know?  We must wait and see."



It was impossible to go out that day, for the rain was still falling 

in heavy showers.  Georges had made haste to disappear from the 

scene and had double-locked his door.  These gentlemen avoided 

mutual explanations, though they were none of them deceived as to 

the reasons which had brought them together.  Vandeuvres, who had 

had a very bad time at play, had really conceived the notion of 

lying fallow for a season, and he was counting on Nana's presence in 

the neighborhood as a safeguard against excessive boredom.  Fauchery 

had taken advantage of the holidays granted him by Rose, who just 

then was extremely busy.  He was thinking of discussing a second 

notice with Nana, in case country air should render them 

reciprocally affectionate.  Daguenet, who had been just a little 

sulky with her since Steiner had come upon the scene, was dreaming 

of resuming the old connection or at least of snatching some 

delightful opportunities if occasion offered.  As to the Marquis de 

Chouard, he was watching for times and seasons.  But among all those 

men who were busy following in the tracks of Venus--a Venus with the 

rouge scarce washed from her cheeks--Muffat was at once the most 

ardent and the most tortured by the novel sensations of desire and 

fear and anger warring in his anguished members.  A formal promise 

had been made him; Nana was awaiting him.  Why then had she taken 

her departure two days sooner than was expected?



He resolved to betake himself to La Mignotte after dinner that same 

evening.  At night as the count was leaving the park Georges fled 

forth after him.  He left him to follow the road to Gumieres, 

crossed the Choue, rushed into Nana's presence, breathless, furious 

and with tears in his eyes.  Ah yes, he understood everything!  That 

old fellow now on his way to her was coming to keep an appointment!  

Nana was dumfounded by this ebullition of jealousy, and, greatly 

moved by the way things were turning out, she took him in her arms 

and comforted him to the best of her ability.  Oh no, he was quite 

beside the mark; she was expecting no one.  If the gentleman came it 

would not be her fault.  What a great ninny that Zizi was to be 

taking on so about nothing at all!  By her child's soul she swore 

she loved nobody except her own Georges.  And with that she kissed 

him and wiped away his tears.



"Now just listen!  You'll see that it's all for your sake," she went 

on when he had grown somewhat calmer.  "Steiner has arrived--he's up 

above there now.  You know, duckie, I can't turn HIM out of doors."



"Yes, I know; I'm not talking of HIM," whispered the boy.



"Very well then, I've stuck him into the room at the end.  I said I 

was out of sorts.  He's unpacking his trunk.  Since nobody's seen 

you, be quick and run up and hide in my room and wait for me.



Georges sprang at her and threw his arms round her neck.  It was 

true after all!  She loved him a little!  So they would put the lamp 

out as they did yesterday and be in the dark till daytime!  Then as 

the front-door bell sounded he quietly slipped away.  Upstairs in 

the bedroom he at once took off his shoes so as not to make any 

noise and straightway crouched down behind a curtain and waited 

soberly.



Nana welcomed Count Muffat, who, though still shaken with passion, 

was now somewhat embarrassed.  She had pledged her word to him and 

would even have liked to keep it since he struck her as a serious, 

practicable lover.  But truly, who could have foreseen all that 

happened yesterday?  There was the voyage and the house she had 

never set eyes on before and the arrival of the drenched little 

lover!  How sweet it had all seemed to her, and how delightful it 

would be to continue in it!  So much the worse for the gentleman!  

For three months past she had been keeping him dangling after her 

while she affected conventionality in order the further to inflame 

him.  Well, well!  He would have to continue dangling, and if he 

didn't like that he could go!  She would sooner have thrown up 

everything than have played false to Georges.



The count had seated himself with all the ceremonious politeness 

becoming a country caller.  Only his hands were trembling slightly.  

Lust, which Nana's skillful tactics daily exasperated, had at last 

wrought terrible havoc in that sanguine, uncontaminated nature.  The 

grave man, the chamberlain who was wont to tread the state 

apartments at the Tuileries with slow and dignified step, was now 

nightly driven to plunge his teeth into his bolster, while with sobs 

of exasperation he pictured to himself a sensual shape which never 

changed.  But this time he was determined to make an end of the 

torture.  Coming along the highroad in the deep quiet of the 

gloaming, he had meditated a fierce course of action.  And the 

moment he had finished his opening remarks he tried to take hold of 

Nana with both hands.



"No, no!  Take care!" she said simply.  She was not vexed; nay, she 

even smiled.



He caught her again, clenching his teeth as he did so.  Then as she 

struggled to get free he coarsely and crudely reminded her that he 

had come to stay the night.  Though much embarrassed at this, Nana 

did not cease to smile.  She took his hands and spoke very 

familiarly in order to soften her refusal.



"Come now, darling, do be quiet!  Honor bright, I can't: Steiner's 

upstairs."



But he was beside himself.  Never yet had she seen a man in such a 

state.  She grew frightened and put her hand over his mouth in order 

to stifle his cries.  Then in lowered tones she besought him to be 

quiet and to let her alone.  Steiner was coming downstairs.  Things 

were getting stupid, to be sure!  When Steiner entered the room he 

heard Nana remarking:



"I adore the country."



She was lounging comfortably back in her deep easy chair, and she 

turned round and interrupted herself.



"It's Monsieur le Comte Muffat, darling.  He saw a light here while 

he was strolling past, and he came in to bid us welcome."



The two men clasped hands.  Muffat, with his face in shadow, stood 

silent for a moment or two.  Steiner seemed sulky.  Then they 

chatted about Paris: business there was at a standstill; abominable 

things had been happening on 'change.  When a quarter of an hour had 

elapsed Muffat took his departure, and, as the young woman was 

seeing him to the door, he tried without success to make an 

assignation for the following night.  Steiner went up to bed almost 

directly afterward, grumbling, as he did so, at the everlasting 

little ailments that seemed to afflict the genus courtesan.  The two 

old boys had been packed off at last!  When she was able to rejoin 

him Nana found Georges still hiding exemplarily behind the curtain.  

The room was dark.  He pulled her down onto the floor as she sat 

near him, and together they began playfully rolling on the ground, 

stopping now and again and smothering their laughter with kisses 

whenever they struck their bare feet against some piece of 

furniture.  Far away, on the road to Gumieres, Count Muffat walked 

slowly home and, hat in hand, bathed his burning forehead in the 

freshness and silence of the night.



During the days that followed Nana found life adorable.  In the 

lad's arms she was once more a girl of fifteen, and under the 

caressing influence of this renewed childhood love's white flower 

once more blossomed forth in a nature which had grown hackneyed and 

disgusted in the service of the other sex.  She would experience 

sudden fits of shame, sudden vivid emotions, which left her 

trembling.  She wanted to laugh and to cry, and she was beset by 

nervous, maidenly feelings, mingled with warm desires that made her 

blush again.  Never yet had she felt anything comparable to this.  

The country filled her with tender thoughts.  As a little girl she 

had long wished to dwell in a meadow, tending a goat, because one 

day on the talus of the fortifications she had seen a goat bleating 

at the end of its tether.  Now this estate, this stretch of land 

belonging to her, simply swelled her heart to bursting, so utterly 

had her old ambition been surpassed.  Once again she tasted the 

novel sensations experienced by chits of girls, and at night when 

she went upstairs, dizzy with her day in the open air and 

intoxicated by the scent of green leaves, and rejoined her Zizi 

behind the curtain, she fancied herself a schoolgirl enjoying a 

holiday escapade.  It was an amour, she thought, with a young cousin 

to whom she was going to be married.  And so she trembled at the 

slightest noise and dread lest parents should hear her, while making 

the delicious experiments and suffering the voluptuous terrors 

attendant on a girl's first slip from the path of virtue.



Nana in those days was subject to the fancies a sentimental girl 

will indulge in.  She would gaze at the moon for hours.  One night 

she had a mind to go down into the garden with Georges when all the 

household was asleep.  When there they strolled under the trees, 

their arms round each other's waists, and finally went and laid down 

in the grass, where the dew soaked them through and through.  On 

another occasion, after a long silence up in the bedroom, she fell 

sobbing on the lad's neck, declaring in broken accents that she was 

afraid of dying.  She would often croon a favorite ballad of Mme 

Lerat's, which was full of flowers and birds.  The song would melt 

her to tears, and she would break off in order to clasp Georges in a 

passionate embrace and to extract from him vows of undying 

affection.  In short she was extremely silly, as she herself would 

admit when they both became jolly good fellows again and sat up 

smoking cigarettes on the edge of the bed, dangling their bare legs 

over it the while and tapping their heels against its wooden side.



But what utterly melted the young woman's heart was Louiset's 

arrival.  She had an access of maternal affection which was as 

violent as a mad fit.  She would carry off her boy into the sunshine 

outside to watch him kicking about; she would dress him like a 

little prince and roll with him in the grass.  The moment he arrived 

she decided that he was to sleep near her, in the room next hers, 

where Mme Lerat, whom the country greatly affected, used to begin 

snoring the moment her head touched the pillow.  Louiset did not 

hurt Zizi's position in the least.  On the contrary, Nana said that 

she had now two children, and she treated them with the same wayward 

tenderness.  At night, more than ten times running, she would leave 

Zizi to go and see if Louiset were breathing properly, but on her 

return she would re-embrace her Zizi and lavish on him the caresses 

that had been destined for the child.  She played at being Mamma 

while he wickedly enjoyed being dandled in the arms of the great 

wench and allowed himself to be rocked to and fro like a baby that 

is being sent to sleep.  It was all so delightful, and Nana was so 

charmed with her present existence, that she seriously proposed to 

him never to leave the country.  They would send all the other 

people away, and he, she and the child would live alone.  And with 

that they would make a thousand plans till daybreak and never once 

hear Mme Lerat as she snored vigorously after the fatigues of a day 

spent in picking country flowers.



This charming existence lasted nearly a week.  Count Muffat used to 

come every evening and go away again with disordered face and 

burning hands.  One evening he was not even received, as Steiner had 

been obliged to run up to Paris.  He was told that Madame was not 

well.  Nana grew daily more disgusted at the notion of deceiving 

Georges.  He was such an innocent lad, and he had such faith in her!  

She would have looked on herself as the lowest of the low had she 

played him false.  Besides, it would have sickened her to do so!  

Zoe, who took her part in this affair in mute disdain, believed that 

Madame was growing senseless.



On the sixth day a band of visitors suddenly blundered into Nana's 

idyl.  She had, indeed, invited a whole swarm of people under the 

belief that none of them would come.  And so one fine afternoon she 

was vastly astonished and annoyed to see an omnibus full of people 

pulling up outside the gate of La Mignotte.



"It's us!" cried Mignon, getting down first from the conveyance and 

extracting then his sons Henri and Charles.



Labordette thereupon appeared and began handing out an interminable 

file of ladies--Lucy Stewart, Caroline Hequet, Tatan Nene, Maria 

Blond.  Nana was in hopes that they would end there, when La Faloise 

sprang from the step in order to receive Gaga and her daughter 

Amelie in his trembling arms.  That brought the number up to eleven 

people.  Their installation proved a laborious undertaking.  There 

were five spare rooms at La Mignotte, one of which was already 

occupied by Mme Lerat and Louiset.  The largest was devoted to the 

Gaga and La Faloise establishment, and it was decided that Amelie 

should sleep on a truckle bed in the dressing room at the side.  

Mignon and his two sons had the third room.  Labordette the fourth.  

There thus remained one room which was transformed into a dormitory 

with four beds in it for Lucy, Caroline, Tatan and Maria.  As to 

Steiner, he would sleep on the divan in the drawing room.  At the 

end of an hour, when everyone was duly settled, Nana, who had begun 

by being furious, grew enchanted at the thought of playing hostess 

on a grand scale.  The ladies complimented her on La Mignotte.  

"It's a stunning property, my dear!"  And then, too, they brought 

her quite a whiff of Parisian air, and talking all together with 

bursts of laughter and exclamation and emphatic little gestures, 

they gave her all the petty gossip of the week just past.  By the 

by, and how about Bordenave?  What had he said about her prank?  Oh, 

nothing much!  After bawling about having her brought back by the 

police, he had simply put somebody else in her place at night.  

Little Violaine was the understudy, and she had even obtained a very 

pretty success as the Blonde Venus.  Which piece of news made Nana 

rather serious.



It was only four o'clock in the afternoon, and there was some talk 

of taking a stroll around.



"Oh, I haven't told you," said Nana, "I was just off to get up 

potatoes when you arrived."



Thereupon they all wanted to go and dig potatoes without even 

changing their dresses first.  It was quite a party.  The gardener 

and two helpers were already in the potato field at the end of the 

grounds.  The ladies knelt down and began fumbling in the mold with 

their beringed fingers, shouting gaily whenever they discovered a 

potato of exceptional size.  It struck them as so amusing!  But 

Tatan Nene was in a state of triumph!  So many were the potatoes she 

had gathered in her youth that she forgot herself entirely and gave 

the others much good advice, treating them like geese the while.  

The gentlemen toiled less strenuously.  Mignon looked every inch the 

good citizen and father and made his stay in the country an occasion 

for completing his boys' education.  Indeed, he spoke to them of 

Parmentier!



Dinner that evening was wildly hilarious.  The company ate 

ravenously.  Nana, in a state of great elevation, had a warm 

disagreement with her butler, an individual who had been in service 

at the bishop's palace in Orleans.  The ladies smoked over their 

coffee.  An earsplitting noise of merrymaking issued from the open 

windows and died out far away under the serene evening sky while 

peasants, belated in the lanes, turned and looked at the flaring 

rooms.



"It's most tiresome that you're going back the day after tomorrow," 

said Nana.  "But never mind, we'll get up an excursion all the 

same!"



They decided to go on the morrow, Sunday, and visit the ruins of the 

old Abbey of Chamont, which were some seven kilometers distant.  

Five carriages would come out from Orleans, take up the company 

after lunch and bring them back to dinner at La Mignotte at about 

seven.  It would be delightful.



That evening, as his wont was, Count Muffat mounted the hill to ring 

at the outer gate.  But the brightly lit windows and the shouts of 

laughter astonished him.  When, however, he recognized Mignon's 

voice, he understood it all and went off, raging at this new 

obstacle, driven to extremities, bent on some violent act.  Georges 

passed through a little door of which he had the key, slipped along 

the staircase walls and went quietly up into Nana's room.  Only he 

had to wait for her till past midnight.  She appeared at last in a 

high state of intoxication and more maternal even than on the 

previous nights.  Whenever she had drunk anything she became so 

amorous as to be absurd.  Accordingly she now insisted on his 

accompanying her to the Abbey of Chamont.  But he stood out against 

this; he was afraid of being seen.  If he were to be seen driving 

with her there would be an atrocious scandal.  But she burst into 

tears and evinced the noisy despair of a slighted woman.  And he 

thereupon consoled her and formally promised to be one of the party.



"So you do love me very much," she blurted out.  "Say you love me 

very much.  Oh, my darling old bear, if I were to die would you feel 

it very much?  Confess!"



At Les Fondettes the near neighborhood of Nana had utterly 

disorganized the party.  Every morning during lunch good Mme Hugon 

returned to the subject despite herself, told her guests the news 

the gardener had brought her and gave evidence of the absorbing 

curiosity with which notorious courtesans are able to inspire even 

the worthiest old ladies.  Tolerant though she was, she was revolted 

and maddened by a vague presentiment of coming ill, which frightened 

her in the evenings as thoroughly as if a wild beast had escaped 

from a menagerie and were known to be lurking in the countryside.



She began trying to pick a little quarrel with her guests, whom she 

each and all accused of prowling round La Mignotte.  Count 

Vandeuvres had been seen laughing on the highroad with a golden-

haired lady, but he defended himself against the accusation; he 

denied that it was Nana, the fact being that Lucy had been with him 

and had told him how she had just turned her third prince out of 

doors.  The Marquis de Chouard used also to go out every day, but 

his excuse was doctor's orders.  Toward Daguenet and Fauchery Mme 

Hugon behaved unjustly too.  The former especially never left Les 

Fondettes, for he had given up the idea of renewing the old 

connection and was busy paying the most respectful attentions to 

Estelle.  Fauchery also stayed with the Muffat ladies.  On one 

occasion only he had met Mignon with an armful of flowers, putting 

his sons through a course of botanical instruction in a by-path.  

The two men had shaken hands and given each other the news about 

Rose.  She was perfectly well and happy; they had both received a 

letter from her that morning in which she besought them to profit by 

the fresh country air for some days longer.  Among all her guests 

the old lady spared only Count Muffat and Georges.  The count, who 

said he had serious business in Orleans, could certainly not be 

running after the bad woman, and as to Georges, the poor child was 

at last causing her grave anxiety, seeing that every evening he was 

seized with atrocious sick headaches which kept him to his bed in 

broad daylight.



Meanwhile Fauchery had become the Countess Sabine's faithful 

attendant in the absence during each afternoon of Count Muffat.  

Whenever they went to the end of the park he carried her campstool 

and her sunshade.  Besides, he amused her with the original 

witticisms peculiar to a second-rate journalist, and in so doing he 

prompted her to one of those sudden intimacies which are allowable 

in the country.  She had apparently consented to it from the first, 

for she had grown quite a girl again in the society of a young man 

whose noisy humor seemed unlikely to compromize her.  But now and 

again, when for a second or two they found themselves alone behind 

the shrubs, their eyes would meet; they would pause amid their 

laughter, grow suddenly serious and view one another darkly, as 

though they had fathomed and divined their inmost hearts.



On Friday a fresh place had to be laid at lunch time.  M. Theophile 

Venot, whom Mme Hugon remembered to have invited at the Muffats' 

last winter, had just arrived.  He sat stooping humbly forward and 

behaved with much good nature, as became a man of no account, nor 

did he seem to notice the anxious deference with which he was 

treated.  When he had succeeded in getting the company to forget his 

presence he sat nibbling small lumps of sugar during dessert, 

looking sharply up at Daguenet as the latter handed Estelle 

strawberries and listening to Fauchery, who was making the countess 

very merry over one of his anecdotes.  Whenever anyone looked at HIM 

he smiled in his quiet way.  When the guests rose from table he took 

the count's arm and drew him into the park.  He was known to have 

exercised great influence over the latter ever since the death of 

his mother.  Indeed, singular stories were told about the kind of 

dominion which the ex-lawyer enjoyed in that household.  Fauchery, 

whom his arrival doubtless embarrassed, began explaining to Georges 

and Daguenet the origin of the man's wealth.  It was a big lawsuit 

with the management of which the Jesuits had entrusted him in days 

gone by.  In his opinion the worthy man was a terrible fellow 

despite his gentle, plump face and at this time of day had his 

finger in all the intrigues of the priesthood.  The two young men 

had begun joking at this, for they thought the little old gentleman 

had an idiotic expression.  The idea of an unknown Venot, a gigantic 

Venot, acting for the whole body of the clergy, struck them in the 

light of a comical invention.  But they were silenced when, still 

leaning on the old man's arm, Count Muffat reappeared with blanched 

cheeks and eyes reddened as if by recent weeping.



I bet they've been chatting about hell," muttered Fauchery in a 

bantering tone.



The Countess Sabine overheard the remark.  She turned her head 

slowly, and their eyes met in that long gaze with which they were 

accustomed to sound one another prudently before venturing once for 

all.



After the breakfast it was the guests' custom to betake themselves 

to a little flower garden on a terrace overlooking the plain.  This 

Sunday afternoon was exquisitely mild.  There had been signs of rain 

toward ten in the morning, but the sky, without ceasing to be 

covered, had, as it were, melted into milky fog, which now hung like 

a cloud of luminous dust in the golden sunlight.  Soon Mme Hugon 

proposed that they should step down through a little doorway below 

the terrace and take a walk on foot in the direction of Gumieres and 

as far as the Choue.  She was fond of walking and, considering her 

threescore years, was very active.  Besides, all her guests declared 

that there was no need to drive.  So in a somewhat straggling order 

they reached the wooden bridge over the river.  Fauchery and 

Daguenet headed the column with the Muffat ladies and were followed 

by the count and the marquis, walking on either side of Mme Hugon, 

while Vandeuvres, looking fashionable and out of his element on the 

highroad, marched in the rear, smoking a cigar.  M. Venot, now 

slackening, now hastening his pace, passed smilingly from group to 

group, as though bent on losing no scrap of conversation.



"To think of poor dear Georges at Orleans!" said Mme Hugon.  "He was 

anxious to consult old Doctor Tavernier, who never goes out now, on 

the subject of his sick headaches.  Yes, you were not up, as he went 

off before seven o'clock.  But it'll be a change for him all the 

same."



She broke off, exclaiming:



"Why, what's making them stop on the bridge?"



The fact was the ladies and Fauchery and Daguenet were standing 

stock-still on the crown of the bridge.  They seemed to be 

hesitating as though some obstacle or other rendered them uneasy and 

yet the way lay clear before them.



"Go on!" cried the count.



They never moved and seemed to be watching the approach of something 

which the rest had not yet observed.  Indeed the road wound 

considerably and was bordered by a thick screen of poplar trees.  

Nevertheless, a dull sound began to grow momentarily louder, and 

soon there was a noise of wheels, mingled with shouts of laughter 

and the cracking of whips.  Then suddenly five carriages came into 

view, driving one behind the other.  They were crowded to bursting, 

and bright with a galaxy of white, blue and pink costumes.



"What is it?" said Mme Hugon in some surprise.



Then her instinct told her, and she felt indignant at such an 

untoward invasion of her road.



"Oh, that woman!" she murmured.  "Walk on, pray walk on.  Don't 

appear to notice."



But it was too late.  The five carriages which were taking Nana and 

her circle to the ruins of Chamont rolled on to the narrow wooden 

bridge.  Fauchery, Daguenet and the Muffat ladies were forced to 

step backward, while Mme Hugon and the others had also to stop in 

Indian file along the roadside.  It was a superb ride past!  The 

laughter in the carriages had ceased, and faces were turned with an 

expression of curiosity.  The rival parties took stock of each other 

amid a silence broken only by the measured trot of the horses.  In 

the first carriage Maria Blond and Tatan Nene were lolling backward 

like a pair of duchesses, their skirts swelling forth over the 

wheels, and as they passed they cast disdainful glances at the 

honest women who were walking afoot.  Then came Gaga, filling up a 

whole seat and half smothering La Faloise beside her so that little 

but his small anxious face was visible.  Next followed Caroline 

Hequet with Labordette, Lucy Stewart with Mignon and his boys and at 

the close of all Nana in a victoria with Steiner and on a bracket 

seat in front of her that poor, darling Zizi, with his knees jammed 

against her own.



"It's the last of them, isn't it?" the countess placidly asked 

Fauchery, pretending at the same time not to recognize Nana.



The wheel of the victoria came near grazing her, but she did not 

step back.  The two women had exchanged a deeply significant glance.  

It was, in fact, one of those momentary scrutinies which are at once 

complete and definite.  As to the men, they behaved unexceptionably.  

Fauchery and Daguenet looked icy and recognized no one.  The 

marquis, more nervous than they and afraid of some farcical 

ebullition on the part of the ladies, had plucked a blade of grass 

and was rolling it between his fingers.  Only Vandeuvres, who had 

stayed somewhat apart from the rest of the company, winked 

imperceptibly at Lucy, who smiled at him as she passed.



"Be careful!" M. Venot had whispered as he stood behind Count 

Muffat.



The latter in extreme agitation gazed after this illusive vision of 

Nana while his wife turned slowly round and scrutinized him.  Then 

he cast his eyes on the ground as though to escape the sound of 

galloping hoofs which were sweeping away both his senses and his 

heart.  He could have cried aloud in his agony, for, seeing Georges 

among Nana's skirts, he understood it all now.  A mere child!  He 

was brokenhearted at the thought that she should have preferred a 

mere child to him!  Steiner was his equal, but that child!



Mme Hugon, in the meantime, had not at once recognized Georges.  

Crossing the bridge, he was fain to jump into the river, but Nana's 

knees restrained him.  Then white as a sheet and icy cold, he sat 

rigidly up in his place and looked at no one.  It was just possible 

no one would notice him.



"Oh, my God!" said the old lady suddenly.  "Georges is with her!"



The carriages had passed quite through the uncomfortable crowd of 

people who recognized and yet gave no sign of recognition.  The 

short critical encounter seemed to have been going on for ages.  And 

now the wheels whirled away the carriageloads of girls more gaily 

than ever.  Toward the fair open country they went, amid the 

buffetings of the fresh air of heaven.  Bright-colored fabrics 

fluttered in the wind, and the merry laughter burst forth anew as 

the voyagers began jesting and glancing back at the respectable 

folks halting with looks of annoyance at the roadside.  Turning 

round, Nana could see the walking party hesitating and then 

returning the way they had come without crossing the bridge.  Mme 

Hugon was leaning silently on Count Muffat's arm, and so sad was her 

look that no one dared comfort her.



"I say, did you see Fauchery, dear?" Nana shouted to Lucy, who was 

leaning out of the carriage in front.  "What a brute he was!  He 

shall pay out for that.  And Paul, too, a fellow I've been so kind 

to!  Not a sign!  They're polite, I'm sure."



And with that she gave Steiner a terrible dressing, he having 

ventured to suggest that the gentlemen's attitude had been quite as 

it should be.  So then they weren't even worth a bow?  The first 

blackguard that came by might insult them?  Thanks!  He was the 

right sort, too, he was!  It couldn't be better!  One ought always 

to bow to a woman.



"Who's the tall one?" asked Lucy at random, shouting through the 

noise of the wheels.



"It's the Countess Muffat," answered Steiner.



"There now!  I suspected as much," said Nana.  "Now, my dear fellow, 

it's all very well her being a countess, for she's no better than 

she should be.  Yes, yes, she's no better that she should be.  You 

know, I've got an eye for such things, I have!  And now I know your 

countess as well as if I had been at the making of her!  I'll bet 

you that she's the mistress of that viper Fauchery!  I tell you, 

she's his mistress!  Between women you guess that sort of thing at 

once!"



Steiner shrugged his shoulders.  Since the previous day his 

irritation had been hourly increasing.  He had received letters 

which necessitated his leaving the following morning, added to which 

he did not much appreciate coming down to the country in order to 

sleep on the drawing-room divan.



"And this poor baby boy!" Nana continued, melting suddenly at sight 

of Georges's pale face as he still sat rigid and breathless in front 

of her.



"D'you think Mamma recognized me?" he stammered at last.



"Oh, most surely she did!  Why, she cried out!  But it's my fault.  

He didn't want to come with us; I forced him to.  Now listen, Zizi, 

would you like me to write to your mamma?  She looks such a kind, 

decent sort of lady!  I'll tell her that I never saw you before and 

that it was Steiner who brought you with him for the first time 

today."



"No, no, don't write," said Georges in great anxiety.  "I'll explain 

it all myself.  Besides, if they bother me about it I shan't go home 

again."



But he continued plunged in thought, racking his brains for excuses 

against his return home in the evening.  The five carriages were 

rolling through a flat country along an interminable straight road 

bordered by fine trees.  The country was bathed in a silvery-gray 

atmosphere.  The ladies still continued shouting remarks from 

carriage to carriage behind the backs of the drivers, who chuckled 

over their extraordinary fares.  Occasionally one of them would rise 

to her feet to look at the landscape and, supporting herself on her 

neighbor's shoulder, would grow extremely excited till a sudden jolt 

brought her down to the seat again.  Caroline Hequet in the meantime 

was having a warm discussion with Labordette.  Both of them were 

agreed that Nana would be selling her country house before three 

months were out, and Caroline was urging Labordette to buy it back 

for her for as little as it was likely to fetch.  In front of them 

La Faloise, who was very amorous and could not get at Gaga's 

apoplectic neck, was imprinting kisses on her spine through her 

dress, the strained fabric of which was nigh splitting, while 

Amelie, perching stiffly on the bracket seat, was bidding them be 

quiet, for she was horrified to be sitting idly by, watching her 

mother being kissed.  In the next carriage Mignon, in order to 

astonish Lucy, was making his sons recite a fable by La Fontaine.  

Henri was prodigious at this exercise; he could spout you one 

without pause or hesitation.  But Maria Blond, at the head of the 

procession, was beginning to feel extremely bored.  She was tired of 

hoaxing that blockhead of a Tatan Nene with a story to the effect 

that the Parisian dairywomen were wont to fabricate eggs with a 

mixture of paste and saffron.  The distance was too great: were they 

never going to get to their destination?  And the question was 

transmitted from carriage to carriage and finally reached Nana, who, 

after questioning her driver, got up and shouted:



"We've not got a quarter of an hour more to go.  You see that church 

behind the trees down there?"



Then she continued:



"Do you know, it appears the owner of the Chateau de Chamont is an 

old lady of Napoleon's time?  Oh, SHE was a merry one!  At least, so 

Joseph told me, and he heard it from the servants at the bishop's 

palace.  There's no one like it nowadays, and for the matter of 

that, she's become goody-goody."



"What's her name?" asked Lucy.



"Madame d'Anglars."



"Irma d'Anglars--I knew her!" cried Gaga.



Admiring exclamations burst from the line of carriages and were 

borne down the wind as the horses quickened their trot.  Heads were 

stretched out in Gaga's direction; Maria Blond and Tatan Nene turned 

round and knelt on the seat while they leaned over the carriage 

hood, and the air was full of questions and cutting remarks, 

tempered by a certain obscure admiration.  Gaga had known her!  The 

idea filled them all with respect for that far-off past.



"Dear me, I was young then," continued Gaga.  "But never mind, I 

remember it all.  I saw her pass.  They said she was disgusting in 

her own house, but, driving in her carriage, she WAS just smart!  

And the stunning tales about her!  Dirty doings and money flung 

about like one o'clock!  I don't wonder at all that she's got a fine 

place.  Why, she used to clean out a man's pockets as soon as look 

at him.  Irma d'Anglars still in the land of the living!  Why, my 

little pets, she must be near ninety."



At this the ladies became suddenly serious.  Ninety years old!  The 

deuce, there wasn't one of them, as Lucy loudly declared, who would 

live to that age.  They were all done for.  Besides, Nana said she 

didn't want to make old bones; it wouldn't be amusing.  They were 

drawing near their destination, and the conversation was interrupted 

by the cracking of whips as the drivers put their horses to their 

best paces.  Yet amid all the noise Lucy continued talking and, 

suddenly changing the subject, urged Nana to come to town with them 

all to-morrow.  The exhibition was soon to close, and the ladies 

must really return to Paris, where the season was surpassing their 

expectations.  But Nana was obstinate.  She loathed Paris; she 

wouldn't set foot there yet!



"Eh, darling, we'll stay?" she said, giving Georges's knees a 

squeeze, as though  Steiner were of no account.



The carriages had pulled up abruptly, and in some surprise the 

company got out on some waste ground at the bottom of a small hill.  

With his whip one of the drivers had to point them out the ruins of 

the old Abbey of Chamont where they lay hidden among trees.  It was 

a great sell!  The ladies voted them silly.  Why, they were only a 

heap of old stones with briers growing over them and part of a 

tumble-down tower.  It really wasn't worth coming a couple of 

leagues to see that!  Then the driver pointed out to them the 

countryseat, the park of which stretched away from the abbey, and he 

advised them to take a little path and follow the walls surrounding 

it.  They would thus make the tour of the place while the carriages 

would go and await them in the village square.  It was a delightful 

walk, and the company agreed to the proposition.



"Lord love me, Irma knows how to take care of herself!" said Gaga, 

halting before a gate at the corner of the park wall abutting on the 

highroad.



All of them stood silently gazing at the enormous bush which stopped 

up the gateway.  Then following the little path, they skirted the 

park wall, looking up from time to time to admire the trees, whose 

lofty branches stretched out over them and formed a dense vault of 

greenery.  After three minutes or so they found themselves in front 

of a second gate.  Through this a wide lawn was visible, over which 

two venerable oaks cast dark masses of shadow.  Three minutes 

farther on yet another gate afforded them an extensive view of a 

great avenue, a perfect corridor of shadow, at the end of which a 

bright spot of sunlight gleamed like a star.  They stood in silent, 

wondering admiration, and then little by little exclamations burst 

from their lips.  They had been trying hard to joke about it all 

with a touch of envy at heart, but this decidedly and immeasurably 

impressed them.  What a genius that Irma was!  A sight like this 

gave you a rattling notion of the woman!  The trees stretched away 

and away, and there were endlessly recurrent patches of ivy along 

the wall with glimpses of lofty roofs and screens of poplars 

interspersed with dense masses of elms and aspens.  Was there no end 

to it then?  The ladies would have liked to catch sight of the 

mansion house, for they were weary of circling on and on, weary of 

seeing nothing but leafy recesses through every opening they came 

to.  They took the rails of the gate in their hands and pressed 

their faces against the ironwork.  And thus excluded and isolated, a 

feeling of respect began to overcome them as they thought of the 

castle lost to view in surrounding immensity.  Soon, being quite 

unused to walking, they grew tired.  And the wall did not leave off; 

at every turn of the small deserted path the same range of gray 

stones stretched ahead of them.  Some of them began to despair of 

ever getting to the end of it and began talking of returning.  But 

the more their long walk fatigued them, the more respectful they 

became, for at each successive step they were increasingly impressed 

by the tranquil, lordly dignity of the domain.



"It's getting silly, this is!" said Caroline Hequet, grinding her 

teeth.



Nana silenced her with a shrug.  For some moments past she had been 

rather pale and extremely serious and had not spoken a single word.  

Suddenly the path gave a final turn; the wall ended, and as they 

came out on the village square the mansion house stood before them 

on the farther side of its grand outer court.  All stopped to admire 

the proud sweep of the wide steps, the twenty frontage windows, the 

arrangement of the three wings, which were built of brick framed by 

courses of stone.  Henri IV had erewhile inhabited this historic 

mansion, and his room, with its great bed hung with Genoa velvet, 

was still preserved there.  Breathless with admiration, Nana gave a 

little childish sigh.



"Great God!" she whispered very quietly to herself.



But the party were deeply moved when Gaga suddenly announced that 

Irma herself was standing yonder in front of the church.  She 

recognized her perfectly.  She was as upright as of old, the hoary 

campaigner, and that despite her age, and she still had those eyes 

which flashed when she moved in that proud way of hers!  Vespers 

were just over, and for a second or two Madame stood in the church 

porch.  She was dressed in a dark brown silk and looked very simple 

and very tall, her venerable face reminding one of some old marquise 

who had survived the horrors of the Great Revolution.  In her right 

hand a huge Book of Hours shone in the sunlight, and very slowly she 

crossed the square, followed some fifteen paces off by a footman in 

livery.  The church was emptying, and all the inhabitants of Chamont 

bowed before her with extreme respect.  An old man even kissed her 

hand, and a woman wanted to fall on her knees.  Truly this was a 

potent queen, full of years and honors.  She mounted her flight of 

steps and vanished from view.



"That's what one attains to when one has methodical habits!" said 

Mignon with an air of conviction, looking at his sons and improving 

the occasion.



Then everybody said his say.  Labordette thought her extraordinarily 

well preserved.  Maria Blond let slip a foul expression and vexed 

Lucy, who declared that one ought to honor gray hairs.  All the 

women, to sum up, agreed that she was a perfect marvel.  Then the 

company got into their conveyances again.  From Chamont all the way 

to La Mignotte Nana remained silent.  She had twice turned round to 

look back at the house, and now, lulled by the sound of the wheels, 

she forgot that Steiner was at her side and that Georges was in 

front of her.  A vision had come up out of the twilight, and the 

great lady seemed still to be sweeping by with all the majesty of a 

potent queen, full of years and of honors.



That evening Georges re-entered Les Fondettes in time for dinner.  

Nana, who had grown increasingly absent-minded and singular in point 

of manner, had sent him to ask his mamma's forgiveness.  It was his 

plain duty, she remarked severely, growing suddenly solicitous for 

the decencies of family life.  She even made him swear not to return 

for the night; she was tired, and in showing proper obedience he was 

doing no more than his duty.  Much bored by this moral discourse, 

Georges appeared in his mother's presence with heavy heart and 

downcast head.



Fortunately for him his brother Philippe, a great merry devil of a 

military man, had arrived during the day, a fact which greatly 

curtailed the scene he was dreading.  Mme Hugon was content to look 

at him with eyes full of tears while Philippe, who had been put in 

possession of the facts, threatened to go and drag him home by the 

scruff of the neck if ever he went back into that woman's society.  

Somewhat comforted, Georges began slyly planning how to make his 

escape toward two o'clock next day in order to arrange about future 

meetings with Nana.



Nevertheless, at dinnertime the house party at Les Fondettes seemed 

not a little embarrassed.  Vandeuvres had given notice of departure, 

for he was anxious to take Lucy back to Paris with him.  He was 

amused at the idea of carrying off this girl whom he had known for 

ten years yet never desired.  The Marquis de Chouard bent over his 

plate and meditated on Gaga's young lady.  He could well remember 

dandling Lili on his knee.  What a way children had of shooting up!  

This little thing was becoming extremely plump!  But Count Muffat 

especially was silent and absorbed.  His cheeks glowed, and he had 

given Georges one long look.  Dinner over, he went upstairs, 

intending to shut himself in his bedroom, his pretext being a slight 

feverish attack.  M. Venot had rushed after him, and upstairs in the 

bedroom a scene ensued.  The count threw himself upon the bed and 

strove to stifle a fit of nervous sobbing in the folds of the pillow 

while M. Venot, in a soft voice, called him brother and advised him 

to implore heaven for mercy.  But he heard nothing: there was a 

rattle in his throat.  Suddenly he sprang off the bed and stammered:



"I am going there.  I can't resist any longer."



"Very well," said the old man, "I go with you."



As they left the house two shadows were vanishing into the dark 

depths of a garden walk, for every evening now Fauchery and the 

Countess Sabine left Daguenet to help Estelle make tea.  Once on the 

highroad the count walked so rapidly that his companion had to run 

in order to follow him.  Though utterly out of breath, the latter 

never ceased showering on him the most conclusive arguments against 

the temptations of the flesh.  But the other never opened his mouth 

as he hurried away into the night.  Arrived in front of La Mignotte, 

he said simply:



"I can't resist any longer.  Go!"



"God's will be done then!" muttered M. Venot.  "He uses every method 

to assure His final triumph.  Your sin will become His weapon."



At La Mignotte there was much wrangling during the evening meal.  

Nana had found a letter from Bordenave awaiting her, in which he 

advised rest, just as though he were anxious to be rid of her.  

Little Violaine, he said, was being encored twice nightly.  But when 

Mignon continued urging her to come away with them on the morrow 

Nana grew exasperated and declared that she did not intend taking 

advice from anybody.  In other ways, too, her behavior at table was 

ridiculously stuck up.  Mme Lerat having made some sharp little 

speech or other, she loudly announced that, God willing, she wasn't 

going to let anyone--no, not even her own aunt--make improper 

remarks in her presence.  After which she dreed her guests with 

honorable sentiments.  She seemed to be suffering from a fit of 

stupid right-mindedness, and she treated them all to projects of 

religious education for Louiset and to a complete scheme of 

regeneration for herself.  When the company began laughing she gave 

vent to profound opinions, nodding her head like a grocer's wife who 

knows what she is saying.  Nothing but order could lead to fortune!  

And so far as she was concerned, she had no wish to die like a 

beggar!  She set the ladies' teeth on edge.  They burst out in 

protest.  Could anyone have been converting Nana?  No, it was 

impossible!  But she sat quite still and with absent looks once more 

plunged into dreamland, where the vision of an extremely wealthy and 

greatly courted Nana rose up before her.



The household were going upstairs to bed when Muffat put in an 

appearance.  It was Labordette who caught sight of him in the 

garden.  He understood it all at once and did him a service, for he 

got Steiner out of the way and, taking his hand, led him along the 

dark corridor as far as Nana's bedroom.  In affairs of this kind 

Labordette was wont to display the most perfect tact and cleverness.  

Indeed, he seemed delighted to be making other people happy.  Nana 

showed no surprise; she was only somewhat annoyed by the excessive 

heat of Muffat's pursuit.  Life was a serious affair, was it not?  

Love was too silly: it led to nothing.  Besides, she had her 

scruples in view of Zizi's tender age.  Indeed, she had scarcely 

behaved quite fairly toward him.  Dear me, yes, she was choosing the 

proper course again in taking up with an old fellow.



"Zoe," she said to the lady's maid, who was enchanted at the thought 

of leaving the country, "pack the trunks when you get up tomorrow.  

We are going back to Paris."



And she went to bed with Muffat but experienced no pleasure.


