





CHAPTER IV





Since morning Zoe had delivered up the flat to a managing man who 

had come from Brebant's with a staff of helpers and waiters.  

Brebant was to supply everything, from the supper, the plates and 

dishes, the glass, the linen, the flowers, down to the seats and 

footstools.  Nana could not have mustered a dozen napkins out of all 

her cupboards, and not having had time to get a proper outfit after 

her new start in life and scorning to go to the restaurant, she had 

decided to make the restaurant come to her.  It struck her as being 

more the thing.  She wanted to celebrate her great success as an 

actress with a supper which should set people talking.  As her 

dining room was too small, the manager had arranged the table in the 

drawing room, a table with twenty-five covers, placed somewhat close 

together.



"Is everything ready?" asked Nana when she returned at midnight.



"Oh! I don't know," replied Zoe roughly, looking beside herself with 

worry.  "The Lord be thanked, I don't bother about anything.  

They're making a fearful mess in the kitchen and all over the flat!  

I've had to fight my battles too.  The other two came again.  My 

eye!  I did just chuck 'em out!"



She referred, of course, to her employer's old admirers, the 

tradesman and the Walachian, to whom Nana, sure of her future and 

longing to shed her skin, as she phrased it, had decided to give the 

go-by.



"There are a couple of leeches for you!" she muttered.



"If they come back threaten to go to the police."



Then she called Daguenet and Georges, who had remained behind in the 

anteroom, where they were hanging up their overcoats.  They had both 

met at the stage door in the Passage des Panoramas, and she had 

brought them home with her in a cab.  As there was nobody there yet, 

she shouted to them to come into the dressing room while Zoe was 

touching up her toilet.  Hurriedly and without changing her dress 

she had her hair done up and stuck white roses in her chignon and at 

her bosom.  The little room was littered with the drawing-room 

furniture, which the workmen had been compelled to roll in there, 

and it was full of a motley assemblage of round tables, sofas and 

armchairs, with their legs in air for the most part.  Nana was quite 

ready when her dress caught on a castor and tore upward.  At this 

she swore furiously; such things only happened to her!  Ragingly she 

took off her dress, a very simple affair of white foulard, of so 

thin and supple a texture that it clung about her like a long shift.  

But she put it on again directly, for she could not find another to 

her taste, and with tears in her eyes declared that she was dressed 

like a ragpicker.  Daguenet and Georges had to patch up the rent 

with pins, while Zoe once more arranged her hair.  All three hurried 

round her, especially the boy, who knelt on the floor with his hands 

among her skirts.  And at last she calmed down again when Daguenet 

assured her it could not be later than a quarter past twelve, seeing 

that by dint of scamping her words and skipping her lines she had 

effectually shortened the third act of the Blonde Venus.



"The play's still far too good for that crowd of idiots," she said.  

"Did you see?  There were thousands there tonight.  Zoe, my girl, 

you will wait in here.  Don't go to bed, I shall want you.  By gum, 

it is time they came.  Here's company!"



She ran off while Georges stayed where he was with the skirts of his 

coat brushing the floor.  He blushed, seeing Daguenet looking at 

him.  Notwithstanding which, they had conceived a tender regard the 

one for the other.  They rearranged the bows of their cravats in 

front of the big dressing glass and gave each other a mutual dose of 

the clothesbrush, for they were all white from their close contact 

with Nana.



"One would think it was sugar," murmured Georges, giggling like a 

greedy little child.



A footman hired for the evening was ushering the guests into the 

small drawing room, a narrow slip of a place in which only four 

armchairs had been left in order the better to pack in the company.  

From the large drawing room beyond came a sound as of the moving of 

plates and silver, while a clear and brilliant ray of light shone 

from under the door.  At her entrance Nana found Clarisse Besnus, 

whom La Faloise had brought, already installed in one of the 

armchairs.



"Dear me, you're the first of 'em!" said Nana, who, now that she was 

successful, treated her familiarly.



"Oh, it's his doing," replied Clarisse.  "He's always afraid of not 

getting anywhere in time.  If I'd taken him at his word I shouldn't 

have waited to take off my paint and my wig."



The young man, who now saw Nana for the first time, bowed, paid her 

a compliment and spoke of his cousin, hiding his agitation behind an 

exaggeration of politeness.  But Nana, neither listening to him nor 

recognizing his face, shook hands with him and then went briskly 

toward Rose Mignon, with whom she at once assumed a most 

distinguished manner.



"Ah, how nice of you, my dear madame!  I was so anxious to have you 

here!"



"It's I who am charmed, I assure you," said Rose with equal 

amiability.



"Pray, sit down.  Do you require anything?"



"Thank you, no!  Ah yes, I've left my fan in my pelisse, Steiner; 

just look in the right-hand pocket."



Steiner and Mignon had come in behind Rose.  The banker turned back 

and reappeared with the fan while Mignon embraced Nana fraternally 

and forced Rose to do so also.  Did they not all belong to the same 

family in the theatrical world?  Then he winked as though to 

encourage Steiner, but the latter was disconcerted by Rose's clear 

gaze and contented himself by kissing Nana's hand.



Just then the Count de Vandeuvres made his appearance with Blanche 

de Sivry.  There was an interchange of profound bows, and Nana with 

the utmost ceremony conducted Blanche to an armchair.  Meanwhile 

Vandeuvres told them laughingly that Fauchery was engaged in a 

dispute at the foot of the stairs because the porter had refused to 

allow Lucy Stewart's carriage to come in at the gate.  They could 

hear Lucy telling the porter he was a dirty blackguard in the 

anteroom.  But when the footman had opened the door she came forward 

with her laughing grace of manner, announced her name herself, took 

both Nana's hands in hers and told her that she had liked her from 

the very first and considered her talent splendid.  Nana, puffed up 

by her novel role of hostess, thanked her and was veritably 

confused.  Nevertheless, from the moment of Fauchery's arrival she 

appeared preoccupied, and directly she could get near him she asked 

him in a low voice:



"Will he come?"



"No, he did not want to," was the journalist's abrupt reply, for he 

was taken by surprise, though he had got ready some sort of tale to 

explain Count Muffat's refusal.



Seeing the young woman's sudden pallor, he became conscious of his 

folly and tried to retract his words.



"He was unable to; he is taking the countess to the ball at the 

Ministry of the Interior tonight."



"All right," murmured Nana, who suspected him of ill will, "you'll 

pay me out for that, my pippin."



She turned on her heel, and so did he; they were angry.  Just then 

Mignon was pushing Steiner up against Nana, and when Fauchery had 

left her he said to her in a low voice and with the good-natured 

cynicism of a comrade in arms who wishes his friends to be happy:



"He's dying of it, you know, only he's afraid of my wife.  Won't you 

protect him?"



Nana did not appear to understand.  She smiled and looked at Rose, 

the husband and the banker and finally said to the latter:



"Monsieur Steiner, you will sit next to me."



With that there came from the anteroom a sound of laughter and 

whispering and a burst of merry, chattering voices, which sounded as 

if a runaway convent were on the premises.  And Labordette appeared, 

towing five women in his rear, his boarding school, as Lucy Stewart 

cruelly phrased it.  There was Gaga, majestic in a blue velvet dress 

which was too tight for her, and Caroline Hequet, clad as usual in 

ribbed black silk, trimmed with Chantilly lace.  Lea de Horn came 

next, terribly dressed up, as her wont was, and after her the big 

Tatan Nene, a good-humored fair girl with the bosom of a wet nurse, 

at which people laughed, and finally little Maria Blond, a young 

damsel of fifteen, as thin and vicious as a street child, yet on the 

high road to success, owing to her recent first appearance at the 

Folies.  Labordette had brought the whole collection in a single 

fly, and they were stlll laughing at the way they had been squeezed 

with Maria Blond on her knees.  But on entering the room they pursed 

up their lips, and all grew very conventional as they shook hands 

and exchanged salutations.  Gaga even affected the infantile and 

lisped through excess of genteel deportment.  Tatan Nene alone 

transgressed.  They had been telling her as they came along that six 

absolutely naked Negroes would serve up Nana's supper, and she now 

grew anxious about them and asked to see them.  Labordette called 

her a goose and besought her to be silent.



"And Bordenave?" asked Fauchery.



"Oh, you may imagine how miserable I am," cried Nana; "he won't be 

able to join us."



"Yes," said Rose Mignon, "his foot caught in a trap door, and he's 

got a fearful sprain.  If only you could hear him swearing, with his 

leg tied up and laid out on a chair!"



Thereupon everybody mourned over Bordenave's absence.  No one ever 

gave a good supper without Bordenave.  Ah well, they would try and 

do without him, and they were already talking about other matters 

when a burly voice was heard:



"What, eh, what?  Is that the way they're going to write my obituary 

notice?"



There was a shout, and all heads were turned round, for it was 

indeed Bordenave.  Huge and fiery-faced, he was standing with his 

stiff leg in the doorway, leaning for support on Simonne Cabiroche's 

shoulder.  Simonne was for the time being his mistress.  This little 

creature had had a certain amount of education and could play the 

piano and talk English.  She was a blonde on a tiny, pretty scale 

and so delicately formed that she seemed to bend under Bordenave's 

rude weight.  Yet she was smilingly submissive withal.  He postured 

there for some moments, for he felt that together they formed a 

tableau.



"One can't help liking ye, eh?" he continued.  "Zounds, I was afraid 

I should get bored, and I said to myself, 'Here goes.'"



But he interrupted himself with an oath.



"Oh, damn!"



Simonne had taken a step too quickly forward, and his foot had just 

felt his full weight.  He gave her a rough push, but she, still 

smiling away and ducking her pretty head as some animal might that 

is afraid of a beating, held him up with all the strength a little 

plump blonde can command.  Amid all these exclamations there was a 

rush to his assistance.  Nana and Rose Mignon rolled up an armchair, 

into which Bordenave let himself sink, while the other women slid a 

second one under his leg.  And with that all the actresses present 

kissed him as a matter of course.  He kept grumbling and gasping.



"Oh, damn!  Oh, damn!  Ah well, the stomach's unhurt, you'll see."



Other guests had arrived by this time, and motion became impossible 

in the room.  The noise of clinking plates and silver had ceased, 

and now a dispute was heard going on in the big drawing room, where 

the voice of the manager grumbled angrily.  Nana was growing 

impatient, for she expected no more invited guests and wondered why 

they did not bring in supper.  She had just sent Georges to find out 

what was going on when, to her great surprise, she noticed the 

arrival of more guests, both male and female.  She did not know them 

in the least.  Whereupon with some embarrassment she questioned 

Bordenave, Mignon and Labordette about them.  They did not know them 

any more than she did, but when she turned to the Count de 

Vandeuvres he seemed suddenly to recollect himself.  They were the 

young men he had pressed into her service at Count Muffat's.  Nana 

thanked him.  That was capital, capital!  Only they would all be 

terribly crowded, and she begged Labordette to go and have seven 

more covers set.  Scarcely had he left the room than the footman 

ushered in three newcomers.  Nay, this time the thing was becoming 

ridiculous; one certainly could never take them all in.  Nana was 

beginning to grow angry and in her haughtiest manner announced that 

such conduct was scarcely in good taste.  But seeing two more 

arrive, she began laughing; it was really too funny.  So much the 

worse.  People would have to fit in anyhow!  The company were all on 

their feet save Gaga and Rose and Bordenave, who alone took up two 

armchairs.  There was a buzz of voices, people talking in low tones 

and stifling slight yawns the while.



"Now what d'you say, my lass," asked Bordenave, "to our sitting down 

at table as if nothing had happened?  We are all here, don't you 

think?"



"Oh yes, we're all here, I promise you!" she answered laughingly.



She looked round her but grew suddenly serious, as though she were 

surprised at not finding someone.  Doubtless there was a guest 

missing whom she did not mention.  It was a case of waiting.  But a 

minute or two later the company noticed in their midst a tall 

gentleman with a fine face and a beautiful white beard.  The most 

astonishing thing about it was that nobody had seen him come in; 

indeed, he must have slipped into the little drawing room through 

the bedroom door, which had remained ajar.  Silence reigned, broken 

only by a sound of whispering.  The Count de Vandeuvres certainly 

knew who the gentleman was, for they both exchanged a discreet 

handgrip, but to the questions which the women asked him he replied 

by a smile only.  Thereupon Caroline Hequet wagered in a low voice 

that it was an English lord who was on the eve of returning to 

London to be married.  She knew him quite well--she had had him.  

And this account of the matter went the round of the ladies present, 

Maria Blond alone asserting that, for her part, she recognized a 

German ambassador.  She could prove it, because he often passed the 

night with one of her friends.  Among the men his measure was taken 

in a few rapid phrases.  A real swell, to judge by his looks!  

Perhaps he would pay for the supper!  Most likely.  It looked like 

it.  Bah!  Provided only the supper was a good one!  In the end the 

company remained undecided.  Nay, they were already beginning to 

forget the old white-bearded gentleman when the manager opened the 

door of the large drawing room.



"Supper is on the table, madame."



Nana had already accepted Steiner's proffered arm without noticing a 

movement on the part of the old gentleman, who started to walk 

behind her in solitary state.  Thus the march past could not be 

organized, and men and women entered anyhow, joking with homely good 

humor over this absence of ceremony.  A long table stretched from 

one end to the other of the great room, which had been entirely 

cleared of furniture, and this same table was not long enough, for 

the plates thereon were touching one another.  Four candelabra, with 

ten candles apiece, lit up the supper, and of these one was gorgeous 

in silver plate with sheaves of flowers to right and left of it.  

Everything was luxurious after the restaurant fashion; the china was 

ornamented with a gold line and lacked the customary monogram; the 

silver had become worn and tarnished through dint of continual 

washings; the glass was of the kind that you can complete an odd set 

of in any cheap emporium.



The scene suggested a premature housewarming in an establishment 

newly smiled on by fortune and as yet lacking the necessary 

conveniences.  There was no central luster, and the candelabra, 

whose tall tapers had scarcely burned up properly, cast a pale 

yellow light among the dishes and stands on which fruit, cakes and 

preserves alternated symmetrically.



"You sit where you like, you know," said Nana.  "It's more amusing 

that way."



She remained standing midway down the side of the table.  The old 

gentleman whom nobody knew had placed himself on her right, while 

she kept Steiner on her left hand.  Some guests were already sitting 

down when the sound of oaths came from the little drawing room.  It 

was Bordenave.  The company had forgotten him, and he was having all 

the trouble in the world to raise himself out of his two armchairs, 

for he was howling amain and calling for that cat of a Simonne, who 

had slipped off with the rest.  The women ran in to him, full of 

pity for his woes, and Bordenave appeared, supported, nay, almost 

carried, by Caroline, Clarisse, Tatan Nene and Maria Blond.  And 

there was much to-do over his installation at the table.



"In the middle, facing Nana!" was the cry.  "Bordenave in the 

middle!  He'll be our president!"



Thereupon the ladies seated him in the middle.  But he needed a 

second chair for his leg, and two girls lifted it up and stretched 

it carefully out.  It wouldn't matter; he would eat sideways.



"God blast it all!" he grumbled.  "We're squashed all the same!  Ah, 

my kittens, Papa recommends himself to your tender care!"



He had Rose Mignon on his right and Lucy Stewart on his left hand, 

and they promised to take good care of him.  Everybody was now 

getting settled.  Count de Vandeuvres placed himself between Lucy 

and Clarisse; Fauchery between Rose Mignon and Caroline Hequet.  On 

the other side of the table Hector de la Faloise had rushed to get 

next Gaga, and that despite the calls of Clarisse opposite, while 

Mignon, who never deserted Steiner, was only separated from him by 

Blanche and had Tatan Nene on his left.  Then came Labordette and, 

finally, at the two ends of the table were irregular crowding groups 

of young men and of women, such as Simonne, Lea de Horn and Maria 

Blond.  It was in this region that Daguenet and Georges forgathered 

more warmly than ever while smilingly gazing at Nana.



Nevertheless, two people remained standing, and there was much 

joking about it.  The men offered seats on their knees.  Clarisse, 

who could not move her elbows, told Vandeuvres that she counted on 

him to feed her.  And then that Bordenave did just take up space 

with his chairs!  There was a final effort, and at last everybody 

was seated, but, as Mignon loudly remarked, they were confoundedly 

like herrings in a barrel.



"Thick asparagus soup a la comtesse, clear soup a la Deslignac," 

murmured the waiters, carrying about platefuls in rear of the 

guests.



Bordenave was loudly recommending the thick soup when a shout arose, 

followed by protests and indignant exclamations.  The door had just 

opened, and three late arrivals, a woman and two men, had just come 

in.  Oh dear, no!  There was no space for them!  Nana, however, 

without leaving her chair, began screwing up her eyes in the effort 

to find out whether she knew them.  The woman was Louise Violaine, 

but she had never seen the men before.



"This gentleman, my dear," said Vandeuvres, "is a friend of mine, a 

naval officer, Monsieur de Foucarmont by name.  I invited him."



Foucarmont bowed and seemed very much at ease, for he added:



"And I took leave to bring one of my friends with me."



"Oh, it's quite right, quite right!" said Nana.  "Sit down, pray.  

Let's see, you--Clarisse--push up a little.  You're a good deal 

spread out down there.  That's it--where there's a will--"



They crowded more tightly than ever, and Foucarmont and Louise were 

given a little stretch of table, but the friend had to sit at some 

distance from his plate and ate his supper through dint of making a 

long arm between his neighbors' shoulders.  The waiters took away 

the soup plates and circulated rissoles of young rabbit with 

truffles and "niokys" and powdered cheese.  Bordenave agitated the 

whole table with the announcement that at one moment he had had the 

idea of bringing with him Prulliere, Fontan and old Bosc.  At this 

Nana looked sedate and remarked dryly that she would have given them 

a pretty reception.  Had she wanted colleagues, she would certainly 

have undertaken to ask them herself.  No, no, she wouldn't have 

third-rate play actors.  Old Bosc was always drunk; Prulliere was 

fond of spitting too much, and as to Fontan, he made himself 

unbearable in society with his loud voice and his stupid doings.  

Then, you know, third-rate play actors were always out of place when 

they found themselves in the society of gentlemen such as those 

around her.



"Yes, yes, it's true," Mignon declared.



All round the table the gentlemen in question looked unimpeachable 

in the extreme, what with their evening dress and their pale 

features, the natural distinction of which was still further refined 

by fatigue.  The old gentleman was as deliberate in his movements 

and wore as subtle a smile as though he were presiding over a 

diplomatic congress, and Vandeuvres, with his exquisite politeness 

toward the ladies next to him, seemed to be at one of the Countess 

Muffat's receptions.  That very morning Nana had been remarking to 

her aunt that in the matter of men one could not have done better--

they were all either wellborn or wealthy, in fact, quite the thing.  

And as to the ladies, they were behaving admirably.  Some of them, 

such as Blanche, Lea and Louise, had come in low dresses, but Gaga's 

only was perhaps a little too low, the more so because at her age 

she would have done well not to show her neck at all.  Now that the 

company were finally settled the laughter and the light jests began 

to fail.  Georges was under the impression that he had assisted at 

merrier dinner parties among the good folks of Orleans.  There was 

scarcely any conversation.  The men, not being mutually acquainted, 

stared at one another, while the women sat quite quiet, and it was 

this which especially surprised Georges.  He thought them all smugs--

he had been under the impression that everybody would begin kissing 

at once.



The third course, consisting of a Rhine carp a la Chambord and a 

saddle of venison a l'anglaise, was being served when Blanche 

remarked aloud:



"Lucy, my dear, I met your Ollivier on Sunday.  How he's grown!"



"Dear me, yes!  He's eighteen," replied Lucy.  "It doesn't make me 

feel any younger.  He went back to his school yesterday."



Her son Ollivier, whom she was wont to speak of with pride, was a 

pupil at the Ecole de Marine.  Then ensued a conversation about the 

young people, during which all the ladies waxed very tender.  Nana 

described her own great happiness.  Her baby, the little Louis, she 

said, was now at the house of her aunt, who brought him round to her 

every morning at eleven o'clock, when she would take him into her 

bed, where he played with her griffon dog Lulu.  It was enough to 

make one die of laughing to see them both burying themselves under 

the clothes at the bottom of the bed.  The company had no idea how 

cunning Louiset had already become.



"Oh, yesterday I did just pass a day!" said Rose Mignon in her turn.  

"Just imagine, I went to fetch Charles and Henry at their boarding 

school, and I had positively to take them to the theater at night.  

They jumped; they clapped their little hands: 'We shall see Mamma 

act!  We shall see Mamma act!'  Oh, it was a to-do!"



Mignon smiled complaisantly, his eyes moist with paternal 

tenderness.



"And at the play itself," he continued, "they were so funny!  They 

behaved as seriously as grown men, devoured Rose with their eyes and 

asked me why Mamma had her legs bare like that."



The whole table began laughing, and Mignon looked radiant, for his 

pride as a father was flattered.  He adored his children and had but 

one object in life, which was to increase their fortunes by 

administering the money gained by Rose at the theater and elsewhere 

with the businesslike severity of a faithful steward.  When as first 

fiddle in the music hall where she used to sing he had married her, 

they had been passionately fond of one another.  Now they were good 

friends.  There was an understanding between them: she labored hard 

to the full extent of her talent and of her beauty; he had given up 

his violin in order the better to watch over her successes as an 

actress and as a woman.  One could not have found a more homely and 

united household anywhere!



"What age is your eldest?" asked Vandeuvres.



"Henry's nine," replied Mignon, "but such a big chap for his years!"



Then he chaffed Steiner, who was not fond of children, and with 

quiet audacity informed him that were he a father, he would make a 

less stupid hash of his fortune.  While talking he watched the 

banker over Blanche's shoulders to see if it was coming off with 

Nana.  But for some minutes Rose and Fauchery, who were talking very 

near him, had been getting on his nerves.  Was Rose going to waste 

time over such a folly as that?  In that sort of case, by Jove, he 

blocked the way.  And diamond on finger and with his fine hands in 

great evidence, he finished discussing a fillet of venison.



Elsewhere the conversation about children continued.  La Faloise, 

rendered very restless by the immediate proximity of Gaga, asked 

news of her daughter, whom he had had the pleasure of noticing in 

her company at the Varietes.  Lili was quite well, but she was still 

such a tomboy!  He was astonished to learn that Lili was entering on 

her nineteenth year.  Gaga became even more imposing in his eyes, 

and when he endeavored to find out why she had not brought Lili with 

her:



"Oh no, no, never!" she said stiffly.  "Not three months ago she 

positively insisted on leaving her boarding school.  I was thinking 

of marrying her off at once, but she loves me so that I had to take 

her home--oh, so much against my will!"



Her blue eyelids with their blackened lashes blinked and wavered 

while she spoke of the business of settling her young lady.  If at 

her time of life she hadn't laid by a sou but was still always 

working to minister to men's pleasures, especially those very young 

men, whose grandmother she might well be, it was truly because she 

considered a good match of far greater importance than mere savings.  

And with that she leaned over La Faloise, who reddened under the 

huge, naked, plastered shoulder with which she well-nigh crushed 

him.



"You know," she murmured, "if she fails it won't be my fault.  But 

they're so strange when they're young!"



There was a considerable bustle round the table, and the waiters 

became very active.  After the third course the entrees had made 

their appearance; they consisted of pullets a la marechale, fillets 

of sole with shallot sauce and escalopes of Strasbourg pate.  The 

manager, who till then had been having Meursault served, now offered 

Chambertin and Leoville.  Amid the slight hubbub which the change of 

plates involved Georges, who was growing momentarily more 

astonished, asked Daguenet if all the ladies present were similarly 

provided with children, and the other, who was amused by this 

question, gave him some further details.  Lucy Stewart was the 

daughter of a man of English origin who greased the wheels of the 

trains at the Gare du Nord; she was thirty-nine years old and had 

the face of a horse but was adorable withal and, though consumptive, 

never died.  In fact, she was the smartest woman there and 

represented three princes and a duke.  Caroline Hequet, born at 

Bordeaux, daughter of a little clerk long since dead of shame, was 

lucky enough to be possessed of a mother with a head on her 

shoulders, who, after having cursed her, had made it up again at the 

end of a year of reflection, being minded, at any rate, to save a 

fortune for her daughter.  The latter was twenty-five years old and 

very passionless and was held to be one of the finest women it is 

possible to enjoy.  Her price never varied.  The mother, a model of 

orderliness, kept the accounts and noted down receipts and 

expenditures with severe precision.  She managed the whole household 

from some small lodging two stories above her daughter's, where, 

moreover, she had established a workroom for dressmaking and plain 

sewing.  As to Blanche de Sivry, whose real name was Jacqueline 

Bandu, she hailed from a village near Amiens.  Magnificent in 

person, stupid and untruthful in character, she gave herself out as 

the granddaughter of a general and never owned to her thirty-two 

summers.  The Russians had a great taste for her, owing to her 

embonpoint.  Then Daguenet added a rapid word or two about the rest.  

There was Clarisse Besnus, whom a lady had brought up from Saint-

Aubin-sur-Mer in the capacity of maid while the lady's husband had 

started her in quite another line.  There was Simonne Cabiroche, the 

daughter of a furniture dealer in the Faubourg Saint-Antoine, who 

had been educated in a large boarding school with a view to becoming 

a governess.  Finally there were Maria Blond and Louise Violaine and 

Lea de Horn, who had all shot up to woman's estate on the pavements 

of Paris, not to mention Tatan Nene, who had herded cows in 

Champagne till she was twenty.



Georges listened and looked at these ladies, feeling dizzy and 

excited by the coarse recital thus crudely whispered in his ear, 

while behind his chair the waiters kept repeating in respectful 

tones:



"Pullets a la marechale; fillets of sole with ravigote sauce."



"My dear fellow," said Daguenet, giving him the benefit of his 

experience, "don't take any fish; it'll do you no good at this time 

of night.  And be content with Leoville: it's less treacherous."



A heavy warmth floated upward from the candelabras, from the dishes 

which were being handed round, from the whole table where thirty-

eight human beings were suffocating.  And the waiters forgot 

themselves and ran when crossing the carpet, so that it was spotted 

with grease.  Nevertheless, the supper grew scarce any merrier.  The 

ladies trifled with their meat, left half of it uneaten.  Tatan Nene 

alone partook gluttonously of every dish.  At that advanced hour of 

the night hunger was of the nervous order only, a mere whimsical 

craving born of an exasperated stomach.



At Nana's side the old gentleman refused every dish offered him; he 

had only taken a spoonful of soup, and he now sat in front of his 

empty plate, gazing silently about.  There was some subdued yawning, 

and occasionally eyelids closed and faces became haggard and white.  

It was unutterably slow, as it always was, according to Vandeuvres's 

dictum.  This sort of supper should be served anyhow if it was to be 

funny, he opined.  Otherwise when elegantly and conventionally done 

you might as well feed in good society, where you were not more 

bored than here.  Had it not been for Bordenave, who was still 

bawling away, everybody would have fallen asleep.  That rum old 

buffer Bordenave, with his leg duly stretched on its chair, was 

letting his neighbors, Lucy and Rose, wait on him as though he were 

a sultan.  They were entirely taken up with him, and they helped him 

and pampered him and watched over his glass and his plate, and yet 

that did not prevent his complaining.



"Who's going to cut up my meat for me?  I can't; the table's a 

league away."



Every few seconds Simonne rose and took up a position behind his 

back in order to cut his meat and his bread.  All the women took a 

great interest in the things he ate.  The waiters were recalled, and 

he was stuffed to suffocation.  Simonne having wiped his mouth for 

him while Rose and Lucy were changing his plate, her act struck him 

as very pretty and, deigning at length to show contentment:



"There, there, my daughter," he said, "that's as it should be.  

Women are made for that!"



There was a slight reawakening, and conversation became general as 

they finished discussing some orange sherbet.  The hot roast was a 

fillet with truffles, and the cold roast a galantine of guinea fowl 

in jelly.  Nana, annoyed by the want of go displayed by her guests, 

had begun talking with the greatest distinctness.



"You know the Prince of Scots has already had a stage box reserved 

so as to see the Blonde Venus when he comes to visit the 

exhibition."



"I very much hope that all the princes will come and see it," 

declared Bordenave with his mouth full.



"They are expecting the shah of Persia next Sunday," said Lucy 

Stewart.  Whereupon Rose Mignon spoke of the shah's diamonds.  He 

wore a tunic entirely covered with gems; it was a marvel, a flaming 

star; it represented millions.  And the ladies, with pale faces and 

eyes glittering with covetousness, craned forward and ran over the 

names of the other kings, the other emperors, who were shortly 

expected.  All of them were dreaming of some royal caprice, some 

night to be paid for by a fortune.



"Now tell me, dear boy," Caroline Hequet asked Vandeuvres, leaning 

forward as she did so, "how old's the emperor of Russia?"



"Oh, he's 'present time,'" replied the count, laughing.  "Nothing to 

be done in that quarter, I warn you."



Nana made pretense of being hurt.  The witticism appeared somewhat 

too stinging, and there was a murmur of protest.  But Blanche gave a 

description of the king of Italy, whom she had once seen at Milan.  

He was scarcely good looking, and yet that did not prevent him 

enjoying all the women.  She was put out somewhat when Fauchery 

assured her that Victor Emmanuel could not come to the exhibition.  

Louise Violaine and Lea favored the emperor of Austria, and all of a 

sudden little Maria Blond was heard saying:



"What an old stick the king of Prussia is!  I was at Baden last 

year, and one was always meeting him about with Count Bismarck."



"Dear me, Bismarck!" Simonne interrupted.  "I knew him once, I did.  

A charming man."



"That's what I was saying yesterday," cried Vandeuvres, "but nobody 

would believe me."



And just as at Countess Sabine's, there ensued a long discussion 

about Bismarck.  Vandeuvres repeated the same phrases, and for a 

moment or two one was again in the Muffats' drawing room, the only 

difference being that the ladies were changed.  Then, just as last 

night, they passed on to a discussion on music, after which, 

Foucarmont having let slip some mention of the assumption of the 

veil of which Paris was still talking, Nana grew quite interested 

and insisted on details about Mlle de Fougeray.  Oh, the poor child, 

fancy her burying herself alive like that!  Ah well, when it was a 

question of vocation!  All round the table the women expressed 

themselves much touched, and Georges, wearied at hearing these 

things a second time discussed, was beginning to ask Daguenet about 

Nana's ways in private life, when the conversation veered fatefully 

back to Count Bismarck.  Tatan Nene bent toward Labordette to ask 

him privily who this Bismarck might be, for she did not know him.  

Whereupon Labordette, in cold blood, told her some portentous 

anecdotes.  This Bismarck, he said, was in the habit of eating raw 

meat and when he met a woman near his den would carry her off 

thither on his back; at forty years of age he had already had as 

many as thirty-two children that way.



"Thirty-two children at forty!" cried Tatan Nene, stupefied and yet 

convinced.  "He must be jolly well worn out for his age."



There was a burst of merriment, and it dawned on her that she was 

being made game of.



"You sillies!  How am I to know if you're joking?"



Gaga, meanwhile, had stopped at the exhibition.  Like all these 

ladies, she was delightedly preparing for the fray.  A good season, 

provincials and foreigners rushing into Paris!  In the long run, 

perhaps, after the close of the exhibition she would, if her 

business had flourished, be able to retire to a little house at 

Jouvisy, which she had long had her eye on.



"What's to be done?" she said to La Faloise.  "One never gets what 

one wants!  Oh, if only one were still really loved!"



Gaga behaved meltingly because she had felt the young man's knee 

gently placed against her own.  He was blushing hotly and lisping as 

elegantly as ever.  She weighed him at a glance.  Not a very heavy 

little gentleman, to be sure, but then she wasn't hard to please.  

La Faloise obtained her address.



"Just look there," murmured Vandeuvres to Clarisse.  "I think Gaga's 

doing you out of your Hector."



"A good riddance, so far as I'm concerned," replied the actress.  

"That fellow's an idiot.  I've already chucked him downstairs three 

times.  You know, I'm disgusted when dirty little boys run after old 

women."



She broke off and with a little gesture indicated Blanche, who from 

the commencement of dinner had remained in a most uncomfortable 

attitude, sitting up very markedly, with the intention of displaying 

her shoulders to the old distinguished-looking gentleman three seats 

beyond her.



"You're being left too," she resumed.



Vandeuvres smiled his thin smile and made a little movement to 

signify he did not care.  Assuredly 'twas not he who would ever have 

prevented poor, dear Blanche scoring a success.  He was more 

interested by the spectacle which Steiner was presenting to the 

table at large.  The banker was noted for his sudden flames.  That 

terrible German Jew who brewed money, whose hands forged millions, 

was wont to turn imbecile whenever he became enamored of a woman.  

He wanted them all too!  Not one could make her appearance on the 

stage but he bought her, however expensive she might be.  Vast sums 

were quoted.  Twice had his furious appetite for courtesans ruined 

him.  The courtesans, as Vandeuvres used to say, avenged public 

morality by emptying his moneybags.  A big operation in the 

saltworks of the Landes had rendered him powerful on 'change, and so 

for six weeks past the Mignons had been getting a pretty slice out 

of those same saltworks.  But people were beginning to lay wagers 

that the Mignons would not finish their slice, for Nana was showing 

her white teeth.  Once again Steiner was in the toils, and so deeply 

this time that as he sat by Nana's side he seemed stunned; he ate 

without appetite; his lip hung down; his face was mottled.  She had 

only to name a figure.  Nevertheless, she did not hurry but 

continued playing with him, breathing her merry laughter into his 

hairy ear and enjoying the little convulsive movements which kept 

traversing his heavy face.  There would always be time enough to 

patch all that up if that ninny of a Count Muffat were really to 

treat her as Joseph did Potiphar's wife.



"Leoville or Chambertin?" murmured a waiter, who came craning 

forward between Nana and Steiner just as the latter was addressing 

her in a low voice.



"Eh, what?" he stammered, losing his head.  "Whatever you like--I 

don't care."



Vandeuvres gently nudged Lucy Stewart, who had a very spiteful 

tongue and a very fierce invention when once she was set going.  

That evening Mignon was driving her to exasperation.



"He would gladly be bottleholder, you know," she remarked to the 

count.  "He's in hopes of repeating what he did with little 

Jonquier.  You remember: Jonquier was Rose's man, but he was sweet 

on big Laure.  Now Mignon procured Laure for Jonquier and then came 

back arm in arm with him to Rose, as if he were a husband who had 

been allowed a little peccadillo.  But this time the thing's going 

to fail.  Nana doesn't give up the men who are lent her."



"What ails Mignon that he should be looking at his wife in that 

severe way?" asked Vandeuvres.



He leaned forward and saw Rose growing exceedingly amorous toward 

Fauchery.  This was the explanation of his neighbor's wrath.  He 

resumed laughingly:



"The devil, are you jealous?"



"Jealous!" said Lucy in a fury.  "Good gracious, if Rose is wanting 

Leon I give him up willingly--for what he's worth!  That's to say, 

for a bouquet a week and the rest to match!  Look here, my dear boy, 

these theatrical trollops are all made the same way.  Why, Rose 

cried with rage when she read Leon's article on Nana; I know she 

did.  So now, you understand, she must have an article, too, and 

she's gaining it.  As for me, I'm going to chuck Leon downstairs--

you'll see!"



She paused to say "Leoville" to the waiter standing behind her with 

his two bottles and then resumed in lowered tones:



"I don't want to shout; it isn't my style.  But she's a cocky slut 

all the same.  If I were in her husband's place I should lead her a 

lovely dance.  Oh, she won't be very happy over it.  She doesn't 

know my Fauchery: a dirty gent he is, too, palling up with women 

like that so as to get on in the world.  Oh, a nice lot they are!"



Vandeuvres did his best to calm her down, but Bordenave, deserted by 

Rose and by Lucy, grew angry and cried out that they were letting 

Papa perish of hunger and thirst.  This produced a fortunate 

diversion.  Yet the supper was flagging; no one was eating now, 

though platefuls of cepes a' l'italienne and pineapple fritters a la 

Pompadour were being mangled.  The champagne, however, which had 

been drunk ever since the soup course, was beginning little by 

little to warm the guests into a state of nervous exaltation.  They 

ended by paying less attention to decorum than before.  The women 

began leaning on their elbows amid the disordered table 

arrangements, while the men, in order to breathe more easily, pushed 

their chairs back, and soon the black coats appeared buried between 

the light-colored bodices, and bare shoulders, half turned toward 

the table, began to gleam as soft as silk.  It was too hot, and the 

glare of the candles above the table grew ever yellower and duller.  

Now and again, when a women bent forward, the back of her neck 

glowed golden under a rain of curls, and the glitter of a diamond 

clasp lit up a lofty chignon.  There was a touch of fire in the 

passing jests, in the laughing eyes, in the sudden gleam of white 

teeth, in the reflection of the candelabra on the surface of a glass 

of champagne.  The company joked at the tops of their voices, 

gesticulated, asked questions which no one answered and called to 

one another across the whole length of the room.  But the loudest 

din was made by the waiters; they fancied themselves at home in the 

corridors of their parent restaurant; they jostled one another and 

served the ices and the dessert to an accompaniment of guttural 

exclamations.



"My children," shouted Bordenave, "you know we're playing tomorrow.  

Be careful!  Not too much champagne!"



"As far as I'm concerned," said Foucarmont, "I've drunk every 

imaginable kind of wine in all the four quarters of the globe.  

Extraordinary liquors some of 'em, containing alcohol enough to kill 

a corpse!  Well, and what d'you think?  Why, it never hurt me a bit.  

I can't make myself drunk.  I've tried and I can't."



He was very pale, very calm and collected, and he lolled back in his 

chair, drinking without cessation.



"Never mind that," murmured Louise Violaine.  "Leave off; you've had 

enough.  It would be a funny business if I had to look after you the 

rest of the night."



Such was her state of exaltation that Lucy Stewart's cheeks were 

assuming a red, consumptive flush, while Rose Mignon with moist 

eyelids was growing excessively melting.  Tatan Nene, greatly 

astonished at the thought that she had overeaten herself, was 

laughing vaguely over her own stupidity.  The others, such as 

Blanche, Caroline, Simonne and Maria, were all talking at once and 

telling each other about their private affairs--about a dispute with 

a coachman, a projected picnic and innumerable complex stories of 

lovers stolen or restored.  Meanwhile a young man near Georges, 

having evinced a desire to kiss Lea de Horn, received a sharp rap, 

accompanied by a "Look here, you, let me go!" which was spoken in a 

tone of fine indignation; and Georges, who was now very tipsy and 

greatly excited by the sight of Nana, hesitated about carrying out a 

project which he had been gravely maturing.  He had been planning, 

indeed, to get under the table on all fours and to go and crouch at 

Nana's feet like a little dog.  Nobody would have seen him, and he 

would have stayed there in the quietest way.  But when at Lea's 

urgent request Daguenet had told the young man to sit still, Georges 

all at once felt grievously chagrined, as though the reproof had 

just been leveled at him.  Oh, it was all silly and slow, and there 

was nothing worth living for!  Daguenet, nevertheless, began 

chaffing and obliged him to swallow a big glassful of water, asking 

him at the same time what he would do if he were to find himself 

alone with a woman, seeing that three glasses of champagne were able 

to bowl him over.



"Why, in Havana," resumed Foucarmont, "they make a spirit with a 

certain wild berry; you think you're swallowing fire!  Well now, one 

evening I drank more than a liter of it, and it didn't hurt me one 

bit.  Better than that, another time when we were on the coast of 

Coromandel some savages gave us I don't know what sort of a mixture 

of pepper and vitriol, and that didn't hurt me one bit.  I can't 

make myself drunk."



For some moments past La Faloise's face opposite had excited his 

displeasure.  He began sneering and giving vent to disagreeable 

witticisms.  La Faloise, whose brain was in a whirl, was behaving 

very restlessly and squeezing up against Gaga.  But at length he 

became the victim of anxiety; somebody had just taken his 

handkerchief, and with drunken obstinacy he demanded it back again, 

asked his neighbors about it, stooped down in order to look under 

the chairs and the guests' feet.  And when Gaga did her best to 

quiet him:



"It's a nuisance," he murmured, "my initials and my coronet are 

worked in the corner.  They may compromise me."



"I say, Monsieur Falamoise, Lamafoise, Mafaloise!" shouted 

Foucarmont, who thought it exceedingly witty thus to disfigure the 

young man's name ad infinitum.



But La Faloise grew wroth and talked with a stutter about his 

ancestry.  He threatened to send a water bottle at Foucarmont's 

head, and Count de Vandeuvres had to interfere in order to assure 

him that Foucarmont was a great joker.  Indeed, everybody was 

laughing.  This did for the already flurried young man, who was very 

glad to resume his seat and to begin eating with childlike 

submissiveness when in a loud voice his cousin ordered him to feed.  

Gaga had taken him back to her ample side; only from time to time he 

cast sly and anxious glances at the guests, for he ceased not to 

search for his handkerchief.



Then Foucarmont, being now in his witty vein, attacked Labordette 

right at the other end of the table.  Louise Violaine strove to make 

him hold his tongue, for, she said, "when he goes nagging at other 

people like that it always ends in mischief for me."  He had 

discovered a witticism which consisted in addressing Labordette as 

"Madame," and it must have amused him greatly, for he kept on 

repeating it while Labordette tranquilly shrugged his shoulders and 

as constantly replied:



"Pray hold your tongue, my dear fellow; it's stupid."



But as Foucarmont failed to desist and even became insulting without 

his neighbors knowing why, he left off answering him and appealed to 

Count Vandeuvres.



"Make your friend hold his tongue, monsieur.  I don't wish to become 

angry."



Foucarmont had twice fought duels, and he was in consequence most 

politely treated and admitted into every circle.  But there was now 

a general uprising against him.  The table grew merry at his 

sallies, for they thought him very witty, but that was no reason why 

the evening should be spoiled.  Vandeuvres, whose subtle countenance 

was darkening visibly, insisted on his restoring Labordette his sex.  

The other men--Mignon, Steiner and Bordenave--who were by this time 

much exalted, also intervened with shouts which drowned his voice.  

Only the old gentleman sitting forgotten next to Nana retained his 

stately demeanor and, still smiling in his tired, silent way, 

watched with lackluster eyes the untoward finish of the dessert.



"What do you say to our taking coffee in here, duckie?" said 

Bordenave.  "We're very comfortable."



Nana did not give an immediate reply.  Since the beginning of supper 

she had seemed no longer in her own house.  All this company had 

overwhelmed and bewildered her with their shouts to the waiters, the 

loudness of their voices and the way in which they put themselves at 

their ease, just as though they were in a restaurant.  Forgetting 

her role of hostess, she busied herself exclusively with bulky 

Steiner, who was verging on apoplexy beside her.  She was listening 

to his proposals and continually refusing them with shakes of the 

head and that temptress's laughter which is peculiar to a voluptuous 

blonde.  The champagne she had been drinking had flushed her a rosy-

red; her lips were moist; her eyes sparkled, and the banker's offers 

rose with every kittenish movement of her shoulders, with every 

little voluptuous lift and fall of her throat, which occurred when 

she turned her head.  Close by her ear he kept espying a sweet 

little satiny corner which drove him crazy.  Occasionally Nana was 

interrupted, and then, remembering her guests, she would try and be 

as pleased as possible in order to show that she knew how to 

receive.  Toward the end of the supper she was very tipsy.  It made 

her miserable to think of it, but champagne had a way of 

intoxicating her almost directly!  Then an exasperating notion 

struck her.  In behaving thus improperly at her table, these ladies 

were showing themselves anxious to do her an ugly turn.  Oh yes, she 

could see it all distinctly.  Lucy had given Foucarmont a wink in 

order to egg him on against Labordette, while Rose, Caroline and the 

others were doing all they could to stir up the men.  Now there was 

such a din you couldn't hear your neighbor speak, and so the story 

would get about that you might allow yourself every kind of liberty 

when you supped at Nana's.  Very well then!  They should see!  She 

might be tipsy, if you like, but she was still the smartest and most 

ladylike woman there.



"Do tell them to serve the coffee here, duckie," resumed Bordenave.  

"I prefer it here because of my leg."



But Nana had sprung savagely to her feet after whispering into the 

astonished ears of Steiner and the old gentleman:



"It's quite right; it'll teach me to go and invite a dirty lot like 

that."



Then she pointed to the door of the dining room and added at the top 

of her voice:



"If you want coffee it's there, you know."



The company left the table and crowded toward the dining room 

without noticing Nana's indignant outburst.  And soon no one was 

left in the drawing room save Bordenave, who advanced cautiously, 

supporting himself against the wall and cursing away at the 

confounded women who chucked Papa the moment they were chock-full.  

The waiters behind him were already busy removing the plates and 

dishes in obedience to the loudly voiced orders of the manager.  

They rushed to and fro, jostled one another, caused the whole table 

to vanish, as a pantomime property might at the sound of the chief 

scene-shifter's whistle.  The ladies and gentlemen were to return to 

the drawing room after drinking their coffee.



"By gum, it's less hot here," said Gaga with a slight shiver as she 

entered the dining room.



The window here had remained open.  Two lamps illuminated the table, 

where coffee and liqueurs were set out.  There were no chairs, and 

the guests drank their coffee standing, while the hubbub the waiters 

were making in the next room grew louder and louder.  Nana had 

disappeared, but nobody fretted about her absence.  They did without 

her excellently well, and everybody helped himself and rummaged in 

the drawers of the sideboard in search of teaspoons, which were 

lacking.  Several groups were formed; people separated during supper 

rejoined each other, and there was an interchange of glances, of 

meaning laughter and of phrases which summed up recent situations.



"Ought not Monsieur Fauchery to come and lunch with us one of these 

days, Auguste?" said Rose Mignon.



Mignon, who was toying with his watch chain, eyed the journalist for 

a second or two with his severe glance.  Rose was out of her senses.  

As became a good manager, he would put a stop to such spendthrift 

courses.  In return for a notice, well and good, but afterward, 

decidedly not.  Nevertheless, as he was fully aware of his wife's 

wrongheadedness and as he made it a rule to wink paternally at a 

folly now and again, when such was necessary, he answered amiably 

enough:



"Certainly, I shall be most happy.  Pray come tomorrow, Monsieur 

Fauchery."



Lucy Stewart heard this invitation given while she was talking with 

Steiner and Blanche and, raising her voice, she remarked to the 

banker:



"It's a mania they've all of them got.  One of them even went so far 

as to steal my dog.  Now, dear boy, am I to blame if you chuck her?"



Rose turned round.  She was very pale and gazed fixedly at Steiner 

as she sipped her coffee.  And then all the concentrated anger she 

felt at his abandonment of her flamed out in her eyes.  She saw more 

clearly than Mignon; it was stupid in him to have wished to begin 

the Jonquier ruse a second time--those dodgers never succeeded twice 

running.  Well, so much the worse for him!  She would have Fauchery!  

She had been getting enamored of him since the beginning of supper, 

and if Mignon was not pleased it would teach him greater wisdom!



"You are not going to fight?" said Vandeuvres, coming over to Lucy 

Stewart.



"No, don't be afraid of that!  Only she must mind and keep quiet, or 

I let the cat out of the bag!"



Then signing imperiously to Fauchery:



"I've got your slippers at home, my little man.  I'll get them taken 

to your porter's lodge for you tomorrow."



He wanted to joke about it, but she swept off, looking like a queen.  

Clarisse, who had propped herself against a wall in order to drink a 

quiet glass of kirsch, was seen to shrug her shoulders.  A pleasant 

business for a man!  Wasn't it true that the moment two women were 

together in the presence of their lovers their first idea was to do 

one another out of them?  It was a law of nature!  As to herself, 

why, in heaven's name, if she had wanted to she would have torn out 

Gaga's eyes on Hector's account!  But la, she despised him!  Then as 

La Faloise passed by, she contented herself by remarking to him:



"Listen, my friend, you like 'em well advanced, you do!  You don't 

want 'em ripe; you want 'em mildewed!"



La Faloise seemed much annoyed and not a little anxious.  Seeing 

Clarisse making game of him, he grew suspicious of her.



"No humbug, I say," he muttered.  "You've taken my handkerchief.  

Well then, give it back!"



"He's dreeing us with that handkerchief of his!" she cried.  "Why, 

you ass, why should I have taken it from you?"



"Why should you?" he said suspiciously.  "Why, that you may send it 

to my people and compromise me."



In the meantime Foucarmont was diligently attacking the liqueurs.  

He continued to gaze sneeringly at Labordette, who was drinking his 

coffee in the midst of the ladies.  And occasionally he gave vent to 

fragmentary assertions, as thus: "He's the son of a horse dealer; 

some say the illegitimate child of a countess.  Never a penny of 

income, yet always got twenty-five louis in his pocket!  Footboy to 

the ladies of the town!  A big lubber, who never goes with any of 

'em!  Never, never, never!" he repeated, growing furious.  "No, by 

Jove!  I must box his ears."



He drained a glass of chartreuse.  The chartreuse had not the 

slightest effect upon him; it didn't affect him "even to that 

extent," and he clicked his thumbnail against the edge of his teeth.  

But suddenly, just as he was advancing upon Labordette, he grew ashy 

white and fell down in a heap in front of the sideboard.  He was 

dead drunk.  Louise Violaine was beside herself.  She had been quite 

right to prophesy that matters would end badly, and now she would 

have her work cut out for the remainder of the night.  Gaga 

reassured her.  She examined the officer with the eye of a woman of 

experience and declared that there was nothing much the matter and 

that the gentleman would sleep like that for at least a dozen or 

fifteen hours without any serious consequences.  Foucarmont was 

carried off.



"Well, where's Nana gone to?" asked Vandeuvres.



Yes, she had certainly flown away somewhere on leaving the table.  

The company suddenly recollected her, and everybody asked for her.  

Steiner, who for some seconds had been uneasy on her account, asked 

Vandeuvres about the old gentleman, for he, too, had disappeared.  

But the count reassured him--he had just brought the old gentleman 

back.  He was a stranger, whose name it was useless to mention.  

Suffice it to say that he was a very rich man who was quite pleased 

to pay for suppers!  Then as Nana was once more being forgotten, 

Vandeuvres saw Daguenet looking out of an open door and beckoning to 

him.  And in the bedroom he found the mistress of the house sitting 

up, white-lipped and rigid, while Daguenet and Georges stood gazing 

at her with an alarmed expression.



"What IS the matter with you?" he asked in some surprise.



She neither answered nor turned her head, and he repeated his 

question.



"Why, this is what's the matter with me," she cried out at length; 

"I won't let them make bloody sport of me!"



Thereupon she gave vent to any expression that occurred to her.  

Yes, oh yes, SHE wasn't a ninny--she could see clearly enough.  They 

had been making devilish light of her during supper and saying all 

sorts of frightful things to show that they thought nothing of her!  

A pack of sluts who weren't fit to black her boots!  Catch her 

bothering herself again just to be badgered for it after!  She 

really didn't know what kept her from chucking all that dirty lot 

out of the house!  And with this, rage choked her and her voice 

broke down in sobs.



"Come, come, my lass, you're drunk," said Vandeuvres, growing 

familiar.  "You must be reasonable."



No, she would give her refusal now; she would stay where she was.



"I am drunk--it's quite likely!  But I want people to respect me!"



For a quarter of an hour past Daguenet and Georges had been vainly 

beseeching her to return to the drawing room.  She was obstinate, 

however; her guests might do what they liked; she despised them too 

much to come back among them.



No, she never would, never.  They might tear her in pieces before 

she would leave her room!



"I ought to have had my suspicions," she resumed.



"It's that cat of a Rose who's got the plot up!  I'm certain Rose'll 

have stopped that respectable woman coming whom I was expecting 

tonight."



She referred to Mme Robert.  Vandeuvres gave her his word of honor 

that Mme Robert had given a spontaneous refusal.  He listened and he 

argued with much gravity, for he was well accustomed to similar 

scenes and knew how women in such a state ought to be treated.  But 

the moment he tried to take hold of her hands in order to lift her 

up from her chair and draw her away with him she struggled free of 

his clasp, and her wrath redoubled.  Now, just look at that!  They 

would never get her to believe that Fauchery had not put the Count 

Muffat off coming!  A regular snake was that Fauchery, an envious 

sort, a fellow capable of growing mad against a woman and of 

destroying her whole happiness.  For she knew this--the count had 

become madly devoted to her!  She could have had him!



"Him, my dear, never!" cried Vandeuvres, forgetting himself and 

laughing loud.



"Why not?" she asked, looking serious and slightly sobered.



"Because he's thoroughly in the hands of the priests, and if he were 

only to touch you with the tips of his fingers he would go and 

confess it the day after.  Now listen to a bit of good advice.  

Don't let the other man escape you!"



She was silent and thoughtful for a moment or two.  Then she got up 

and went and bathed her eyes.  Yet when they wanted to take her into 

the dining room she still shouted "No!" furiously.  Vandeuvres left 

the bedroom, smiling and without further pressing her, and the 

moment he was gone she had an access of melting tenderness, threw 

herself into Daguenet's arms and cried out:



"Ah, my sweetie, there's only you in the world.  I love you!  YES, I 

love you from the bottom of my heart!  Oh, it would be too nice if 

we could always live together.  My God!  How unfortunate women are!"



Then her eye fell upon Georges, who, seeing them kiss, was growing 

very red, and she kissed him too.  Sweetie could not be jealous of a 

baby!  She wanted Paul and Georges always to agree, because it would 

be so nice for them all three to stay like that, knowing all the 

time that they loved one another very much.  But an extraordinary 

noise disturbed them: someone was snoring in the room.  Whereupon 

after some searching they perceived Bordenave, who, since taking his 

coffee, must have comfortably installed himself there.  He was 

sleeping on two chairs, his head propped on the edge of the bed and 

his leg stretched out in front.  Nana thought him so funny with his 

open mouth and his nose moving with each successive snore that she 

was shaken with a mad fit of laughter.  She left the room, followed 

by Daguenet and Georges, crossed the dining room, entered the 

drawing room, her merriment increasing at every step.



"Oh, my dear, you've no idea!" she cried, almost throwing herself 

into Rose's arms.  "Come and see it."



All the women had to follow her.  She took their hands coaxingly and 

drew them along with her willy-nilly, accompanying her action with 

so frank an outburst of mirth that they all of them began laughing 

on trust.  The band vanished and returned after standing 

breathlessly for a second or two round Bordenave's lordly, 

outstretched form.  And then there was a burst of laughter, and when 

one of them told the rest to be quiet Bordenave's distant snorings 

became audible.



It was close on four o'clock.  In the dining room a card table had 

just been set out, at which Vandeuvres, Steiner, Mignon and 

Labordette had taken their seats.  Behind them Lucy and Caroline 

stood making bets, while Blanche, nodding with sleep and 

dissatisfied about her night, kept asking Vandeuvres at intervals of 

five minutes if they weren't going soon.  In the drawing room there 

was an attempt at dancing.  Daguenet was at the piano or "chest of 

drawers," as Nana called it.  She did not want a "thumper," for Mimi 

would play as many waltzes and polkas as the company desired.  But 

the dance was languishing, and the ladies were chatting drowsily 

together in the corners of sofas.  Suddenly, however, there was an 

outburst of noise.  A band of eleven young men had arrived and were 

laughing loudly in the anteroom and crowding to the drawing room.  

They had just come from the ball at the Ministry of the Interior and 

were in evening dress and wore various unknown orders.  Nana was 

annoyed at this riotous entry, called to the waiters who still 

remained in the kitchen and ordered them to throw these individuals 

out of doors.  She vowed that she had never seen any of them before.  

Fauchery, Labordette, Daguenet and the rest of the men had all come 

forward in order to enforce respectful behavior toward their 

hostess.  Big words flew about; arms were outstretched, and for some 

seconds a general exchange of fisticuffs was imminent.  

Notwithstanding this, however, a little sickly looking light-haired 

man kept insistently repeating:



"Come, come, Nana, you saw us the other evening at Peters' in the 

great red saloon!  Pray remember, you invited us."



The other evening at Peters'?  She did not remember it all.  To 

begin with, what evening?



And when the little light-haired man had mentioned the day, which 

was Wednesday, she distinctly remembered having supped at Peters' on 

the Wednesday, but she had given no invitation to anyone; she was 

almost sure of that.



"However, suppose you HAVE invited them, my good girl," murmured 

Labordette, who was beginning to have his doubts.  "Perhaps you were 

a little elevated."



Then Nana fell a-laughing.  It was quite possible; she really didn't 

know.  So then, since these gentlemen were on the spot, they had her 

leave to come in.  Everything was quietly arranged; several of the 

newcomers found friends in the drawing room, and the scene ended in 

handshakings.  The little sickly looking light-haired man bore one 

of the greatest names in France.  Furthermore, the eleven announced 

that others were to follow them, and, in fact, the door opened every 

few moments, and men in white gloves and official garb presented 

themselves.  They were still coming from the ball at the Ministry.  

Fauchery jestingly inquired whether the minister was not coming, 

too, but Nana answered in a huff that the minister went to the 

houses of people she didn't care a pin for.  What she did not say 

was that she was possessed with a hope of seeing Count Muffat enter 

her room among all that stream of people.  He might quite have 

reconsidered his decision, and so while talking to Rose she kept a 

sharp eye on the door.



Five o'clock struck.  The dancing had ceased, and the cardplayers 

alone persisted in their game.  Labordette had vacated his seat, and 

the women had returned into the drawing room.  The air there was 

heavy with the somnolence which accompanies a long vigil, and the 

lamps cast a wavering light while their burned-out wicks glowed red 

within their globes.  The ladies had reached that vaguely melancholy 

hour when they felt it necessary to tell each other their histories.  

Blanche de Sivry spoke of her grandfather, the general, while 

Clarisse invented a romantic story about a duke seducing her at her 

uncle's house, whither he used to come for the boar hunting.  Both 

women, looking different ways, kept shrugging their shoulders and 

asking themselves how the deuce the other could tell such whoppers!  

As to Lucy Stewart, she quietly confessed to her origin and of her 

own accord spoke of her childhood and of the days when her father, 

the wheel greaser at the Northern Railway Terminus, used to treat 

her to an apple puff on Sundays.



"Oh, I must tell you about it!" cried the little Maria Blond 

abruptly.  "Opposite to me there lives a gentleman, a Russian, an 

awfully rich man!  Well, just fancy, yesterday I received a basket 

of fruit--oh, it just was a basket!  Enormous peaches, grapes as big 

as that, simply wonderful for the time of year!  And in the middle 

of them six thousand-franc notes!  It was the Russian's doing.  Of 

course I sent the whole thing back again, but I must say my heart 

ached a little--when I thought of the fruit!"



The ladies looked at one another and pursed up their lips.  At her 

age little Maria Blond had a pretty cheek!  Besides, to think that 

such things should happen to trollops like her!  Infinite was their 

contempt for her among themselves.  It was Lucy of whom they were 

particularly jealous, for they were beside themselves at the thought 

of her three princes.  Since Lucy had begnn taking a daily morning 

ride in the Bois they all had become Amazons, as though a mania 

possessed them.



Day was about to dawn, and Nana turned her eyes away from the door, 

for she was relinquishing all hope.  The company were bored to 

distraction.  Rose Mignon had refused to sing the "Slipper" and sat 

huddled up on a sofa, chatting in a low voice with Fauchery and 

waiting for Mignon, who had by now won some fifty louis from 

Vandeuvres.  A fat gentleman with a decoration and a serious cast of 

countenance had certainly given a recitation in Alsatian accents of 

"Abraham's Sacrifice," a piece in which the Almighty says, "By My 

blasted Name" when He swears, and Isaac always answers with a "Yes, 

Papa!"  Nobody, however, understood what it was all about, and the 

piece had been voted stupid.  People were at their wits' end how to 

make merry and to finish the night with fitting hilarity.  For a 

moment or two Labordette conceived the idea of denouncing different 

women in a whisper to La Faloise, who still went prowling round each 

individual lady, looking to see if she were hiding his handkerchief 

in her bosom.  Soon, as there were still some bottles of champagne 

on the sideboard, the young men again fell to drinking.  They 

shouted to one another; they stirred each other up, but a dreary 

species of intoxication, which was stupid enough to drive one to 

despair, began to overcome the company beyond hope of recovery.  

Then the little fair-haired fellow, the man who bore one of the 

greatest names in France and had reached his wit's end and was 

desperate at the thought that he could not hit upon something really 

funny, conceived a brilliant notion: he snatched up his bottle of 

champagne and poured its contents into the piano.  His allies were 

convulsed with laughter.



"La now!  Why's he putting champagne into the piano?" asked Tatan 

Nene in great astonishment as she caught sight of him.



"What, my lass, you don't know why he's doing that?" replied 

Labordette solemnly.  "There's nothing so good as champagne for 

pianos.  It gives 'em tone."



"Ah," murmured Tatan Nene with conviction.



And when the rest began laughing at her she grew angry.  How should 

she know?  They were always confusing her.



Decidedly the evening was becoming a big failure.  The night 

threatened to end in the unloveliest way.  In a corner by themselves 

Maria Blond and Lea de Horn had begun squabbling at close quarters, 

the former accusing the latter of consorting with people of 

insufficient wealth.  They were getting vastly abusive over it, 

their chief stumbling block being the good looks of the men in 

question.  Lucy, who was plain, got them to hold their tongues.  

Good looks were nothing, according to her; good figures were what 

was wanted.  Farther off, on a sofa, an attache had slipped his arm 

round Simonne's waist and was trying to kiss her neck, but Simonne, 

sullen and thoroughly out of sorts, pushed him away at every fresh 

attempt with cries of "You're pestering me!" and sound slaps of the 

fan across his face.  For the matter of that, not one of the ladies 

allowed herself to be touched.  Did people take them for light 

women?  Gaga, in the meantime, had once more caught La Faloise and 

had almost hoisted him upon her knees while Clarisse was 

disappearing from view between two gentlemen, shaking with nervous 

laughter as women will when they are tickled.  Round about the piano 

they were still busy with their little game, for they were suffering 

from a fit of stupid imbecillty, which caused each man to jostle his 

fellow in his frantic desire to empty his bottle into the 

instrument.  It was a simple process and a charming one.



"Now then, old boy, drink a glass!  Devil take it, he's a thirsty 

piano!  Hi!  'Tenshun!  Here's another bottle!  You mustn't lose a 

drop!"



Nana's back was turned, and she did not see them.  Emphatically she 

was now falling back on the bulky Steiner, who was seated next to 

her.  So much the worse!  It was all on account of that Muffat, who 

had refused what was offered him.  Sitting there in her white 

foulard dress, which was as light and full of folds as a shift, 

sitting there with drooped eyelids and cheeks pale with the touch of 

intoxication from which she was suffering, she offered herself to 

him with that quiet expression which is peculiar to a good-natured 

courtesan.  The roses in her hair and at her throat had lost their 

leaves, and their stalks alone remained.  Presently Steiner withdrew 

his hand quickly from the folds of her skirt, where he had come in 

contact with the pins that Georges had stuck there.  Some drops of 

blood appeared on his fingers, and one fell on Nana's dress and 

stained it.



"Now the bargain's struck," said Nana gravely.



The day was breaking apace.  An uncertain glimmer of light, fraught 

with a poignant melancholy, came stealing through the windows.  And 

with that the guests began to take their departure.  It was a most 

sour and uncomfortable retreat.  Caroline Hequet, annoyed at the 

loss of her night, announced that it was high time to be off unless 

you were anxious to assist at some pretty scenes.  Rose pouted as if 

her womanly character had been compromised.  It was always so with 

these girls; they didn't know how to behave and were guilty of 

disgusting conduct when they made their first appearance in society!  

And Mignon having cleaned Vandeuvres out completely, the family took 

their departure.  They did not trouble about Steiner but renewed 

their invitation for tomorrow to Fauchery.  Lucy thereupon refused 

the journalist's escort home and sent him back shrilly to his 

"strolling actress."  At this Rose turned round immediately and 

hissed out a "Dirty sow" by way of answer.  But Mignon, who in 

feminine quarrels was always paternal, for his experience was a long 

one and rendered him superior to them, had already pushed her out of 

the house, telling her at the same time to have done.  Lucy came 

downstairs in solitary state behind them.  After which Gaga had to 

carry off La Faloise, ill, sobbing like a child, calling after 

Clarisse, who had long since gone off with her two gentlemen.  

Simonne, too, had vanished.  Indeed, none remained save Tatan, Lea 

and Maria, whom Labordette complaisantly took under his charge.



"Oh, but I don't the least bit want to go to bed!" said Nana.  "One 

ought to find something to do."



She looked at the sky through the windowpanes.  It was a livid sky, 

and sooty clouds were scudding across it.  It was six o'clock in the 

morning.  Over the way, on the opposite side of the Boulevard 

Haussmann, the glistening roofs of the still-slumbering houses were 

sharply outlined against the twilight sky while along the deserted 

roadway a gang of street sweepers passed with a clatter of wooden 

shoes.  As she viewed Paris thus grimly awakening, she was overcome 

by tender, girlish feelings, by a yearning for the country, for 

idyllic scenes, for things soft and white.



"Now guess what you're to do," she said, coming back to Steiner.  

"You're going to take me to the Bois de Boulogne, and we'll drink 

milk there."



She clapped her hands in childish glee.  Without waiting for the 

banker's reply--he naturally consented, though he was really rather 

bored and inclined to think of other things--she ran off to throw a 

pelisse over her shoulders.  In the drawing room there was now no 

one with Steiner save the band of young men.  These had by this time 

dropped the very dregs of their glasses into the piano and were 

talking of going, when one of their number ran in triumphantly.  He 

held in his hands a last remaining bottle, which he had brought back 

with him from the pantry.



"Wait a minute, wait a minute!" he shouted.  "Here's a bottle of 

chartreuse; that'll pick him up!  And now, my young friends, let's 

hook it.  We're blooming idiots."



In the dressing room Nana was compelled to wake up Zoe, who had 

dozed off on a chair.  The gas was still alight, and Zoe shivered as 

she helped her mistress on with her hat and pelisse.



"Well, it's over; I've done what you wanted me to," said Nana, 

speaking familiarly to the maid in a sudden burst of expansive 

confidence and much relieved at the thought that she had at last 

made her election.  "You were quite right; the banker's as good as 

another."



The maid was cross, for she was still heavy with sleep.  She 

grumbled something to the effect that Madame ought to have come to a 

decision the first evening.  Then following her into the bedroom, 

she asked what she was going to do with "those two," meaning 

Bordenave, who was snoring away as usual, and Georges, who had 

slipped in slyly, buried his head in a pillow and, finally falling 

asleep there, was now breathing as lightly and regularly as a 

cherub.  Nana in reply told her that she was to let them sleep on.  

But seeing Daguenet come into the room, she again grew tender.  He 

had been watching her from the kitchen and was looking very 

wretched.



"Come, my sweetie, be reasonable," she said, taking him in her arms 

and kissing him with all sorts of little wheedling caresses.  

"Nothing's changed; you know that it's sweetie whom I always adore!  

Eh, dear?  I had to do it.  Why, I swear to you we shall have even 

nicer times now.  Come tomorrow, and we'll arrange about hours.  Now 

be quick, kiss and hug me as you love me.  Oh, tighter, tighter than 

that!"



And she escaped and rejoined Steiner, feeling happy and once more 

possessed with the idea of drinking milk.  In the empty room the 

Count de Vandeuvres was left alone with the "decorated" man who had 

recited "Abraham's Sacrifice."  Both seemed glued to the card table; 

they had lost count of their whereabouts and never once noticed the 

broad light of day without, while Blanche had made bold to put her 

feet up on a sofa in order to try and get a little sleep.



"Oh, Blanche is with them!" cried Nana.  "We are going to drink 

milk, dear.  Do come; you'll find Vandeuvres here when we return."



Blanche got up lazily.  This time the banker's fiery face grew white 

with annoyance at the idea of having to take that big wench with him 

too.  She was certain to bore him.  But the two women had already 

got him by the arms and were reiterating:



"We want them to milk the cow before our eyes, you know."

