





BOOK II.



CHAPTER I



DESCRIBES THE DESERT ISLAND TO WHICH PAUL WAS DRIFTED.



"Room to let for a single gentleman."  Sometimes in an idle hour,

impelled by foolishness, I will knock at the door.  It is opened after

a longer or shorter interval by the "slavey"--in the morning,

slatternly, her arms concealed beneath her apron; in the afternoon,

smart in dirty cap and apron.  How well I know her!  Unchanged, not

grown an inch--her round bewildered eyes, her open mouth, her touzled

hair, her scored red hands.  With an effort I refrain from muttering:

"So sorry, forgot my key," from pushing past her and mounting two at a

time the narrow stairs, carpeted to the first floor, but bare beyond.

Instead, I say, "Oh, what rooms have you to let?" when, scuttling to

the top of the kitchen stairs, she will call over the banisters:  "A

gentleman to see the rooms."  There comes up, panting, a

harassed-looking, elderly female, but genteel in black.  She crushes

past the little "slavey," and approaching, eyes me critically.



"I have a very nice room on the first floor," she informs me, "and one

behind on the third."



I agree to see them, explaining that I am seeking them for a young

friend of mine.  We squeeze past the hat and umbrella stand:  there is

just room, but one must keep close to the wall.  The first floor is

rather an imposing apartment, with a marble-topped sideboard measuring

quite three feet by two, the doors of which will remain closed if you

introduce a wad of paper between them.  A green table-cloth, matching

the curtains, covers the loo-table.  The lamp is perfectly safe so

long as it stands in the exact centre of the table, but should not be

shifted.  A paper fire-stove ornament in some mysterious way bestows

upon the room an air of chastity.  Above the mantelpiece is a

fly-blown mirror, between the once gilt frame and glass of which can

be inserted invitation cards; indeed, one or two so remain, proving

that the tenants even of "bed-sitting-rooms" are not excluded from

social delights.  The wall opposite is adorned by an oleograph of the

kind Cheap Jacks sell by auction on Saturday nights in the Pimlico

Road, and warrant as "hand-made."  Generally speaking, it is a Swiss

landscape.  There appears to be more "body" in a Swiss landscape than

in scenes from less favoured localities.  A dilapidated mill, a

foaming torrent, a mountain, a maiden and a cow can at the least be

relied upon.  An easy chair (I disclaim all responsibility for the

adjective), stuffed with many coils of steel wire, each possessing a

"business end" in admirable working order, and covered with horsehair,

highly glazed, awaits the uninitiated.  There is one way of sitting

upon it, and only one:  by using the extreme edge, and planting your

feet firmly on the floor.  If you attempt to lean back in it you

inevitably slide out of it.  When so treated it seems to say to you:

"Excuse me, you are very heavy, and you would really be much more

comfortable upon the floor.  Thank you so much."  The bed is behind

the door, and the washstand behind the bed.  If you sit facing the

window you can forget the bed.  On the other hand, if more than one

friend come to call on you, you are glad of it.  As a matter of fact,

experienced visitors prefer it--make straight for it, refusing with

firmness to exchange it for the easy chair.



"And this room is?"



"Eight shillings a week, sir--with attendance, of course."



"Any extras?"



"The lamp, sir, is eighteenpence a week; and the kitchen fire, if the

gentleman wishes to dine at home, two shillings."



"And fire?"



"Sixpence a scuttle, sir, I charge for coals."



"It's rather a small scuttle."



The landlady bridles a little.  "The usual size, I think, sir."  One

presumes there is a special size in coal-scuttles made exclusively for

lodging-house keepers.



I agree that while I am about it I may as well see the other room, the

third floor back.  The landlady opens the door for me, but remains

herself on the landing.  She is a stout lady, and does not wish to

dwarf the apartment by comparison.  The arrangement here does not

allow of your ignoring the bed.  It is the life and soul of the room,

and it declines to efface itself.  Its only possible rival is the

washstand, straw-coloured; with staring white basin and jug, together

with other appurtenances.  It glares defiantly from its corner.  "I

know I'm small," it seems to say; "but I'm very useful; and I won't be

ignored."  The remaining furniture consists of a couple of

chairs--there is no hypocrisy about them:  they are not easy and they

do not pretend to be easy; a small chest of light-painted drawers

before the window, with white china handles, upon which is a tiny

looking-glass; and, occupying the entire remaining space, after

allowing three square feet for the tenant, when he arrives, an

attenuated four-legged table apparently home-made.  The only ornament

in the room is, suspended above the fireplace, a funeral card, framed

in beer corks.  As the corpse introduced by the ancient Egyptians into

their banquets, it is hung there perhaps to remind the occupant of the

apartment that the luxuries and allurements of life have their end; or

maybe it consoles him in despondent moments with the reflection that

after all he might be worse off.



The rent of this room is three-and-sixpence a week, also including

attendance; lamp, as for the first floor, eighteen-pence; but kitchen

fire a shilling.



"But why should kitchen fire for the first floor be two shillings, and

for this only one?"



"Well, as a rule, sir, the first floor wants more cooking done."



You are quite right, my dear lady, I was forgetting.  The gentleman in

the third floor back! cooking for him is not a great tax upon the

kitchen fire.  His breakfast, it is what, madam, we call plain, I

think.  His lunch he takes out.  You may see him, walking round the

quiet square, up and down the narrow street that, leading to nowhere

in particular, is between twelve and two somewhat deserted.  He

carries a paper bag, into which at intervals, when he is sure nobody

is looking, his mouth disappears.  From studying the neighbourhood one

can guess what it contains.  Saveloys hereabouts are plentiful and

only twopence each.  There are pie shops, where meat pies are twopence

and fruit pies a penny.  The lady behind the counter, using deftly a

broad, flat knife, lifts the little dainty with one twist clean from

its tiny dish:  it is marvellous, having regard to the thinness of the

pastry, that she never breaks one.  Roley-poley pudding, sweet and

wonderfully satisfying, more especially when cold, is but a penny a

slice.  Peas pudding, though this is an awkward thing to eat out of a

bag, is comforting upon cold days.  Then with his tea he takes two

eggs or a haddock, the fourpenny size; maybe on rare occasions, a chop

or steak; and you fry it for him, madam, though every time he urges on

you how much he would prefer it grilled, for fried in your one

frying-pan its flavour becomes somewhat confused.  But maybe this is

the better for him, for, shutting his eyes and trusting only to smell

and flavour, he can imagine himself enjoying variety.  He can begin

with herrings, pass on to liver and bacon, opening his eyes again for

a moment perceive that he has now arrived at the joint, and closing

them again, wind up with distinct suggestion of toasted cheese, thus

avoiding monotony.  For dinner he goes out again.  Maybe he is not

hungry, late meals are a mistake; or, maybe, putting his hand into his

pocket and making calculations beneath a lamp-post, appetite may come

to him.  Then there are places cheerful with the sound of frizzling

fat, where fried plaice brown and odorous may be had for three

halfpence, and a handful of sliced potatoes for a penny; where for

fourpence succulent stewed eels may be discussed; vinegar ad lib.; or

for sevenpence--but these are red-letter evenings--half a sheep's head

may be indulged in, which is a supper fit for any king, who happened

to be hungry.



I explain that I will discuss the matter with my young friend when he

arrives.  The landlady says, "Certainly, sir:"  she is used to what

she calls the "wandering Christian;" and easing my conscience by

slipping a shilling into the "slavey's" astonished, lukewarm hand, I

pass out again into the long, dreary street, now echoing maybe to the

sad cry of "Muffins!"



Or sometimes of an evening, the lamp lighted, the remnants of the meat

tea cleared away, the flickering firelight cosifying the dingy rooms,

I go a-visiting.  There is no need for me to ring the bell, to mount

the stairs.  Through the thin transparent walls I can see you plainly,

old friends of mine, fashions a little changed, that is all.  We wore

bell-shaped trousers; eight-and-six to measure, seven-and-six if from

stock; fastened our neckties in dashing style with a horseshoe pin.  I

think in the matter of waistcoats we had the advantage of you; ours

were gayer, braver.  Our cuffs and collars were of paper:  sixpence-

halfpenny the dozen, three-halfpence the pair.  On Sunday they were

white and glistening; on Monday less aggressively obvious; on Tuesday

morning decidedly dappled.  But on Tuesday evening, when with natty

cane, or umbrella neatly rolled in patent leather case, we took our

promenade down Oxford Street--fashionable hour nine to ten p.m.--we

could shoot our arms and cock our chins with the best.  Your

india-rubber linen has its advantages.  Storm does not wither it; it

braves better the heat and turmoil of the day.  The passing of a

sponge! and your "Dicky" is itself again.  We had to use bread-crumbs,

and so sacrifice the glaze.  Yet I cannot help thinking that for the

first few hours, at all events, our paper was more dazzling.



For the rest I see no change in you, old friends.  I wave you greeting

from the misty street.  God rest you, gallant gentlemen, lonely and

friendless and despised; making the best of joyless lives; keeping

yourselves genteel on twelve, fifteen, or eighteen (ah, but you are

plutocrats!) shillings a week; saving something even of that, maybe,

to help the old mother in the country, so proud of her "gentleman" son

who has book learning and who is "something in the City."  May nothing

you dismay.  Bullied, and badgered, and baited from nine to six though

you may be, from then till bedtime you are rorty young dogs.  The

half-guinea topper, "as worn by the Prince of Wales" (ah, how many a

meal has it not cost!), warmed before the fire, brushed and polished

and coaxed, shines resplendent.  The second pair of trousers are drawn

from beneath the bed; in the gaslight, with well-marked crease from

top to toe, they will pass for new.  A pleasant evening to you!  May

your cheap necktie make all the impression your soul can desire!  May

your penny cigar be mistaken for Havana!  May the barmaid charm your

simple heart by addressing you as "Baby!"  May some sweet shop-girl

throw a kindly glance at you, inviting you to walk with her!  May she

snigger at your humour; may other dogs cast envious looks at you, and

may no harm come of it!



You dreamers of dreams, you who while your companions play and sleep

will toil upward in the night!  You have read Mr. Smiles' "Self-Help,"

Longfellow's "Psalm of Life," and so strengthened attack with

confidence "French Without a Master," "Bookkeeping in Six Lessons."

With a sigh to yourselves you turn aside from the alluring streets,

from the bright, bewitching eyes, into the stuffy air of Birkbeck

Institutions, Polytechnic Schools.  May success compensate you for

your youth devoid of pleasure!  May the partner's chair you seen in

visions be yours before the end!  May you live one day in Clapham in a

twelve-roomed house!



And, after all, we have our moments, have we not?  The Saturday night

at the play.  The hours of waiting, they are short.  We converse with

kindred souls of the British Drama, its past and future:  we have our

views.  We dream of Florence This, Kate That; in a little while we

shall see her.  Ah, could she but know how we loved her!  Her photo is

on our mantelpiece, transforming the dismal little room into a shrine.

The poem we have so often commenced! when it is finished we will post

it to her.  At least she will acknowledge its receipt; we can kiss the

paper her hand has rested on.  The great doors groan, then quiver.

Ah, the wild thrill of that moment!  Now push for all you are worth:

charge, wriggle, squirm!  It is an epitome of life.  We are

through--collarless, panting, pummelled from top to toe:  but what of

that?  Upward, still upward; then downward with leaps at risk of our

neck, from bench to bench through the gloom.  We have gained the front

row!  Would we exchange sensations with the stallite, strolling

languidly to his seat?  The extravagant dinner once a week!  We

banquet _a la Francais_, in Soho, for one-and-six, including wine.

Does Tortoni ever give his customers a repast they enjoy more?  I trow

not.



My first lodging was an attic in a square the other side of

Blackfriars Bridge.  The rent of the room, if I remember rightly, was

three shillings a week with cooking, half-a-crown without.  I

purchased a methylated spirit stove with kettle and frying-pan, and

took it without.



Old Hasluck would have helped me willingly, and there were others to

whom I might have appealed, but a boy's pride held me back.  I would

make my way alone, win my place in the world by myself.  To Hal,

knowing he would sympathise with me, I confided the truth.



"Had your mother lived," he told me, "I should have had something to

say on the subject.  Of course, I knew what had happened, but as it

is--well, you need not be afraid, I shall not offer you help; indeed,

I should refuse it were you to ask.  Put your Carlyle in your pocket:

he is not all voices, but he is the best maker of men I know.  The

great thing to learn of life is not to be afraid of it."



"Look me up now and then," he added, "and we'll talk about the stars,

the future of Socialism, and the Woman Question--anything you like

except about yourself and your twopenny-half-penny affairs."



From another it would have sounded brutal, but I understood him.  And

so we shook hands and parted for longer than either of us at the time

expected.  The Franco-German War broke out a few weeks later on, and

Hal, the love of adventure always strong within him, volunteered his

services, which were accepted.  It was some years before we met again.



On the door-post of a house in Farringdon Street, not far from the

Circus, stood in those days a small brass plate, announcing that the

"Ludgate News Rooms" occupied the third and fourth floors, and that

the admission to the same was one penny.  We were a seedy company that

every morning crowded into these rooms:  clerks, shopmen, superior

artisans, travellers, warehousemen--all of us out of work.  Most of us

were young, but with us was mingled a sprinkling of elder men, and

these latter were always the saddest and most silent of this little

whispering army of the down-at-heel.  Roughly speaking, we were

divided into two groups:  the newcomers, cheery, confident.  These

would flit from newspaper to newspaper with buzz of pleasant

anticipation, select their advertisement as one choosing some dainty

out of a rich and varied menu card, and replying to it as one

conferring favour.



"Dear Sir,--in reply to your advertisement in to-day's _Standard_, I

shall be pleased to accept the post vacant in your office.  I am of

good appearance and address.  I am an excellent--"  It was really

marvellous the quality and number of our attainments.  French! we

wrote and spoke it fluently, _a la Ahn_.  German! of this we possessed

a slighter knowledge, it was true, but sufficient for mere purposes of

commerce.  Bookkeeping! arithmetic! geometry! we played with them.

The love of work! it was a passion with us.  Our moral character! it

would have adorned a Free Kirk Elder.  "I could call on you to-morrow

or Friday between eleven and one, or on Saturday any time up till two.

Salary required, two guineas a week.  An early answer will oblige.

Yours truly."



The old stagers did not buzz.  Hour after hour they sat writing,

steadily, methodically, with day by day less hope and heavier fears:



"Sir,-Your advt. in to-day's _D. T._  I am--" of such and such an age.

List of qualifications less lengthy, set forth with more modesty;

object desired being air of verisimilitude.--"If you decide to engage

me I will endeavour to give you every satisfaction.  Any time you like

to appoint I will call on you.  I should not ask a high salary to

start with.  Yours obediently."



Dozens of the first letter, hundreds of the second, I wrote with

painful care, pen carefully chosen, the one-inch margin down the left

hand side of the paper first portioned off with dots.  To three or

four I received a curt reply, instructing me to call.  But the shyness

that had stood so in my way during the earlier half of my school days

had now, I know not why, returned upon me, hampering me at every turn.

A shy child grown-up folks at all events can understand and forgive;

but a shy young man is not unnaturally regarded as a fool.  I gave the

impression of being awkward, stupid, sulky.  The more I strove against

my temperament the worse I became.  My attempts to be at my ease, to

assert myself, resulted--I could see it myself--only in rudeness.



"Well, I have got to see one or two others.  We will write and let you

know," was the conclusion of each interview, and the end, as far as I

was concerned, of the enterprise.



My few pounds, guard them how I would, were dwindling rapidly.

Looking back, it is easy enough to regard one's early struggles from a

humorous point of view.  One knows the story, it all ended happily.

But at the time there is no means of telling whether one's biography

is going to be comedy or tragedy.  There were moments when I felt

confident it was going to be the latter.  Occasionally, when one is

feeling well, it is not unpleasant to contemplate with pathetic

sympathy one's own death-bed.  One thinks of the friends and relations

who at last will understand and regret one, be sorry they had not

behaved themselves better.  But myself, there was no one to regret.  I

felt very small, very helpless.  The world was big.  I feared it might

walk over me, trample me down, never seeing me.  I seemed unable to

attract its attention.



One morning I found waiting for me at the Reading Room another of the

usual missives.  It ran:  "Will Mr. P. Kelver call at the above

address to-morrow morning between ten-thirty and eleven.  The paper

was headed:  "Lott and Co., Indian Commission Agents, Aldersgate

Street."  Without much hope I returned to my lodgings, changed my

clothes, donned my silk hat, took my one pair of gloves, drew its silk

case over my holey umbrella; and so equipped for fight with Fate made

my way to Aldersgate Street.  For a quarter of an hour or so, being

too soon, I walked up and down the pavement outside the house, gazing

at the second-floor windows, behind which, so the door-plate had

informed me, were the offices of Lott & Co.  I could not recall their

advertisement, nor my reply to it.  The firm was evidently not in a

very flourishing condition.  I wondered idly what salary they would

offer.  For a moment I dreamt of a Cheeryble Brother asking me kindly

if I thought I could do with thirty shillings a week as a beginning;

but the next I recalled my usual fate, and considered whether it was

even worth while to climb the stairs, go through what to me was a

painful ordeal, merely to be impressed again with the sense of my own

worthlessness.



A fine rain began to fall.  I did not wish to unroll my umbrella, yet

felt nervous for my hat.  It was five minutes to the half hour.

Listlessly I crossed the road and mounted the bare stairs to the

second floor.  Two doors faced me, one marked "Private."  I tapped

lightly at the second.  Not hearing any response, after a second or

two I tapped again.  A sound reached me, but it was unintelligible.  I

knocked yet again, still louder.  This time I heard a reply in a

shrill, plaintive tone:



"Oh, do come in."



The tone was one of pathetic entreaty.  I turned the handle and

entered.  It was a small room, dimly lighted by a dirty window, the

bottom half of which was rendered opaque by tissue paper pasted to its

panes.  The place suggested a village shop rather than an office.

Pots of jam, jars of pickles, bottles of wine, biscuit tins, parcels

of drapery, boxes of candles, bars of soap, boots, packets of

stationery, boxes of cigars, tinned provisions, guns,

cartridges--things sufficient to furnish a desert island littered

every available corner.  At a small desk under the window sat a youth

with a remarkably small body and a remarkably large head; so

disproportionate were the two I should hardly have been surprised had

he put up his hands and taken it off.  Half in the room and half out,

I paused.



"Is this Lott & Co.?" I enquired.



"No," he answered; "it's a room."  One eye was fixed upon me, dull and

glassy; it never blinked, it never wavered.  With the help of the

other he continued his writing.



"I mean," I explained, coming entirely into the room, "are these the

offices of Lott & Co.?"



"It's one of them," he replied; "the back one.  If you're really

anxious for a job, you can shut the door."



I complied with his suggestion, and then announced that I was Mr.

Kelver--Mr. Paul Kelver.



"Minikin's my name," he returned, "Sylvanus Minikin.  You don't happen

by any chance to know what you've come for, I suppose?"



Looking at his body, my inclination was to pick my way among the goods

that covered the floor and pull his ears for him.  From his grave and

massive face, he might, for all I knew, be the head clerk.



"I have called to see Mr. Lott," I replied, with dignity; "I have an

appointment."  I produced the letter from my pocket, and leaning

across a sewing-machine, I handed it to him for his inspection.

Having read it, he suddenly took from its socket the eye with which he

had been hitherto regarding me, and proceeding to polish it upon his

pocket handkerchief, turned upon me his other.  Having satisfied

himself, he handed me back my letter.



"Want my advice?" he asked.



I thought it might be useful to me, so replied in the affirmative.



"Hook it," was his curt counsel.



"Why?" I asked.  "Isn't he a good employer?"



Replacing his glass eye, he turned again to his work.  "If employment

is what you want," answered Mr. Minikin, "you'll get it.  Best

employer in London.  He'll keep you going for twenty-four hours a day,

and then offer you overtime at half salary."



"I must get something to do," I confessed.



"Sit down then," suggested Mr. Minikin.  "Rest while you can."



I took the chair; it was the only chair in the room, with the

exception of the one Minikin was sitting on.



"Apart from his being a bit of a driver," I asked, "what sort of a man

is he?  Is he pleasant?"



"Never saw him put out but once," answered Minikin.



It sounded well.  "When was that?" I asked.



"All the time I've known him."



My spirits continued to sink.  Had I been left alone with Minikin much

longer, I might have ended by following his advice, "hooking it"

before Mr. Lott arrived.  But the next moment I heard the other door

open, and some one entered the private office.  Then the bell rang,

and Minikin disappeared, leaving the communicating door ajar behind

him.  The conversation that I overheard was as follows:



"Why isn't Mr. Skeat here?"



"Because he hasn't come."



"Where are the letters?"



"Under your nose."



"How dare you answer me like that?"



"Well, it's the truth.  They are under your nose."



"Did you give Thorneycroft's man my message?"



"Yes."



"What did he answer?"



"Said you were a liar."



"Oh, he did, did he!  What did you reply?"



"Asked him to tell me something I didn't know."



"Thought that clever, didn't you?"



"Not bad."



Whatever faults might be laid to Mr. Lott's door, he at least, I

concluded, possesssed the virtue of self-control.



"Anybody been here?"



"Yes."



"Who?"



"Mr. Kelver--Mr. Paul Kelver."



"Kelver, Kelver.  Who's Kelver?"



"Know what he is--a fool."



"What do you mean?"



"He's come after the place."



"Is he there?"



"Yes."



"What's he like?"



"Not bad looking; fair--"



"Idiot!  I mean is he smart?"



"Just at present--got all his Sunday clothes on."



"Send him in to me.  Don't go, don't go."



"How can I send him in to you if I don't go?"



"Take these.  Have you finished those bills of lading?"



"No."



"Good God! when will you have finished them?"



"Half an hour after I have begun them."



"Get out, get out!  Has that door been open all the time?"



"Well, I don't suppose it's opened itself."



Minikin re-entered with papers in his hand.  "In you go," he said.

"Heaven help you!"  And I passed in and closed the door behind me.



The room was a replica of the one I had just left.  If possible, it

was more crowded, more packed with miscellaneous articles.  I picked

my way through these and approached the desk.  Mr. Lott was a small,

dingy-looking man, with very dirty hands, and small, restless eyes.  I

was glad that he was not imposing, or my shyness might have descended

upon me; as it was, I felt better able to do myself justice.  At once

he plunged into the business by seizing and waving in front of my eyes

a bulky bundle of letters tied together with red tape.



"One hundred and seventeen answers to an advertisement," he cried with

evident satisfaction, "in one day!  That shows you the state of the

labour market!"



I agreed it was appalling.



"Poor devils, poor devils!" murmured Mr. Lott "what will become of

them?  Some of them will starve.  Terrible death, starvation, Kelver;

takes such a long time--especially when you're young."



Here also I found myself in accord with him.



"Living with your parents?"



I explained to him my situation.



"Any friends?"



I informed him I was entirely dependent upon my own efforts.



"Any money?  Anything coming in?"



I told him I had a few pounds still remaining to me, but that after

that was gone I should be penniless.



"And to think, Kelver, that there are hundreds, thousands of young

fellows precisely in your position!  How sad, how very sad!  How long

have you been looking for a berth?"



"A month," I answered him.



"I thought as much.  Do you know why I selected your letter out of the

whole batch?"



I replied I hoped it was because he judged from it I should prove

satisfactory.



"Because it's the worst written of them all."  He pushed it across to

me.  "Look at it.  Awful, isn't it?"



I admitted that handwriting was not my strong point.



"Nor spelling either," he added, and with truth.  "Who do you think

will engage you if I don't?"



"Nobody," he continued, without waiting for me to reply.  "A month

hence you will still be looking for a berth, and a month after that.

Now, I'm going to do you a good turn; save you from destitution; give

you a start in life."



I expressed my gratitude.



He waived it aside.  "That is my notion of philanthropy:  help those

that nobody else will help.  That young fellow in the other room--he

isn't a bad worker, he's smart, but he's impertinent."



I murmured that I had gathered so much.



"Doesn't mean to be, can't help it.  Noticed his trick of looking at

you with his glass eye, keeping the other turned away from you?"



I replied that I had.



"Always does it.  Used to irritate his last employer to madness.  Said

to him one day:  'Do turn that signal lamp of yours off, Minikin, and

look at me with your real eye.'  What do you think he answered?  That

it was the only one he'd got, and that he didn't want to expose it to

shocks.  Wouldn't have mattered so much if it hadn't been one of the

ugliest men in London."



I murmured my indignation.



"I put up with him.  Nobody else would.  The poor fellow must live."



I expressed admiration at Mr. Lott's humanity.



"You don't mind work?  You're not one of those good-for-nothings who

sleep all day and wake up when it's time to go home?"



I assured him that in whatever else I might fail I could promise him

industry.



"With some of them," complained Mr. Lott, in a tone of bitterness,

"it's nothing but play, girls, gadding about the streets.  Work,

business--oh, no.  I may go bankrupt; my wife and children may go into

the workhouse.  No thought for me, the man that keeps them, feeds

them, clothes them.  How much salary do you want?"



I hesitated.  I gathered this was not a Cheeryble Brother; it would be

necessary to be moderate in one's demands.  "Five-and-twenty shillings

a week," I suggested.



He repeated the figure in a scream.  "Five-and-twenty shillings for

writing like that!  And can't spell commission!  Don't know anything

about the business.  Five-and-twenty!--Tell you what I'll do:  I'll

give you twelve."



"But I can't live on twelve," I explained.



"Can't live on twelve!  Do you know why?  Because you don't know how

to live.  I know you all.  One veal and ham pie, one roley-poley, one

Dutch cheese and a pint of bitter."



His recital made my mouth water.



"You overload your stomachs, then you can't work.  Half the diseases

you young fellows suffer from are brought about by overeating."



"Now, you take my advice," continued Mr. Lott; "try vegetarianism.  In

the morning, a little oatmeal.  Wonderfully strengthening stuff,

oatmeal:  look at the Scotch.  For dinner, beans.  Why, do you know

there's more nourishment in half a pint of lentil beans than in a

pound of beefsteak--more gluten.  That's what you want, more gluten;

no corpses, no dead bodies.  Why, I've known young fellows,

vegetarians, who have lived like fighting cocks on sevenpence a day.

Seven times seven are forty-nine.  How much do you pay for your room?"



I told him.



"Four-and-a-penny and two-and-six makes six-and-seven.  That leaves

you five and fivepence for mere foolery.  Good God!  what more do you

want?"



"I'll take eighteen, sir," I answered.  "I can't really manage on

less."



"Very well, I won't beat you down," he answered.  "Fifteen shillings a

week."



"I said eighteen," I persisted.



"Well, and I said fifteen," he retorted, somewhat indignant at the

quibbling.  "That's splitting the difference, isn't it?  I can't be

fairer than that."



I dared not throw away the one opportunity that had occurred.

Anything was better than return to the Reading Rooms, and the empty

days full of despair.  I accepted, and it was agreed that I should

come the following Monday morning.



"Nabbed?" was Minikin's enquiry on my return to the back office for my

hat.



I nodded.



"What's he wasting on you?"



"Fifteen shillings a week," I whispered.



"Felt sure somehow that he'd take a liking to you," answered Minikin.

"Don't be ungrateful and look thin on it."



Outside the door I heard Mr. Lott's shrill voice demanding to know

where postage stamps were to be found.



"At the Post-office," was Minikin's reply.



The hours were long--in fact, we had no office hours; we got away when

we could, which was rarely before seven or eight--but my work was

interesting.  It consisted of buying for unfortunate clients in India

or the Colonies anything they might happen to want, from a stage coach

to a pot of marmalade; packing it and shipping it across to them.  Our

"commission" was anything they could be persuaded to pay over and

above the value of the article.  I was not much interfered with.

There was that to be said for Lott & Co., so long as the work was done

he was quite content to leave one to one's own way of doing it.  And

hastening through the busy streets, bargaining in shop or warehouse,

bustling important in and out the swarming docks, I often thanked my

stars that I was not as some poor two-pound-a-week clerk chained to a

dreary desk.



The fifteen shillings a week was a tight fit; but that was not my

trouble.  Reduce your denominator--you know the quotation.  I found it

no philosophical cant, but a practical solution of life.  My food cost

me on the average a shilling a day.  If more of us limited our

commissariat bill to the same figure, there would be less dyspepsia

abroad.  Generally I cooked my own meals in my own frying-pan; but

occasionally I would indulge myself with a more orthodox dinner at a

cook shop, or tea with hot buttered toast at a coffee-shop; and but

for the greasy table-cloth and the dirty-handed waiter, such would

have been even greater delights.  The shilling a week for amusements

afforded me at least one, occasionally two, visits to the theatre, for

in those days there were Paradises where for sixpence one could be a

god.  Fourpence a week on tobacco gave me half-a-dozen cigarettes a

day; I have spent more on smoke and derived less satisfaction.  Dress

was my greatest difficulty.  One anxiety in life the poor man is

saved:  he knows not the haunting sense of debt.  My tailor never

dunned me.  His principle was half-a-crown down on receipt of order,

the balance on the handing over of the goods.  No system is perfect;

the method avoided friction, it is true; yet on the other hand it was

annoying to be compelled to promenade, come Sundays, in shiny elbows

and frayed trousers, knowing all the while that finished, waiting, was

a suit in which one might have made one's mark--had only one shut

one's eyes passing that pastry-cook's window on pay-day.  Surely there

should be a sumptuary law compelling pastry-cooks to deal in cellars

or behind drawn blinds.



Were it because of its mere material hardships that to this day I

think of that period of my life with a shudder, I should not here

confess to it.  I was alone.  I knew not a living soul to whom I dared

to speak, who cared to speak to me.  For those first twelve months

after my mother's death I lived alone, thought alone, felt alone.  In

the morning, during the busy day, it was possible to bear; but in the

evenings the sense of desolation gripped me like a physical pain.  The

summer evenings came again, bringing with them the long, lingering

light so laden with melancholy.  I would walk into the Parks and,

sitting there, watch with hungry eyes the men and women, boys and

girls, moving all around me, talking, laughing, interested in one

another; feeling myself some speechless ghost, seeing but not seen,

crying to the living with a voice they heard not.  Sometimes a

solitary figure would pass by and glance back at me; some lonely

creature like myself longing for human sympathy.  In the teeming city

must have been thousands such--young men and women to whom a friendly

ear, a kindly voice, would have been as the water of life.  Each

imprisoned in his solitary cell of shyness, we looked at one another

through the grating with condoling eyes; further than that was

forbidden to us.  Once, in Kensington Gardens, a woman turned, then

slowly retracing her steps, sat down beside me on the bench.  Neither

of us spoke; had I done so she would have risen and moved away; yet

there was understanding between us.  To each of us it was some comfort

to sit thus for a little while beside the other.  Had she poured out

her heart to me, she could have told me nothing more than I knew:  "I,

too, am lonely, friendless; I, too, long for the sound of a voice, the

touch of a hand.  It is hard for you, it is harder still for me, a

girl; shut out from the bright world that laughs around me; denied the

right of youth to joy and pleasure; denied the right of womanhood to

love and tenderness."



The footsteps to and fro grew fewer.  She moved to rise.  Stirred by

an impulse, I stretched out my hand, then seeing the flush upon her

face, drew it back hastily.  But the next moment, changing her mind,

she held hers out to me, and I took it.  It was the first clasp of a

hand I had felt since six months before I had said good-bye to Hal.

She turned and walked quickly away.  I stood watching her; she never

looked round, and I never saw her again.



I take no credit to myself for keeping straight, as it is termed,

during these days.  For good or evil, my shyness prevented my taking

part in the flirtations of the streets.  Whether inviting eyes were

ever thrown to me as to others, I cannot say.  Sometimes, fancying

so--hoping so, I would follow.  Yet never could I summon up sufficient

resolution to face the possible rebuff before some less timid swain

would swoop down upon the quarry.  Then I would hurry on, cursing

myself for the poorness of my spirit, fancying mocking contempt in the

laughter that followed me.



On a Sunday I would rise early and take long solitary walks into the

country.  One winter's day--I remember it was on the road between

Edgware and Stanmore--there issued from a by-road a little ahead of me

a party of boys and girls, young people about my own age, bound

evidently on a skating expedition.  I could hear the musical ring of

their blades, clattering as they walked, and the sound of their merry

laughter so clear and bell-like through the frosty air.  And an aching

anguish fell upon me.  I felt a mad desire to run after them, to plead

with them to let me walk with them a little way, to let me laugh and

talk with them.  Every now and then they would pirouette to cry some

jest to one another.  I could see their faces:  the girls' so sweetly

alluring, framed by their dainty hats and furs, the bright colour in

their cheeks, the light in their teasing eyes.  A little further on

they turned aside into a by-lane, and I stood at the corner listening

till the last echo of their joyous voices died away, and on a stone

that still remains standing there I sat down and sobbed.



I would walk about the streets always till very late.  I dreaded the

echoing clang of the little front door when I closed it behind me, the

climbing of the silent stairs, the solitude that waited for me in my

empty room.  It would rise and come towards me like some living thing,

kissing me with cold lips.  Often, unable to bear the closeness of its

presence, I would creep out into the streets.  There, even though it

followed me, I was not alone with it.  Sometimes I would pace them the

whole night, sharing them with the other outcasts while the city

slept.



Occasionally, during these nightly wanderings would come to me moments

of exaltation when fear fell from me and my blood would leap with joy

at prospect of the fierce struggle opening out before me.  Then it was

the ghostly city sighing round me that seemed dead, I the only living

thing real among a world of shadows.  In long, echoing streets I would

laugh and shout.  Misunderstanding policemen would turn their

bull's-eyes on me, gruffly give me practical advice:  they knew not

who I was!  I stood the centre of a vast galanty-show:  the phantom

houses came and went; from some there shone bright lights; the doors

were open, and little figures flitted in and out, the tiny coaches

glided to and fro, manikins grotesque but pitiful crept across the

star-lit curtain.



Then the mood would change.  The city, grim and vast, stretched round

me endless.  I crawled, a mere atom, within its folds, helpless,

insignificant, absurd.  The houseless forms that shared my vigil were

my fellows.  What were we?  Animalcule upon its bosom, that it saw

not, heeded not.  For company I would mingle with them:  ragged men,

frowsy women, ageless youths, gathered round the red glow of some

coffee stall.



Rarely would we speak to one another.  More like animals we browsed

there, sipping the halfpenny cup of hot water coloured with coffee

grounds (at least it was warm), munching the moist slab of coarse

cake; looking with dull, indifferent eyes each upon the wretchedness

of the others.  Perhaps some two would whisper to each other in

listless, monotonous tone, broken here and there by a short, mirthless

laugh; some shivering creature, not yet case-hardened to despair,

seek, perhaps, the relief of curses that none heeded.  Later, a faint

chill breeze would shake the shadows loose, a thin, wan light streak

the dark air with shade, and silently, stealthily, we would fade away

and disappear.

