





CHAPTER XVI - OMNIBUSES







It is very generally allowed that public conveyances afford an

extensive field for amusement and observation.  Of all the public

conveyances that have been constructed since the days of the Ark -

we think that is the earliest on record - to the present time,

commend us to an omnibus.  A long stage is not to be despised, but

there you have only six insides, and the chances are, that the same

people go all the way with you - there is no change, no variety.

Besides, after the first twelve hours or so, people get cross and

sleepy, and when you have seen a man in his nightcap, you lose all

respect for him; at least, that is the case with us.  Then on

smooth roads people frequently get prosy, and tell long stories,

and even those who don't talk, may have very unpleasant

predilections.  We once travelled four hundred miles, inside a

stage-coach, with a stout man, who had a glass of rum-and-water,

warm, handed in at the window at every place where we changed

horses.  This was decidedly unpleasant.  We have also travelled

occasionally, with a small boy of a pale aspect, with light hair,

and no perceptible neck, coming up to town from school under the

protection of the guard, and directed to be left at the Cross Keys

till called for.  This is, perhaps, even worse than rum-and-water

in a close atmosphere.  Then there is the whole train of evils

consequent on a change of the coachman; and the misery of the

discovery - which the guard is sure to make the moment you begin to

doze - that he wants a brown-paper parcel, which he distinctly

remembers to have deposited under the seat on which you are

reposing.  A great deal of bustle and groping takes place, and when

you are thoroughly awakened, and severely cramped, by holding your

legs up by an almost supernatural exertion, while he is looking

behind them, it suddenly occurs to him that he put it in the fore-

boot.  Bang goes the door; the parcel is immediately found; off

starts the coach again; and the guard plays the key-bugle as loud

as he can play it, as if in mockery of your wretchedness.



Now, you meet with none of these afflictions in an omnibus;

sameness there can never be.  The passengers change as often in the

course of one journey as the figures in a kaleidoscope, and though

not so glittering, are far more amusing.  We believe there is no

instance on record, of a man's having gone to sleep in one of these

vehicles.  As to long stories, would any man venture to tell a long

story in an omnibus? and even if he did, where would be the harm?

nobody could possibly hear what he was talking about.  Again;

children, though occasionally, are not often to be found in an

omnibus; and even when they are, if the vehicle be full, as is

generally the case, somebody sits upon them, and we are unconscious

of their presence.  Yes, after mature reflection, and considerable

experience, we are decidedly of opinion, that of all known

vehicles, from the glass-coach in which we were taken to be

christened, to that sombre caravan in which we must one day make

our last earthly journey, there is nothing like an omnibus.



We will back the machine in which we make our daily peregrination

from the top of Oxford-street to the city, against any 'buss' on

the road, whether it be for the gaudiness of its exterior, the

perfect simplicity of its interior, or the native coolness of its

cad.  This young gentleman is a singular instance of self-devotion;

his somewhat intemperate zeal on behalf of his employers, is

constantly getting him into trouble, and occasionally into the

house of correction.  He is no sooner emancipated, however, than he

resumes the duties of his profession with unabated ardour.  His

principal distinction is his activity.  His great boast is, 'that

he can chuck an old gen'lm'n into the buss, shut him in, and rattle

off, afore he knows where it's a-going to' - a feat which he

frequently performs, to the infinite amusement of every one but the

old gentleman concerned, who, somehow or other, never can see the

joke of the thing.



We are not aware that it has ever been precisely ascertained, how

many passengers our omnibus will contain.  The impression on the

cad's mind evidently is, that it is amply sufficient for the

accommodation of any number of persons that can be enticed into it.

'Any room?' cries a hot pedestrian.  'Plenty o' room, sir,' replies

the conductor, gradually opening the door, and not disclosing the

real state of the case, until the wretched man is on the steps.

'Where?' inquires the entrapped individual, with an attempt to back

out again.  'Either side, sir,' rejoins the cad, shoving him in,

and slamming the door.  'All right, Bill.'  Retreat is impossible;

the new-comer rolls about, till he falls down somewhere, and there

he stops.



As we get into the city a little before ten, four or five of our

party are regular passengers.  We always take them up at the same

places, and they generally occupy the same seats; they are always

dressed in the same manner, and invariably discuss the same topics

- the increasing rapidity of cabs, and the disregard of moral

obligations evinced by omnibus men.  There is a little testy old

man, with a powdered head, who always sits on the right-hand side

of the door as you enter, with his hands folded on the top of his

umbrella.  He is extremely impatient, and sits there for the

purpose of keeping a sharp eye on the cad, with whom he generally

holds a running dialogue.  He is very officious in helping people

in and out, and always volunteers to give the cad a poke with his

umbrella, when any one wants to alight.  He usually recommends

ladies to have sixpence ready, to prevent delay; and if anybody

puts a window down, that he can reach, he immediately puts it up

again.



'Now, what are you stopping for?' says the little man every

morning, the moment there is the slightest indication of 'pulling

up' at the corner of Regent-street, when some such dialogue as the

following takes place between him and the cad:



'What are you stopping for?'



Here the cad whistles, and affects not to hear the question.



'I say [a poke], what are you stopping for?'



'For passengers, sir.  Ba - nk. - Ty.'



'I know you're stopping for passengers; but you've no business to

do so.  WHY are you stopping?'



'Vy, sir, that's a difficult question.  I think it is because we

perfer stopping here to going on.'



'Now mind,' exclaims the little old man, with great vehemence,

'I'll pull you up to-morrow; I've often threatened to do it; now I

will.'



'Thankee, sir,' replies the cad, touching his hat with a mock

expression of gratitude; - 'werry much obliged to you indeed, sir.'

Here the young men in the omnibus laugh very heartily, and the old

gentleman gets very red in the face, and seems highly exasperated.



The stout gentleman in the white neckcloth, at the other end of the

vehicle, looks very prophetic, and says that something must shortly

be done with these fellows, or there's no saying where all this

will end; and the shabby-genteel man with the green bag, expresses

his entire concurrence in the opinion, as he has done regularly

every morning for the last six months.



A second omnibus now comes up, and stops immediately behind us.

Another old gentleman elevates his cane in the air, and runs with

all his might towards our omnibus; we watch his progress with great

interest; the door is opened to receive him, he suddenly disappears

- he has been spirited away by the opposition.  Hereupon the driver

of the opposition taunts our people with his having 'regularly done

'em out of that old swell,' and the voice of the 'old swell' is

heard, vainly protesting against this unlawful detention.  We

rattle off, the other omnibus rattles after us, and every time we

stop to take up a passenger, they stop to take him too; sometimes

we get him; sometimes they get him; but whoever don't get him, say

they ought to have had him, and the cads of the respective vehicles

abuse one another accordingly.



As we arrive in the vicinity of Lincoln's-inn-fields, Bedford-row,

and other legal haunts, we drop a great many of our original

passengers, and take up fresh ones, who meet with a very sulky

reception.  It is rather remarkable, that the people already in an

omnibus, always look at newcomers, as if they entertained some

undefined idea that they have no business to come in at all.  We

are quite persuaded the little old man has some notion of this

kind, and that he considers their entry as a sort of negative

impertinence.



Conversation is now entirely dropped; each person gazes vacantly

through the window in front of him, and everybody thinks that his

opposite neighbour is staring at him.  If one man gets out at Shoe-

lane, and another at the corner of Farringdon-street, the little

old gentleman grumbles, and suggests to the latter, that if he had

got out at Shoe-lane too, he would have saved them the delay of

another stoppage; whereupon the young men laugh again, and the old

gentleman looks very solemn, and says nothing more till he gets to

the Bank, when he trots off as fast as he can, leaving us to do the

same, and to wish, as we walk away, that we could impart to others

any portion of the amusement we have gained for ourselves.
