






CHAPTER III - SHOPS AND THEIR TENANTS







What inexhaustible food for speculation, do the streets of London

afford!  We never were able to agree with Sterne in pitying the man

who could travel from Dan to Beersheba, and say that all was

barren; we have not the slightest commiseration for the man who can

take up his hat and stick, and walk from Covent-garden to St.

Paul's Churchyard, and back into the bargain, without deriving some

amusement - we had almost said instruction - from his

perambulation.  And yet there are such beings:  we meet them every

day.  Large black stocks and light waistcoats, jet canes and

discontented countenances, are the characteristics of the race;

other people brush quickly by you, steadily plodding on to

business, or cheerfully running after pleasure.  These men linger

listlessly past, looking as happy and animated as a policeman on

duty.  Nothing seems to make an impression on their minds:  nothing

short of being knocked down by a porter, or run over by a cab, will

disturb their equanimity.  You will meet them on a fine day in any

of the leading thoroughfares:  peep through the window of a west-

end cigar shop in the evening, if you can manage to get a glimpse

between the blue curtains which intercept the vulgar gaze, and you

see them in their only enjoyment of existence.  There they are

lounging about, on round tubs and pipe boxes, in all the dignity of

whiskers, and gilt watch-guards; whispering soft nothings to the

young lady in amber, with the large ear-rings, who, as she sits

behind the counter in a blaze of adoration and gas-light, is the

admiration of all the female servants in the neighbourhood, and the

envy of every milliner's apprentice within two miles round.



One of our principal amusements is to watch the gradual progress -

the rise or fall - of particular shops.  We have formed an intimate

acquaintance with several, in different parts of town, and are

perfectly acquainted with their whole history.  We could name off-

hand, twenty at least, which we are quite sure have paid no taxes

for the last six years.  They are never inhabited for more than two

months consecutively, and, we verily believe, have witnessed every

retail trade in the directory.



There is one, whose history is a sample of the rest, in whose fate

we have taken especial interest, having had the pleasure of knowing

it ever since it has been a shop.  It is on the Surrey side of the

water - a little distance beyond the Marsh-gate.  It was originally

a substantial, good-looking private house enough; the landlord got

into difficulties, the house got into Chancery, the tenant went

away, and the house went to ruin.  At this period our acquaintance

with it commenced; the paint was all worn off; the windows were

broken, the area was green with neglect and the overflowings of the

water-butt; the butt itself was without a lid, and the street-door

was the very picture of misery.  The chief pastime of the children

in the vicinity had been to assemble in a body on the steps, and to

take it in turn to knock loud double knocks at the door, to the

great satisfaction of the neighbours generally, and especially of

the nervous old lady next door but one.  Numerous complaints were

made, and several small basins of water discharged over the

offenders, but without effect.  In this state of things, the

marine-store dealer at the corner of the street, in the most

obliging manner took the knocker off, and sold it:  and the

unfortunate house looked more wretched than ever.



We deserted our friend for a few weeks.  What was our surprise, on

our return, to find no trace of its existence!  In its place was a

handsome shop, fast approaching to a state of completion, and on

the shutters were large bills, informing the public that it would

shortly be opened with 'an extensive stock of linen-drapery and

haberdashery.'  It opened in due course; there was the name of the

proprietor 'and Co.' in gilt letters, almost too dazzling to look

at.  Such ribbons and shawls! and two such elegant young men behind

the counter, each in a clean collar and white neckcloth, like the

lover in a farce.  As to the proprietor, he did nothing but walk up

and down the shop, and hand seats to the ladies, and hold important

conversations with the handsomest of the young men, who was

shrewdly suspected by the neighbours to be the 'Co.'  We saw all

this with sorrow; we felt a fatal presentiment that the shop was

doomed - and so it was.  Its decay was slow, but sure.  Tickets

gradually appeared in the windows; then rolls of flannel, with

labels on them, were stuck outside the door; then a bill was pasted

on the street-door, intimating that the first floor was to let

unfurnished; then one of the young men disappeared altogether, and

the other took to a black neckerchief, and the proprietor took to

drinking.  The shop became dirty, broken panes of glass remained

unmended, and the stock disappeared piecemeal.  At last the

company's man came to cut off the water, and then the linen-draper

cut off himself, leaving the landlord his compliments and the key.



The next occupant was a fancy stationer.  The shop was more

modestly painted than before, still it was neat; but somehow we

always thought, as we passed, that it looked like a poor and

struggling concern.  We wished the man well, but we trembled for

his success.  He was a widower evidently, and had employment

elsewhere, for he passed us every morning on his road to the city.

The business was carried on by his eldest daughter.  Poor girl! she

needed no assistance.  We occasionally caught a glimpse of two or

three children, in mourning like herself, as they sat in the little

parlour behind the shop; and we never passed at night without

seeing the eldest girl at work, either for them, or in making some

elegant little trifle for sale.  We often thought, as her pale face

looked more sad and pensive in the dim candle-light, that if those

thoughtless females who interfere with the miserable market of poor

creatures such as these, knew but one-half of the misery they

suffer, and the bitter privations they endure, in their honourable

attempts to earn a scanty subsistence, they would, perhaps, resign

even opportunities for the gratification of vanity, and an immodest

love of self-display, rather than drive them to a last dreadful

resource, which it would shock the delicate feelings of these

CHARITABLE ladies to hear named.



But we are forgetting the shop.  Well, we continued to watch it,

and every day showed too clearly the increasing poverty of its

inmates.  The children were clean, it is true, but their clothes

were threadbare and shabby; no tenant had been procured for the

upper part of the house, from the letting of which, a portion of

the means of paying the rent was to have been derived, and a slow,

wasting consumption prevented the eldest girl from continuing her

exertions.  Quarter-day arrived.  The landlord had suffered from

the extravagance of his last tenant, and he had no compassion for

the struggles of his successor; he put in an execution.  As we

passed one morning, the broker's men were removing the little

furniture there was in the house, and a newly-posted bill informed

us it was again 'To Let.'  What became of the last tenant we never

could learn; we believe the girl is past all suffering, and beyond

all sorrow.  God help her!  We hope she is.



We were somewhat curious to ascertain what would be the next stage

- for that the place had no chance of succeeding now, was perfectly

clear.  The bill was soon taken down, and some alterations were

being made in the interior of the shop.  We were in a fever of

expectation; we exhausted conjecture - we imagined all possible

trades, none of which were perfectly reconcilable with our idea of

the gradual decay of the tenement.  It opened, and we wondered why

we had not guessed at the real state of the case before.  The shop

- not a large one at the best of times - had been converted into

two:  one was a bonnet-shape maker's, the other was opened by a

tobacconist, who also dealt in walking-sticks and Sunday

newspapers; the two were separated by a thin partition, covered

with tawdry striped paper.



The tobacconist remained in possession longer than any tenant

within our recollection.  He was a red-faced, impudent, good-for-

nothing dog, evidently accustomed to take things as they came, and

to make the best of a bad job.  He sold as many cigars as he could,

and smoked the rest.  He occupied the shop as long as he could make

peace with the landlord, and when he could no longer live in quiet,

he very coolly locked the door, and bolted himself.  From this

period, the two little dens have undergone innumerable changes.

The tobacconist was succeeded by a theatrical hair-dresser, who

ornamented the window with a great variety of 'characters,' and

terrific combats.  The bonnet-shape maker gave place to a

greengrocer, and the histrionic barber was succeeded, in his turn,

by a tailor.  So numerous have been the changes, that we have of

late done little more than mark the peculiar but certain

indications of a house being poorly inhabited.  It has been

progressing by almost imperceptible degrees.  The occupiers of the

shops have gradually given up room after room, until they have only

reserved the little parlour for themselves.  First there appeared a

brass plate on the private door, with 'Ladies' School' legibly

engraved thereon; shortly afterwards we observed a second brass

plate, then a bell, and then another bell.



When we paused in front of our old friend, and observed these signs

of poverty, which are not to be mistaken, we thought as we turned

away, that the house had attained its lowest pitch of degradation.

We were wrong.  When we last passed it, a 'dairy' was established

in the area, and a party of melancholy-looking fowls were amusing

themselves by running in at the front door, and out at the back

one.
