





CHAPTER XII - GREENWICH FAIR







If the Parks be 'the lungs of London,' we wonder what Greenwich

Fair is - a periodical breaking out, we suppose, a sort of spring-

rash:  a three days' fever, which cools the blood for six months

afterwards, and at the expiration of which London is restored to

its old habits of plodding industry, as suddenly and completely as

if nothing had ever happened to disturb them.



In our earlier days, we were a constant frequenter of Greenwich

Fair, for years.  We have proceeded to, and returned from it, in

almost every description of vehicle.  We cannot conscientiously

deny the charge of having once made the passage in a spring-van,

accompanied by thirteen gentlemen, fourteen ladies, an unlimited

number of children, and a barrel of beer; and we have a vague

recollection of having, in later days, found ourself the eighth

outside, on the top of a hackney-coach, at something past four

o'clock in the morning, with a rather confused idea of our own

name, or place of residence.  We have grown older since then, and

quiet, and steady:  liking nothing better than to spend our Easter,

and all our other holidays, in some quiet nook, with people of whom

we shall never tire; but we think we still remember something of

Greenwich Fair, and of those who resort to it.  At all events we

will try.



The road to Greenwich during the whole of Easter Monday, is in a

state of perpetual bustle and noise.  Cabs, hackney-coaches, 'shay'

carts, coal-waggons, stages, omnibuses, sociables, gigs, donkey-

chaises - all crammed with people (for the question never is, what

the horse can draw, but what the vehicle will hold), roll along at

their utmost speed; the dust flies in clouds, ginger-beer corks go

off in volleys, the balcony of every public-house is crowded with

people, smoking and drinking, half the private houses are turned

into tea-shops, fiddles are in great request, every little fruit-

shop displays its stall of gilt gingerbread and penny toys;

turnpike men are in despair; horses won't go on, and wheels will

come off; ladies in 'carawans' scream with fright at every fresh

concussion, and their admirers find it necessary to sit remarkably

close to them, by way of encouragement; servants-of-all-work, who

are not allowed to have followers, and have got a holiday for the

day, make the most of their time with the faithful admirer who

waits for a stolen interview at the corner of the street every

night, when they go to fetch the beer - apprentices grow

sentimental, and straw-bonnet makers kind.  Everybody is anxious to

get on, and actuated by the common wish to be at the fair, or in

the park, as soon as possible.



Pedestrians linger in groups at the roadside, unable to resist the

allurements of the stout proprietress of the 'Jack-in-the-box,

three shies a penny,' or the more splendid offers of the man with

three thimbles and a pea on a little round board, who astonishes

the bewildered crowd with some such address as, 'Here's the sort o'

game to make you laugh seven years arter you're dead, and turn

ev'ry air on your ed gray vith delight!  Three thimbles and vun

little pea - with a vun, two, three, and a two, three, vun:  catch

him who can, look on, keep your eyes open, and niver say die! niver

mind the change, and the expense:  all fair and above board:  them

as don't play can't vin, and luck attend the ryal sportsman!  Bet

any gen'lm'n any sum of money, from harf-a-crown up to a suverin,

as he doesn't name the thimble as kivers the pea!'  Here some

greenhorn whispers his friend that he distinctly saw the pea roll

under the middle thimble - an impression which is immediately

confirmed by a gentleman in top-boots, who is standing by, and who,

in a low tone, regrets his own inability to bet, in consequence of

having unfortunately left his purse at home, but strongly urges the

stranger not to neglect such a golden opportunity.  The 'plant' is

successful, the bet is made, the stranger of course loses:  and the

gentleman with the thimbles consoles him, as he pockets the money,

with an assurance that it's 'all the fortin of war! this time I

vin, next time you vin:  niver mind the loss of two bob and a

bender!  Do it up in a small parcel, and break out in a fresh

place.  Here's the sort o' game,' &c. - and the eloquent harangue,

with such variations as the speaker's exuberant fancy suggests, is

again repeated to the gaping crowd, reinforced by the accession of

several new-comers.



The chief place of resort in the daytime, after the public-houses,

is the park, in which the principal amusement is to drag young

ladies up the steep hill which leads to the Observatory, and then

drag them down again, at the very top of their speed, greatly to

the derangement of their curls and bonnet-caps, and much to the

edification of lookers-on from below.  'Kiss in the Ring,' and

'Threading my Grandmother's Needle,' too, are sports which receive

their full share of patronage.  Love-sick swains, under the

influence of gin-and-water, and the tender passion, become

violently affectionate:  and the fair objects of their regard

enhance the value of stolen kisses, by a vast deal of struggling,

and holding down of heads, and cries of 'Oh!  Ha' done, then,

George - Oh, do tickle him for me, Mary - Well, I never!' and

similar Lucretian ejaculations.  Little old men and women, with a

small basket under one arm, and a wine-glass, without a foot, in

the other hand, tender 'a drop o' the right sort' to the different

groups; and young ladies, who are persuaded to indulge in a drop of

the aforesaid right sort, display a pleasing degree of reluctance

to taste it, and cough afterwards with great propriety.



The old pensioners, who, for the moderate charge of a penny,

exhibit the mast-house, the Thames and shipping, the place where

the men used to hang in chains, and other interesting sights,

through a telescope, are asked questions about objects within the

range of the glass, which it would puzzle a Solomon to answer; and

requested to find out particular houses in particular streets,

which it would have been a task of some difficulty for Mr. Horner

(not the young gentleman who ate mince-pies with his thumb, but the

man of Colosseum notoriety) to discover.  Here and there, where

some three or four couple are sitting on the grass together, you

will see a sun-burnt woman in a red cloak 'telling fortunes' and

prophesying husbands, which it requires no extraordinary

observation to describe, for the originals are before her.

Thereupon, the lady concerned laughs and blushes, and ultimately

buries her face in an imitation cambric handkerchief, and the

gentleman described looks extremely foolish, and squeezes her hand,

and fees the gipsy liberally; and the gipsy goes away, perfectly

satisfied herself, and leaving those behind her perfectly satisfied

also:  and the prophecy, like many other prophecies of greater

importance, fulfils itself in time.



But it grows dark:  the crowd has gradually dispersed, and only a

few stragglers are left behind.  The light in the direction of the

church shows that the fair is illuminated; and the distant noise

proves it to be filling fast.  The spot, which half an hour ago was

ringing with the shouts of boisterous mirth, is as calm and quiet

as if nothing could ever disturb its serenity:  the fine old trees,

the majestic building at their feet, with the noble river beyond,

glistening in the moonlight, appear in all their beauty, and under

their most favourable aspect; the voices of the boys, singing their

evening hymn, are borne gently on the air; and the humblest

mechanic who has been lingering on the grass so pleasant to the

feet that beat the same dull round from week to week in the paved

streets of London, feels proud to think as he surveys the scene

before him, that he belongs to the country which has selected such

a spot as a retreat for its oldest and best defenders in the

decline of their lives.



Five minutes' walking brings you to the fair; a scene calculated to

awaken very different feelings.  The entrance is occupied on either

side by the vendors of gingerbread and toys:  the stalls are gaily

lighted up, the most attractive goods profusely disposed, and

unbonneted young ladies, in their zeal for the interest of their

employers, seize you by the coat, and use all the blandishments of

'Do, dear' - 'There's a love' - 'Don't be cross, now,' &c., to

induce you to purchase half a pound of the real spice nuts, of

which the majority of the regular fair-goers carry a pound or two

as a present supply, tied up in a cotton pocket-handkerchief.

Occasionally you pass a deal table, on which are exposed pen'orths

of pickled salmon (fennel included), in little white saucers:

oysters, with shells as large as cheese-plates, and divers

specimens of a species of snail (WILKS, we think they are called),

floating in a somewhat bilious-looking green liquid.  Cigars, too,

are in great demand; gentlemen must smoke, of course, and here they

are, two a penny, in a regular authentic cigar-box, with a lighted

tallow candle in the centre.



Imagine yourself in an extremely dense crowd, which swings you to

and fro, and in and out, and every way but the right one; add to

this the screams of women, the shouts of boys, the clanging of

gongs, the firing of pistols, the ringing of bells, the bellowings

of speaking-trumpets, the squeaking of penny dittos, the noise of a

dozen bands, with three drums in each, all playing different tunes

at the same time, the hallooing of showmen, and an occasional roar

from the wild-beast shows; and you are in the very centre and heart

of the fair.



This immense booth, with the large stage in front, so brightly

illuminated with variegated lamps, and pots of burning fat, is

'Richardson's,' where you have a melodrama (with three murders and

a ghost), a pantomime, a comic song, an overture, and some

incidental music, all done in five-and-twenty minutes.



The company are now promenading outside in all the dignity of wigs,

spangles, red-ochre, and whitening.  See with what a ferocious air

the gentleman who personates the Mexican chief, paces up and down,

and with what an eye of calm dignity the principal tragedian gazes

on the crowd below, or converses confidentially with the harlequin!

The four clowns, who are engaged in a mock broadsword combat, may

be all very well for the low-minded holiday-makers; but these are

the people for the reflective portion of the community.  They look

so noble in those Roman dresses, with their yellow legs and arms,

long black curly heads, bushy eyebrows, and scowl expressive of

assassination, and vengeance, and everything else that is grand and

solemn.  Then, the ladies - were there ever such innocent and

awful-looking beings; as they walk up and down the platform in twos

and threes, with their arms round each other's waists, or leaning

for support on one of those majestic men!  Their spangled muslin

dresses and blue satin shoes and sandals (a LEETLE the worse for

wear) are the admiration of all beholders; and the playful manner

in which they check the advances of the clown, is perfectly

enchanting.



'Just a-going to begin!  Pray come for'erd, come for'erd,' exclaims

the man in the countryman's dress, for the seventieth time:  and

people force their way up the steps in crowds.  The band suddenly

strikes up, the harlequin and columbine set the example, reels are

formed in less than no time, the Roman heroes place their arms a-

kimbo, and dance with considerable agility; and the leading tragic

actress, and the gentleman who enacts the 'swell' in the pantomime,

foot it to perfection.  'All in to begin,' shouts the manager, when

no more people can be induced to 'come for'erd,' and away rush the

leading members of the company to do the dreadful in the first

piece.



A change of performance takes place every day during the fair, but

the story of the tragedy is always pretty much the same.  There is

a rightful heir, who loves a young lady, and is beloved by her; and

a wrongful heir, who loves her too, and isn't beloved by her; and

the wrongful heir gets hold of the rightful heir, and throws him

into a dungeon, just to kill him off when convenient, for which

purpose he hires a couple of assassins - a good one and a bad one -

who, the moment they are left alone, get up a little murder on

their own account, the good one killing the bad one, and the bad

one wounding the good one.  Then the rightful heir is discovered in

prison, carefully holding a long chain in his hands, and seated

despondingly in a large arm-chair; and the young lady comes in to

two bars of soft music, and embraces the rightful heir; and then

the wrongful heir comes in to two bars of quick music (technically

called 'a hurry'), and goes on in the most shocking manner,

throwing the young lady about as if she was nobody, and calling the

rightful heir 'Ar-recreant - ar-wretch!' in a very loud voice,

which answers the double purpose of displaying his passion, and

preventing the sound being deadened by the sawdust.  The interest

becomes intense; the wrongful heir draws his sword, and rushes on

the rightful heir; a blue smoke is seen, a gong is heard, and a

tall white figure (who has been all this time, behind the arm-

chair, covered over with a table-cloth), slowly rises to the tune

of 'Oft in the stilly night.'  This is no other than the ghost of

the rightful heir's father, who was killed by the wrongful heir's

father, at sight of which the wrongful heir becomes apoplectic, and

is literally 'struck all of a heap,' the stage not being large

enough to admit of his falling down at full length.  Then the good

assassin staggers in, and says he was hired in conjunction with the

bad assassin, by the wrongful heir, to kill the rightful heir; and

he's killed a good many people in his time, but he's very sorry for

it, and won't do so any more - a promise which he immediately

redeems, by dying off hand without any nonsense about it.  Then the

rightful heir throws down his chain; and then two men, a sailor,

and a young woman (the tenantry of the rightful heir) come in, and

the ghost makes dumb motions to them, which they, by supernatural

interference, understand - for no one else can; and the ghost (who

can't do anything without blue fire) blesses the rightful heir and

the young lady, by half suffocating them with smoke:  and then a

muffin-bell rings, and the curtain drops.



The exhibitions next in popularity to these itinerant theatres are

the travelling menageries, or, to speak more intelligibly, the

'Wild-beast shows,' where a military band in beef-eater's costume,

with leopard-skin caps, play incessantly; and where large highly-

coloured representations of tigers tearing men's heads open, and a

lion being burnt with red-hot irons to induce him to drop his

victim, are hung up outside, by way of attracting visitors.



The principal officer at these places is generally a very tall,

hoarse man, in a scarlet coat, with a cane in his hand, with which

he occasionally raps the pictures we have just noticed, by way of

illustrating his description - something in this way.  'Here, here,

here; the lion, the lion (tap), exactly as he is represented on the

canvas outside (three taps):  no waiting, remember; no deception.

The fe-ro-cious lion (tap, tap) who bit off the gentleman's head

last Cambervel vos a twelvemonth, and has killed on the awerage

three keepers a-year ever since he arrived at matoority.  No extra

charge on this account recollect; the price of admission is only

sixpence.'  This address never fails to produce a considerable

sensation, and sixpences flow into the treasury with wonderful

rapidity.



The dwarfs are also objects of great curiosity, and as a dwarf, a

giantess, a living skeleton, a wild Indian, 'a young lady of

singular beauty, with perfectly white hair and pink eyes,' and two

or three other natural curiosities, are usually exhibited together

for the small charge of a penny, they attract very numerous

audiences.  The best thing about a dwarf is, that he has always a

little box, about two feet six inches high, into which, by long

practice, he can just manage to get, by doubling himself up like a

boot-jack; this box is painted outside like a six-roomed house, and

as the crowd see him ring a bell, or fire a pistol out of the

first-floor window, they verily believe that it is his ordinary

town residence, divided like other mansions into drawing-rooms,

dining-parlour, and bedchambers.  Shut up in this case, the

unfortunate little object is brought out to delight the throng by

holding a facetious dialogue with the proprietor:  in the course of

which, the dwarf (who is always particularly drunk) pledges himself

to sing a comic song inside, and pays various compliments to the

ladies, which induce them to 'come for'erd' with great alacrity.

As a giant is not so easily moved, a pair of indescribables of most

capacious dimensions, and a huge shoe, are usually brought out,

into which two or three stout men get all at once, to the

enthusiastic delight of the crowd, who are quite satisfied with the

solemn assurance that these habiliments form part of the giant's

everyday costume.



The grandest and most numerously-frequented booth in the whole

fair, however, is 'The Crown and Anchor' - a temporary ball-room -

we forget how many hundred feet long, the price of admission to

which is one shilling.  Immediately on your right hand as you

enter, after paying your money, is a refreshment place, at which

cold beef, roast and boiled, French rolls, stout, wine, tongue,

ham, even fowls, if we recollect right, are displayed in tempting

array.  There is a raised orchestra, and the place is boarded all

the way down, in patches, just wide enough for a country dance.



There is no master of the ceremonies in this artificial Eden - all

is primitive, unreserved, and unstudied.  The dust is blinding, the

heat insupportable, the company somewhat noisy, and in the highest

spirits possible:  the ladies, in the height of their innocent

animation, dancing in the gentlemen's hats, and the gentlemen

promenading 'the gay and festive scene' in the ladies' bonnets, or

with the more expensive ornaments of false noses, and low-crowned,

tinder-box-looking hats:  playing children's drums, and accompanied

by ladies on the penny trumpet.



The noise of these various instruments, the orchestra, the

shouting, the 'scratchers,' and the dancing, is perfectly

bewildering.  The dancing, itself, beggars description - every

figure lasts about an hour, and the ladies bounce up and down the

middle, with a degree of spirit which is quite indescribable.  As

to the gentlemen, they stamp their feet against the ground, every

time 'hands four round' begins, go down the middle and up again,

with cigars in their mouths, and silk handkerchiefs in their hands,

and whirl their partners round, nothing loth, scrambling and

falling, and embracing, and knocking up against the other couples,

until they are fairly tired out, and can move no longer.  The same

scene is repeated again and again (slightly varied by an occasional

'row') until a late hour at night:  and a great many clerks and

'prentices find themselves next morning with aching heads, empty

pockets, damaged hats, and a very imperfect recollection of how it

was they did NOT get home.

