






CHAPTER XVII - THE LAST CAB-DRIVER, AND THE FIRST OMNIBUS CAD







Of all the cabriolet-drivers whom we have ever had the honour and

gratification of knowing by sight - and our acquaintance in this

way has been most extensive - there is one who made an impression

on our mind which can never be effaced, and who awakened in our

bosom a feeling of admiration and respect, which we entertain a

fatal presentiment will never be called forth again by any human

being.  He was a man of most simple and prepossessing appearance.

He was a brown-whiskered, white-hatted, no-coated cabman; his nose

was generally red, and his bright blue eye not unfrequently stood

out in bold relief against a black border of artificial

workmanship; his boots were of the Wellington form, pulled up to

meet his corduroy knee-smalls, or at least to approach as near them

as their dimensions would admit of; and his neck was usually

garnished with a bright yellow handkerchief.  In summer he carried

in his mouth a flower; in winter, a straw - slight, but, to a

contemplative mind, certain indications of a love of nature, and a

taste for botany.



His cabriolet was gorgeously painted - a bright red; and wherever

we went, City or West End, Paddington or Holloway, North, East,

West, or South, there was the red cab, bumping up against the posts

at the street corners, and turning in and out, among hackney-

coaches, and drays, and carts, and waggons, and omnibuses, and

contriving by some strange means or other, to get out of places

which no other vehicle but the red cab could ever by any

possibility have contrived to get into at all.  Our fondness for

that red cab was unbounded.  How we should have liked to have seen

it in the circle at Astley's!  Our life upon it, that it should

have performed such evolutions as would have put the whole company

to shame - Indian chiefs, knights, Swiss peasants, and all.



Some people object to the exertion of getting into cabs, and others

object to the difficulty of getting out of them; we think both

these are objections which take their rise in perverse and ill-

conditioned minds.  The getting into a cab is a very pretty and

graceful process, which, when well performed, is essentially

melodramatic.  First, there is the expressive pantomime of every

one of the eighteen cabmen on the stand, the moment you raise your

eyes from the ground.  Then there is your own pantomime in reply -

quite a little ballet.  Four cabs immediately leave the stand, for

your especial accommodation; and the evolutions of the animals who

draw them, are beautiful in the extreme, as they grate the wheels

of the cabs against the curb-stones, and sport playfully in the

kennel.  You single out a particular cab, and dart swiftly towards

it.  One bound, and you are on the first step; turn your body

lightly round to the right, and you are on the second; bend

gracefully beneath the reins, working round to the left at the same

time, and you are in the cab.  There is no difficulty in finding a

seat:  the apron knocks you comfortably into it at once, and off

you go.



The getting out of a cab is, perhaps, rather more complicated in

its theory, and a shade more difficult in its execution.  We have

studied the subject a great deal, and we think the best way is, to

throw yourself out, and trust to chance for alighting on your feet.

If you make the driver alight first, and then throw yourself upon

him, you will find that he breaks your fall materially.  In the

event of your contemplating an offer of eightpence, on no account

make the tender, or show the money, until you are safely on the

pavement.  It is very bad policy attempting to save the fourpence.

You are very much in the power of a cabman, and he considers it a

kind of fee not to do you any wilful damage.  Any instruction,

however, in the art of getting out of a cab, is wholly unnecessary

if you are going any distance, because the probability is, that you

will be shot lightly out before you have completed the third mile.



We are not aware of any instance on record in which a cab-horse has

performed three consecutive miles without going down once.  What of

that?  It is all excitement.  And in these days of derangement of

the nervous system and universal lassitude, people are content to

pay handsomely for excitement; where can it be procured at a

cheaper rate?



But to return to the red cab; it was omnipresent.  You had but to

walk down Holborn, or Fleet-street, or any of the principal

thoroughfares in which there is a great deal of traffic, and judge

for yourself.  You had hardly turned into the street, when you saw

a trunk or two, lying on the ground:  an uprooted post, a hat-box,

a portmanteau, and a carpet-bag, strewed about in a very

picturesque manner:  a horse in a cab standing by, looking about

him with great unconcern; and a crowd, shouting and screaming with

delight, cooling their flushed faces against the glass windows of a

chemist's shop. - 'What's the matter here, can you tell me?' -

'O'ny a cab, sir.' - 'Anybody hurt, do you know?' - 'O'ny the fare,

sir.  I see him a turnin' the corner, and I ses to another gen'lm'n

"that's a reg'lar little oss that, and he's a comin' along rayther

sweet, an't he?" - "He just is," ses the other gen'lm'n, ven bump

they cums agin the post, and out flies the fare like bricks.'  Need

we say it was the red cab; or that the gentleman with the straw in

his mouth, who emerged so coolly from the chemist's shop and

philosophically climbing into the little dickey, started off at

full gallop, was the red cab's licensed driver?



The ubiquity of this red cab, and the influence it exercised over

the risible muscles of justice itself, was perfectly astonishing.

You walked into the justice-room of the Mansion-house; the whole

court resounded with merriment.  The Lord Mayor threw himself back

in his chair, in a state of frantic delight at his own joke; every

vein in Mr. Hobler's countenance was swollen with laughter, partly

at the Lord Mayor's facetiousness, but more at his own; the

constables and police-officers were (as in duty bound) in ecstasies

at Mr. Hobler and the Lord Mayor combined; and the very paupers,

glancing respectfully at the beadle's countenance, tried to smile,

as even he relaxed.  A tall, weazen-faced man, with an impediment

in his speech, would be endeavouring to state a case of imposition

against the red cab's driver; and the red cab's driver, and the

Lord Mayor, and Mr. Hobler, would be having a little fun among

themselves, to the inordinate delight of everybody but the

complainant.  In the end, justice would be so tickled with the red

cab-driver's native humour, that the fine would be mitigated, and

he would go away full gallop, in the red cab, to impose on somebody

else without loss of time.



The driver of the red cab, confident in the strength of his own

moral principles, like many other philosophers, was wont to set the

feelings and opinions of society at complete defiance.  Generally

speaking, perhaps, he would as soon carry a fare safely to his

destination, as he would upset him - sooner, perhaps, because in

that case he not only got the money, but had the additional

amusement of running a longer heat against some smart rival.  But

society made war upon him in the shape of penalties, and he must

make war upon society in his own way.  This was the reasoning of

the red cab-driver.  So, he bestowed a searching look upon the

fare, as he put his hand in his waistcoat pocket, when he had gone

half the mile, to get the money ready; and if he brought forth

eightpence, out he went.



The last time we saw our friend was one wet evening in Tottenham-

court-road, when he was engaged in a very warm and somewhat

personal altercation with a loquacious little gentleman in a green

coat.  Poor fellow! there were great excuses to be made for him:

he had not received above eighteenpence more than his fare, and

consequently laboured under a great deal of very natural

indignation.  The dispute had attained a pretty considerable

height, when at last the loquacious little gentleman, making a

mental calculation of the distance, and finding that he had already

paid more than he ought, avowed his unalterable determination to

'pull up' the cabman in the morning.



'Now, just mark this, young man,' said the little gentleman, 'I'll

pull you up to-morrow morning.'



'No! will you though?' said our friend, with a sneer.



'I will,' replied the little gentleman, 'mark my words, that's all.

If I live till to-morrow morning, you shall repent this.'



There was a steadiness of purpose, and indignation of speech, about

the little gentleman, as he took an angry pinch of snuff, after

this last declaration, which made a visible impression on the mind

of the red cab-driver.  He appeared to hesitate for an instant.  It

was only for an instant; his resolve was soon taken.



'You'll pull me up, will you?' said our friend.



'I will,' rejoined the little gentleman, with even greater

vehemence an before.



'Very well,' said our friend, tucking up his shirt sleeves very

calmly.  'There'll be three veeks for that.  Wery good; that'll

bring me up to the middle o' next month.  Three veeks more would

carry me on to my birthday, and then I've got ten pound to draw.  I

may as well get board, lodgin', and washin', till then, out of the

county, as pay for it myself; consequently here goes!'



So, without more ado, the red cab-driver knocked the little

gentleman down, and then called the police to take himself into

custody, with all the civility in the world.



A story is nothing without the sequel; and therefore, we may state,

that to our certain knowledge, the board, lodging, and washing were

all provided in due course.  We happen to know the fact, for it

came to our knowledge thus:  We went over the House of Correction

for the county of Middlesex shortly after, to witness the operation

of the silent system; and looked on all the 'wheels' with the

greatest anxiety, in search of our long-lost friend.  He was

nowhere to be seen, however, and we began to think that the little

gentleman in the green coat must have relented, when, as we were

traversing the kitchen-garden, which lies in a sequestered part of

the prison, we were startled by hearing a voice, which apparently

proceeded from the wall, pouring forth its soul in the plaintive

air of 'All round my hat,' which was then just beginning to form a

recognised portion of our national music.



We started. - 'What voice is that?' said we.  The Governor shook

his head.



'Sad fellow,' he replied, 'very sad.  He positively refused to work

on the wheel; so, after many trials, I was compelled to order him

into solitary confinement.  He says he likes it very much though,

and I am afraid he does, for he lies on his back on the floor, and

sings comic songs all day!'



Shall we add, that our heart had not deceived us and that the comic

singer was no other than our eagerly-sought friend, the red cab-

driver?



We have never seen him since, but we have strong reason to suspect

that this noble individual was a distant relative of a waterman of

our acquaintance, who, on one occasion, when we were passing the

coach-stand over which he presides, after standing very quietly to

see a tall man struggle into a cab, ran up very briskly when it was

all over (as his brethren invariably do), and, touching his hat,

asked, as a matter of course, for 'a copper for the waterman.'

Now, the fare was by no means a handsome man; and, waxing very

indignant at the demand, he replied - 'Money!  What for?  Coming up

and looking at me, I suppose!' - 'Vell, sir,' rejoined the

waterman, with a smile of immovable complacency, 'THAT'S worth

twopence.'



The identical waterman afterwards attained a very prominent station

in society; and as we know something of his life, and have often

thought of telling what we DO know, perhaps we shall never have a

better opportunity than the present.



Mr. William Barker, then, for that was the gentleman's name, Mr.

William Barker was born - but why need we relate where Mr. William

Barker was born, or when?  Why scrutinise the entries in parochial

ledgers, or seek to penetrate the Lucinian mysteries of lying-in

hospitals?  Mr. William Barker WAS born, or he had never been.

There is a son - there was a father.  There is an effect - there

was a cause.  Surely this is sufficient information for the most

Fatima-like curiosity; and, if it be not, we regret our inability

to supply any further evidence on the point.  Can there be a more

satisfactory, or more strictly parliamentary course?  Impossible.



We at once avow a similar inability to record at what precise

period, or by what particular process, this gentleman's patronymic,

of William Barker, became corrupted into 'Bill Boorker.' Mr. Barker

acquired a high standing, and no inconsiderable reputation, among

the members of that profession to which he more peculiarly devoted

his energies; and to them he was generally known, either by the

familiar appellation of 'Bill Boorker,' or the flattering

designation of 'Aggerawatin Bill,' the latter being a playful and

expressive SOBRIQUET, illustrative of Mr. Barker's great talent in

'aggerawatin' and rendering wild such subjects of her Majesty as

are conveyed from place to place, through the instrumentality of

omnibuses.  Of the early life of Mr. Barker little is known, and

even that little is involved in considerable doubt and obscurity.

A want of application, a restlessness of purpose, a thirsting after

porter, a love of all that is roving and cadger-like in nature,

shared in common with many other great geniuses, appear to have

been his leading characteristics.  The busy hum of a parochial

free-school, and the shady repose of a county gaol, were alike

inefficacious in producing the slightest alteration in Mr. Barker's

disposition.  His feverish attachment to change and variety nothing

could repress; his native daring no punishment could subdue.



If Mr. Barker can be fairly said to have had any weakness in his

earlier years, it was an amiable one - love; love in its most

comprehensive form - a love of ladies, liquids, and pocket-

handkerchiefs.  It was no selfish feeling; it was not confined to

his own possessions, which but too many men regard with exclusive

complacency.  No; it was a nobler love - a general principle.  It

extended itself with equal force to the property of other people.



There is something very affecting in this.  It is still more

affecting to know, that such philanthropy is but imperfectly

rewarded.  Bow-street, Newgate, and Millbank, are a poor return for

general benevolence, evincing itself in an irrepressible love for

all created objects.  Mr. Barker felt it so.  After a lengthened

interview with the highest legal authorities, he quitted his

ungrateful country, with the consent, and at the expense, of its

Government; proceeded to a distant shore; and there employed

himself, like another Cincinnatus, in clearing and cultivating the

soil - a peaceful pursuit, in which a term of seven years glided

almost imperceptibly away.



Whether, at the expiration of the period we have just mentioned,

the British Government required Mr. Barker's presence here, or did

not require his residence abroad, we have no distinct means of

ascertaining.  We should be inclined, however, to favour the latter

position, inasmuch as we do not find that he was advanced to any

other public post on his return, than the post at the corner of the

Haymarket, where he officiated as assistant-waterman to the

hackney-coach stand.  Seated, in this capacity, on a couple of tubs

near the curbstone, with a brass plate and number suspended round

his neck by a massive chain, and his ankles curiously enveloped in

haybands, he is supposed to have made those observations on human

nature which exercised so material an influence over all his

proceedings in later life.



Mr. Barker had not officiated for many months in this capacity,

when the appearance of the first omnibus caused the public mind to

go in a new direction, and prevented a great many hackney-coaches

from going in any direction at all.  The genius of Mr. Barker at

once perceived the whole extent of the injury that would be

eventually inflicted on cab and coach stands, and, by consequence,

on watermen also, by the progress of the system of which the first

omnibus was a part.  He saw, too, the necessity of adopting some

more profitable profession; and his active mind at once perceived

how much might be done in the way of enticing the youthful and

unwary, and shoving the old and helpless, into the wrong buss, and

carrying them off, until, reduced to despair, they ransomed

themselves by the payment of sixpence a-head, or, to adopt his own

figurative expression in all its native beauty, 'till they was

rig'larly done over, and forked out the stumpy.'



An opportunity for realising his fondest anticipations, soon

presented itself.  Rumours were rife on the hackney-coach stands,

that a buss was building, to run from Lisson-grove to the Bank,

down Oxford-street and Holborn; and the rapid increase of busses on

the Paddington-road, encouraged the idea.  Mr. Barker secretly and

cautiously inquired in the proper quarters.  The report was

correct; the 'Royal William' was to make its first journey on the

following Monday.  It was a crack affair altogether.  An

enterprising young cabman, of established reputation as a dashing

whip - for he had compromised with the parents of three scrunched

children, and just 'worked out' his fine for knocking down an old

lady - was the driver; and the spirited proprietor, knowing Mr.

Barker's qualifications, appointed him to the vacant office of cad

on the very first application.  The buss began to run, and Mr.

Barker entered into a new suit of clothes, and on a new sphere of

action.



To recapitulate all the improvements introduced by this

extraordinary man into the omnibus system - gradually, indeed, but

surely - would occupy a far greater space than we are enabled to

devote to this imperfect memoir.  To him is universally assigned

the original suggestion of the practice which afterwards became so

general - of the driver of a second buss keeping constantly behind

the first one, and driving the pole of his vehicle either into the

door of the other, every time it was opened, or through the body of

any lady or gentleman who might make an attempt to get into it; a

humorous and pleasant invention, exhibiting all that originality of

idea, and fine, bold flow of spirits, so conspicuous in every

action of this great man.



Mr. Barker had opponents of course; what man in public life has

not?  But even his worst enemies cannot deny that he has taken more

old ladies and gentlemen to Paddington who wanted to go to the

Bank, and more old ladies and gentlemen to the Bank who wanted to

go to Paddington, than any six men on the road; and however much

malevolent spirits may pretend to doubt the accuracy of the

statement, they well know it to be an established fact, that he has

forcibly conveyed a variety of ancient persons of either sex, to

both places, who had not the slightest or most distant intention of

going anywhere at all.



Mr. Barker was the identical cad who nobly distinguished himself,

some time since, by keeping a tradesman on the step - the omnibus

going at full speed all the time - till he had thrashed him to his

entire satisfaction, and finally throwing him away, when he had

quite done with him.  Mr. Barker it OUGHT to have been, who

honestly indignant at being ignominiously ejected from a house of

public entertainment, kicked the landlord in the knee, and thereby

caused his death.  We say it OUGHT to have been Mr. Barker, because

the action was not a common one, and could have emanated from no

ordinary mind.



It has now become matter of history; it is recorded in the Newgate

Calendar; and we wish we could attribute this piece of daring

heroism to Mr. Barker.  We regret being compelled to state that it

was not performed by him.  Would, for the family credit we could

add, that it was achieved by his brother!



It was in the exercise of the nicer details of his profession, that

Mr. Barker's knowledge of human nature was beautifully displayed.

He could tell at a glance where a passenger wanted to go to, and

would shout the name of the place accordingly, without the

slightest reference to the real destination of the vehicle.  He

knew exactly the kind of old lady that would be too much flurried

by the process of pushing in and pulling out of the caravan, to

discover where she had been put down, until too late; had an

intuitive perception of what was passing in a passenger's mind when

he inwardly resolved to 'pull that cad up to-morrow morning;' and

never failed to make himself agreeable to female servants, whom he

would place next the door, and talk to all the way.



Human judgment is never infallible, and it would occasionally

happen that Mr. Barker experimentalised with the timidity or

forbearance of the wrong person, in which case a summons to a

Police-office, was, on more than one occasion, followed by a

committal to prison.  It was not in the power of trifles such as

these, however, to subdue the freedom of his spirit.  As soon as

they passed away, he resumed the duties of his profession with

unabated ardour.



We have spoken of Mr. Barker and of the red cab-driver, in the past

tense.  Alas! Mr. Barker has again become an absentee; and the

class of men to which they both belonged is fast disappearing.

Improvement has peered beneath the aprons of our cabs, and

penetrated to the very innermost recesses of our omnibuses.  Dirt

and fustian will vanish before cleanliness and livery.  Slang will

be forgotten when civility becomes general:  and that enlightened,

eloquent, sage, and profound body, the Magistracy of London, will

be deprived of half their amusement, and half their occupation.
