






CHAPTER XXV - A VISIT TO NEWGATE







'The force of habit' is a trite phrase in everybody's mouth; and it

is not a little remarkable that those who use it most as applied to

others, unconsciously afford in their own persons singular examples

of the power which habit and custom exercise over the minds of men,

and of the little reflection they are apt to bestow on subjects

with which every day's experience has rendered them familiar.  If

Bedlam could be suddenly removed like another Aladdin's palace, and

set down on the space now occupied by Newgate, scarcely one man out

of a hundred, whose road to business every morning lies through

Newgate-street, or the Old Bailey, would pass the building without

bestowing a hasty glance on its small, grated windows, and a

transient thought upon the condition of the unhappy beings immured

in its dismal cells; and yet these same men, day by day, and hour

by hour, pass and repass this gloomy depository of the guilt and

misery of London, in one perpetual stream of life and bustle,

utterly unmindful of the throng of wretched creatures pent up

within it - nay, not even knowing, or if they do, not heeding, the

fact, that as they pass one particular angle of the massive wall

with a light laugh or a merry whistle, they stand within one yard

of a fellow-creature, bound and helpless, whose hours are numbered,

from whom the last feeble ray of hope has fled for ever, and whose

miserable career will shortly terminate in a violent and shameful

death.  Contact with death even in its least terrible shape, is

solemn and appalling.  How much more awful is it to reflect on this

near vicinity to the dying - to men in full health and vigour, in

the flower of youth or the prime of life, with all their faculties

and perceptions as acute and perfect as your own; but dying,

nevertheless - dying as surely - with the hand of death imprinted

upon them as indelibly - as if mortal disease had wasted their

frames to shadows, and corruption had already begun!



It was with some such thoughts as these that we determined, not

many weeks since, to visit the interior of Newgate - in an amateur

capacity, of course; and, having carried our intention into effect,

we proceed to lay its results before our readers, in the hope -

founded more upon the nature of the subject, than on any

presumptuous confidence in our own descriptive powers - that this

paper may not be found wholly devoid of interest.  We have only to

premise, that we do not intend to fatigue the reader with any

statistical accounts of the prison; they will be found at length in

numerous reports of numerous committees, and a variety of

authorities of equal weight.  We took no notes, made no memoranda,

measured none of the yards, ascertained the exact number of inches

in no particular room:  are unable even to report of how many

apartments the gaol is composed.



We saw the prison, and saw the prisoners; and what we did see, and

what we thought, we will tell at once in our own way.



Having delivered our credentials to the servant who answered our

knock at the door of the governor's house, we were ushered into the

'office;' a little room, on the right-hand side as you enter, with

two windows looking into the Old Bailey:  fitted up like an

ordinary attorney's office, or merchant's counting-house, with the

usual fixtures - a wainscoted partition, a shelf or two, a desk, a

couple of stools, a pair of clerks, an almanack, a clock, and a few

maps.  After a little delay, occasioned by sending into the

interior of the prison for the officer whose duty it was to conduct

us, that functionary arrived; a respectable-looking man of about

two or three and fifty, in a broad-brimmed hat, and full suit of

black, who, but for his keys, would have looked quite as much like

a clergyman as a turnkey.  We were disappointed; he had not even

top-boots on.  Following our conductor by a door opposite to that

at which we had entered, we arrived at a small room, without any

other furniture than a little desk, with a book for visitors'

autographs, and a shelf, on which were a few boxes for papers, and

casts of the heads and faces of the two notorious murderers, Bishop

and Williams; the former, in particular, exhibiting a style of head

and set of features, which might have afforded sufficient moral

grounds for his instant execution at any time, even had there been

no other evidence against him.  Leaving this room also, by an

opposite door, we found ourself in the lodge which opens on the Old

Bailey; one side of which is plentifully garnished with a choice

collection of heavy sets of irons, including those worn by the

redoubtable Jack Sheppard - genuine; and those SAID to have been

graced by the sturdy limbs of the no less celebrated Dick Turpin -

doubtful.  From this lodge, a heavy oaken gate, bound with iron,

studded with nails of the same material, and guarded by another

turnkey, opens on a few steps, if we remember right, which

terminate in a narrow and dismal stone passage, running parallel

with the Old Bailey, and leading to the different yards, through a

number of tortuous and intricate windings, guarded in their turn by

huge gates and gratings, whose appearance is sufficient to dispel

at once the slightest hope of escape that any new-comer may have

entertained; and the very recollection of which, on eventually

traversing the place again, involves one in a maze of confusion.



It is necessary to explain here, that the buildings in the prison,

or in other words the different wards - form a square, of which the

four sides abut respectively on the Old Bailey, the old College of

Physicians (now forming a part of Newgate-market), the Sessions-

house, and Newgate-street.  The intermediate space is divided into

several paved yards, in which the prisoners take such air and

exercise as can be had in such a place.  These yards, with the

exception of that in which prisoners under sentence of death are

confined (of which we shall presently give a more detailed

description), run parallel with Newgate-street, and consequently

from the Old Bailey, as it were, to Newgate-market.  The women's

side is in the right wing of the prison nearest the Sessions-house.

As we were introduced into this part of the building first, we will

adopt the same order, and introduce our readers to it also.



Turning to the right, then, down the passage to which we just now

adverted, omitting any mention of intervening gates - for if we

noticed every gate that was unlocked for us to pass through, and

locked again as soon as we had passed, we should require a gate at

every comma - we came to a door composed of thick bars of wood,

through which were discernible, passing to and fro in a narrow

yard, some twenty women:  the majority of whom, however, as soon as

they were aware of the presence of strangers, retreated to their

wards.  One side of this yard is railed off at a considerable

distance, and formed into a kind of iron cage, about five feet ten

inches in height, roofed at the top, and defended in front by iron

bars, from which the friends of the female prisoners communicate

with them.  In one corner of this singular-looking den, was a

yellow, haggard, decrepit old woman, in a tattered gown that had

once been black, and the remains of an old straw bonnet, with faded

ribbon of the same hue, in earnest conversation with a young girl -

a prisoner, of course - of about two-and-twenty.  It is impossible

to imagine a more poverty-stricken object, or a creature so borne

down in soul and body, by excess of misery and destitution, as the

old woman.  The girl was a good-looking, robust female, with a

profusion of hair streaming about in the wind - for she had no

bonnet on - and a man's silk pocket-handkerchief loosely thrown

over a most ample pair of shoulders.  The old woman was talking in

that low, stifled tone of voice which tells so forcibly of mental

anguish; and every now and then burst into an irrepressible sharp,

abrupt cry of grief, the most distressing sound that ears can hear.

The girl was perfectly unmoved.  Hardened beyond all hope of

redemption, she listened doggedly to her mother's entreaties,

whatever they were:  and, beyond inquiring after 'Jem,' and eagerly

catching at the few halfpence her miserable parent had brought her,

took no more apparent interest in the conversation than the most

unconcerned spectators.  Heaven knows there were enough of them, in

the persons of the other prisoners in the yard, who were no more

concerned by what was passing before their eyes, and within their

hearing, than if they were blind and deaf.  Why should they be?

Inside the prison, and out, such scenes were too familiar to them,

to excite even a passing thought, unless of ridicule or contempt

for feelings which they had long since forgotten.



A little farther on, a squalid-looking woman in a slovenly, thick-

bordered cap, with her arms muffled in a large red shawl, the

fringed ends of which straggled nearly to the bottom of a dirty

white apron, was communicating some instructions to HER visitor -

her daughter evidently.  The girl was thinly clad, and shaking with

the cold.  Some ordinary word of recognition passed between her and

her mother when she appeared at the grating, but neither hope,

condolence, regret, nor affection was expressed on either side.

The mother whispered her instructions, and the girl received them

with her pinched-up, half-starved features twisted into an

expression of careful cunning.  It was some scheme for the woman's

defence that she was disclosing, perhaps; and a sullen smile came

over the girl's face for an instant, as if she were pleased:  not

so much at the probability of her mother's liberation, as at the

chance of her 'getting off' in spite of her prosecutors.  The

dialogue was soon concluded; and with the same careless

indifference with which they had approached each other, the mother

turned towards the inner end of the yard, and the girl to the gate

at which she had entered.



The girl belonged to a class - unhappily but too extensive - the

very existence of which, should make men's hearts bleed.  Barely

past her childhood, it required but a glance to discover that she

was one of those children, born and bred in neglect and vice, who

have never known what childhood is:  who have never been taught to

love and court a parent's smile, or to dread a parent's frown.  The

thousand nameless endearments of childhood, its gaiety and its

innocence, are alike unknown to them.  They have entered at once

upon the stern realities and miseries of life, and to their better

nature it is almost hopeless to appeal in after-times, by any of

the references which will awaken, if it be only for a moment, some

good feeling in ordinary bosoms, however corrupt they may have

become.  Talk to THEM of parental solicitude, the happy days of

childhood, and the merry games of infancy!  Tell them of hunger and

the streets, beggary and stripes, the gin-shop, the station-house,

and the pawnbroker's, and they will understand you.



Two or three women were standing at different parts of the grating,

conversing with their friends, but a very large proportion of the

prisoners appeared to have no friends at all, beyond such of their

old companions as might happen to be within the walls.  So, passing

hastily down the yard, and pausing only for an instant to notice

the little incidents we have just recorded, we were conducted up a

clean and well-lighted flight of stone stairs to one of the wards.

There are several in this part of the building, but a description

of one is a description of the whole.



It was a spacious, bare, whitewashed apartment, lighted, of course,

by windows looking into the interior of the prison, but far more

light and airy than one could reasonably expect to find in such a

situation.  There was a large fire with a deal table before it,

round which ten or a dozen women were seated on wooden forms at

dinner.  Along both sides of the room ran a shelf; below it, at

regular intervals, a row of large hooks were fixed in the wall, on

each of which was hung the sleeping mat of a prisoner:  her rug and

blanket being folded up, and placed on the shelf above.  At night,

these mats are placed on the floor, each beneath the hook on which

it hangs during the day; and the ward is thus made to answer the

purposes both of a day-room and sleeping apartment.  Over the

fireplace, was a large sheet of pasteboard, on which were displayed

a variety of texts from Scripture, which were also scattered about

the room in scraps about the size and shape of the copy-slips which

are used in schools.  On the table was a sufficient provision of a

kind of stewed beef and brown bread, in pewter dishes, which are

kept perfectly bright, and displayed on shelves in great order and

regularity when they are not in use.



The women rose hastily, on our entrance, and retired in a hurried

manner to either side of the fireplace.  They were all cleanly -

many of them decently - attired, and there was nothing peculiar,

either in their appearance or demeanour.  One or two resumed the

needlework which they had probably laid aside at the commencement

of their meal; others gazed at the visitors with listless

curiosity; and a few retired behind their companions to the very

end of the room, as if desirous to avoid even the casual

observation of the strangers.  Some old Irish women, both in this

and other wards, to whom the thing was no novelty, appeared

perfectly indifferent to our presence, and remained standing close

to the seats from which they had just risen; but the general

feeling among the females seemed to be one of uneasiness during the

period of our stay among them:  which was very brief.  Not a word

was uttered during the time of our remaining, unless, indeed, by

the wardswoman in reply to some question which we put to the

turnkey who accompanied us.  In every ward on the female side, a

wardswoman is appointed to preserve order, and a similar regulation

is adopted among the males.  The wardsmen and wardswomen are all

prisoners, selected for good conduct.  They alone are allowed the

privilege of sleeping on bedsteads; a small stump bedstead being

placed in every ward for that purpose.  On both sides of the gaol,

is a small receiving-room, to which prisoners are conducted on

their first reception, and whence they cannot be removed until they

have been examined by the surgeon of the prison. (2)



Retracing our steps to the dismal passage in which we found

ourselves at first (and which, by-the-bye, contains three or four

dark cells for the accommodation of refractory prisoners), we were

led through a narrow yard to the 'school' - a portion of the prison

set apart for boys under fourteen years of age.  In a tolerable-

sized room, in which were writing-materials and some copy-books,

was the schoolmaster, with a couple of his pupils; the remainder

having been fetched from an adjoining apartment, the whole were

drawn up in line for our inspection.  There were fourteen of them

in all, some with shoes, some without; some in pinafores without

jackets, others in jackets without pinafores, and one in scarce

anything at all.  The whole number, without an exception we

believe, had been committed for trial on charges of pocket-picking;

and fourteen such terrible little faces we never beheld. - There

was not one redeeming feature among them - not a glance of honesty

- not a wink expressive of anything but the gallows and the hulks,

in the whole collection.  As to anything like shame or contrition,

that was entirely out of the question.  They were evidently quite

gratified at being thought worth the trouble of looking at; their

idea appeared to be, that we had come to see Newgate as a grand

affair, and that they were an indispensable part of the show; and

every boy as he 'fell in' to the line, actually seemed as pleased

and important as if he had done something excessively meritorious

in getting there at all.  We never looked upon a more disagreeable

sight, because we never saw fourteen such hopeless creatures of

neglect, before.



On either side of the school-yard is a yard for men, in one of

which - that towards Newgate-street - prisoners of the more

respectable class are confined.  Of the other, we have little

description to offer, as the different wards necessarily partake of

the same character.  They are provided, like the wards on the

women's side, with mats and rugs, which are disposed of in the same

manner during the day; the only very striking difference between

their appearance and that of the wards inhabited by the females, is

the utter absence of any employment.  Huddled together on two

opposite forms, by the fireside, sit twenty men perhaps; here, a

boy in livery; there, a man in a rough great-coat and top-boots;

farther on, a desperate-looking fellow in his shirt-sleeves, with

an old Scotch cap upon his shaggy head; near him again, a tall

ruffian, in a smock-frock; next to him, a miserable being of

distressed appearance, with his head resting on his hand; - all

alike in one respect, all idle and listless.  When they do leave

the fire, sauntering moodily about, lounging in the window, or

leaning against the wall, vacantly swinging their bodies to and

fro.  With the exception of a man reading an old newspaper, in two

or three instances, this was the case in every ward we entered.



The only communication these men have with their friends, is

through two close iron gratings, with an intermediate space of

about a yard in width between the two, so that nothing can be

handed across, nor can the prisoner have any communication by touch

with the person who visits him.  The married men have a separate

grating, at which to see their wives, but its construction is the

same.



The prison chapel is situated at the back of the governor's house:

the latter having no windows looking into the interior of the

prison.  Whether the associations connected with the place - the

knowledge that here a portion of the burial service is, on some

dreadful occasions, performed over the quick and not upon the dead

- cast over it a still more gloomy and sombre air than art has

imparted to it, we know not, but its appearance is very striking.

There is something in a silent and deserted place of worship,

solemn and impressive at any time; and the very dissimilarity of

this one from any we have been accustomed to, only enhances the

impression.  The meanness of its appointments - the bare and scanty

pulpit, with the paltry painted pillars on either side - the

women's gallery with its great heavy curtain - the men's with its

unpainted benches and dingy front - the tottering little table at

the altar, with the commandments on the wall above it, scarcely

legible through lack of paint, and dust and damp - so unlike the

velvet and gilding, the marble and wood, of a modern church - are

strange and striking.  There is one object, too, which rivets the

attention and fascinates the gaze, and from which we may turn

horror-stricken in vain, for the recollection of it will haunt us,

waking and sleeping, for a long time afterwards.  Immediately below

the reading-desk, on the floor of the chapel, and forming the most

conspicuous object in its little area, is THE CONDEMNED PEW; a huge

black pen, in which the wretched people, who are singled out for

death, are placed on the Sunday preceding their execution, in sight

of all their fellow-prisoners, from many of whom they may have been

separated but a week before, to hear prayers for their own souls,

to join in the responses of their own burial service, and to listen

to an address, warning their recent companions to take example by

their fate, and urging themselves, while there is yet time - nearly

four-and-twenty hours - to 'turn, and flee from the wrath to come!'

Imagine what have been the feelings of the men whom that fearful

pew has enclosed, and of whom, between the gallows and the knife,

no mortal remnant may now remain!  Think of the hopeless clinging

to life to the last, and the wild despair, far exceeding in anguish

the felon's death itself, by which they have heard the certainty of

their speedy transmission to another world, with all their crimes

upon their heads, rung into their ears by the officiating

clergyman!



At one time - and at no distant period either - the coffins of the

men about to be executed, were placed in that pew, upon the seat by

their side, during the whole service.  It may seem incredible, but

it is true.  Let us hope that the increased spirit of civilisation

and humanity which abolished this frightful and degrading custom,

may extend itself to other usages equally barbarous; usages which

have not even the plea of utility in their defence, as every year's

experience has shown them to be more and more inefficacious.



Leaving the chapel, descending to the passage so frequently alluded

to, and crossing the yard before noticed as being allotted to

prisoners of a more respectable description than the generality of

men confined here, the visitor arrives at a thick iron gate of

great size and strength.  Having been admitted through it by the

turnkey on duty, he turns sharp round to the left, and pauses

before another gate; and, having passed this last barrier, he

stands in the most terrible part of this gloomy building - the

condemned ward.



The press-yard, well known by name to newspaper readers, from its

frequent mention in accounts of executions, is at the corner of the

building, and next to the ordinary's house, in Newgate-street:

running from Newgate-street, towards the centre of the prison,

parallel with Newgate-market.  It is a long, narrow court, of which

a portion of the wall in Newgate-street forms one end, and the gate

the other.  At the upper end, on the left hand - that is, adjoining

the wall in Newgate-street - is a cistern of water, and at the

bottom a double grating (of which the gate itself forms a part)

similar to that before described.  Through these grates the

prisoners are allowed to see their friends; a turnkey always

remaining in the vacant space between, during the whole interview.

Immediately on the right as you enter, is a building containing the

press-room, day-room, and cells; the yard is on every side

surrounded by lofty walls guarded by CHEVAUX DE FRISE; and the

whole is under the constant inspection of vigilant and experienced

turnkeys.



In the first apartment into which we were conducted - which was at

the top of a staircase, and immediately over the press-room - were

five-and-twenty or thirty prisoners, all under sentence of death,

awaiting the result of the recorder's report - men of all ages and

appearances, from a hardened old offender with swarthy face and

grizzly beard of three days' growth, to a handsome boy, not

fourteen years old, and of singularly youthful appearance even for

that age, who had been condemned for burglary.  There was nothing

remarkable in the appearance of these prisoners.  One or two

decently-dressed men were brooding with a dejected air over the

fire; several little groups of two or three had been engaged in

conversation at the upper end of the room, or in the windows; and

the remainder were crowded round a young man seated at a table, who

appeared to be engaged in teaching the younger ones to write.  The

room was large, airy, and clean.  There was very little anxiety or

mental suffering depicted in the countenance of any of the men; -

they had all been sentenced to death, it is true, and the

recorder's report had not yet been made; but, we question whether

there was a man among them, notwithstanding, who did not KNOW that

although he had undergone the ceremony, it never was intended that

his life should be sacrificed.  On the table lay a Testament, but

there were no tokens of its having been in recent use.



In the press-room below, were three men, the nature of whose

offence rendered it necessary to separate them, even from their

companions in guilt.  It is a long, sombre room, with two windows

sunk into the stone wall, and here the wretched men are pinioned on

the morning of their execution, before moving towards the scaffold.

The fate of one of these prisoners was uncertain; some mitigatory

circumstances having come to light since his trial, which had been

humanely represented in the proper quarter.  The other two had

nothing to expect from the mercy of the crown; their doom was

sealed; no plea could be urged in extenuation of their crime, and

they well knew that for them there was no hope in this world.  'The

two short ones,' the turnkey whispered, 'were dead men.'



The man to whom we have alluded as entertaining some hopes of

escape, was lounging, at the greatest distance he could place

between himself and his companions, in the window nearest to the

door.  He was probably aware of our approach, and had assumed an

air of courageous indifference; his face was purposely averted

towards the window, and he stirred not an inch while we were

present.  The other two men were at the upper end of the room.  One

of them, who was imperfectly seen in the dim light, had his back

towards us, and was stooping over the fire, with his right arm on

the mantel-piece, and his head sunk upon it.  The other was leaning

on the sill of the farthest window.  The light fell full upon him,

and communicated to his pale, haggard face, and disordered hair, an

appearance which, at that distance, was ghastly.  His cheek rested

upon his hand; and, with his face a little raised, and his eyes

wildly staring before him, he seemed to be unconsciously intent on

counting the chinks in the opposite wall.  We passed this room

again afterwards.  The first man was pacing up and down the court

with a firm military step - he had been a soldier in the foot-

guards - and a cloth cap jauntily thrown on one side of his head.

He bowed respectfully to our conductor, and the salute was

returned.  The other two still remained in the positions we have

described, and were as motionless as statues. (3)



A few paces up the yard, and forming a continuation of the

building, in which are the two rooms we have just quitted, lie the

condemned cells.  The entrance is by a narrow and obscure stair-

case leading to a dark passage, in which a charcoal stove casts a

lurid tint over the objects in its immediate vicinity, and diffuses

something like warmth around.  From the left-hand side of this

passage, the massive door of every cell on the story opens; and

from it alone can they be approached.  There are three of these

passages, and three of these ranges of cells, one above the other;

but in size, furniture and appearance, they are all precisely

alike.  Prior to the recorder's report being made, all the

prisoners under sentence of death are removed from the day-room at

five o'clock in the afternoon, and locked up in these cells, where

they are allowed a candle until ten o'clock; and here they remain

until seven next morning.  When the warrant for a prisoner's

execution arrives, he is removed to the cells and confined in one

of them until he leaves it for the scaffold.  He is at liberty to

walk in the yard; but, both in his walks and in his cell, he is

constantly attended by a turnkey who never leaves him on any

pretence.



We entered the first cell.  It was a stone dungeon, eight feet long

by six wide, with a bench at the upper end, under which were a

common rug, a bible, and prayer-book.  An iron candlestick was

fixed into the wall at the side; and a small high window in the

back admitted as much air and light as could struggle in between a

double row of heavy, crossed iron bars.  It contained no other

furniture of any description.



Conceive the situation of a man, spending his last night on earth

in this cell.  Buoyed up with some vague and undefined hope of

reprieve, he knew not why - indulging in some wild and visionary

idea of escaping, he knew not how - hour after hour of the three

preceding days allowed him for preparation, has fled with a speed

which no man living would deem possible, for none but this dying

man can know.  He has wearied his friends with entreaties,

exhausted the attendants with importunities, neglected in his

feverish restlessness the timely warnings of his spiritual

consoler; and, now that the illusion is at last dispelled, now that

eternity is before him and guilt behind, now that his fears of

death amount almost to madness, and an overwhelming sense of his

helpless, hopeless state rushes upon him, he is lost and stupefied,

and has neither thoughts to turn to, nor power to call upon, the

Almighty Being, from whom alone he can seek mercy and forgiveness,

and before whom his repentance can alone avail.



Hours have glided by, and still he sits upon the same stone bench

with folded arms, heedless alike of the fast decreasing time before

him, and the urgent entreaties of the good man at his side.  The

feeble light is wasting gradually, and the deathlike stillness of

the street without, broken only by the rumbling of some passing

vehicle which echoes mournfully through the empty yards, warns him

that the night is waning fast away.  The deep bell of St. Paul's

strikes - one!  He heard it; it has roused him.  Seven hours left!

He paces the narrow limits of his cell with rapid strides, cold

drops of terror starting on his forehead, and every muscle of his

frame quivering with agony.  Seven hours!  He suffers himself to be

led to his seat, mechanically takes the bible which is placed in

his hand, and tries to read and listen.  No:  his thoughts will

wander.  The book is torn and soiled by use - and like the book he

read his lessons in, at school, just forty years ago!  He has never

bestowed a thought upon it, perhaps, since he left it as a child:

and yet the place, the time, the room - nay, the very boys he

played with, crowd as vividly before him as if they were scenes of

yesterday; and some forgotten phrase, some childish word, rings in

his ears like the echo of one uttered but a minute since.  The

voice of the clergyman recalls him to himself.  He is reading from

the sacred book its solemn promises of pardon for repentance, and

its awful denunciation of obdurate men.  He falls upon his knees

and clasps his hands to pray.  Hush! what sound was that?  He

starts upon his feet.  It cannot be two yet.  Hark!  Two quarters

have struck;  - the third - the fourth.  It is!  Six hours left.

Tell him not of repentance!  Six hours' repentance for eight times

six years of guilt and sin!  He buries his face in his hands, and

throws himself on the bench.



Worn with watching and excitement, he sleeps, and the same

unsettled state of mind pursues him in his dreams.  An

insupportable load is taken from his breast; he is walking with his

wife in a pleasant field, with the bright sky above them, and a

fresh and boundless prospect on every side - how different from the

stone walls of Newgate!  She is looking - not as she did when he

saw her for the last time in that dreadful place, but as she used

when he loved her - long, long ago, before misery and ill-treatment

had altered her looks, and vice had changed his nature, and she is

leaning upon his arm, and looking up into his face with tenderness

and affection - and he does NOT strike her now, nor rudely shake

her from him.  And oh! how glad he is to tell her all he had

forgotten in that last hurried interview, and to fall on his knees

before her and fervently beseech her pardon for all the unkindness

and cruelty that wasted her form and broke her heart!  The scene

suddenly changes.  He is on his trial again:  there are the judge

and jury, and prosecutors, and witnesses, just as they were before.

How full the court is - what a sea of heads - with a gallows, too,

and a scaffold - and how all those people stare at HIM!  Verdict,

'Guilty.'  No matter; he will escape.



The night is dark and cold, the gates have been left open, and in

an instant he is in the street, flying from the scene of his

imprisonment like the wind.  The streets are cleared, the open

fields are gained and the broad, wide country lies before him.

Onward he dashes in the midst of darkness, over hedge and ditch,

through mud and pool, bounding from spot to spot with a speed and

lightness, astonishing even to himself.  At length he pauses; he

must be safe from pursuit now; he will stretch himself on that bank

and sleep till sunrise.



A period of unconsciousness succeeds.  He wakes, cold and wretched.

The dull, gray light of morning is stealing into the cell, and

falls upon the form of the attendant turnkey.  Confused by his

dreams, he starts from his uneasy bed in momentary uncertainty.  It

is but momentary.  Every object in the narrow cell is too

frightfully real to admit of doubt or mistake.  He is the condemned

felon again, guilty and despairing; and in two hours more will be

dead.
