





CHAPTER IX - LONDON RECREATIONS







The wish of persons in the humbler classes of life, to ape the

manners and customs of those whom fortune has placed above them, is

often the subject of remark, and not unfrequently of complaint.

The inclination may, and no doubt does, exist to a great extent,

among the small gentility - the would-be aristocrats - of the

middle classes.  Tradesmen and clerks, with fashionable novel-

reading families, and circulating-library-subscribing daughters,

get up small assemblies in humble imitation of Almack's, and

promenade the dingy 'large room' of some second-rate hotel with as

much complacency as the enviable few who are privileged to exhibit

their magnificence in that exclusive haunt of fashion and foolery.

Aspiring young ladies, who read flaming accounts of some 'fancy

fair in high life,' suddenly grow desperately charitable; visions

of admiration and matrimony float before their eyes; some

wonderfully meritorious institution, which, by the strangest

accident in the world, has never been heard of before, is

discovered to be in a languishing condition:  Thomson's great room,

or Johnson's nursery-ground, is forthwith engaged, and the

aforesaid young ladies, from mere charity, exhibit themselves for

three days, from twelve to four, for the small charge of one

shilling per head!  With the exception of these classes of society,

however, and a few weak and insignificant persons, we do not think

the attempt at imitation to which we have alluded, prevails in any

great degree.  The different character of the recreations of

different classes, has often afforded us amusement; and we have

chosen it for the subject of our present sketch, in the hope that

it may possess some amusement for our readers.



If the regular City man, who leaves Lloyd's at five o'clock, and

drives home to Hackney, Clapton, Stamford-hill, or elsewhere, can

be said to have any daily recreation beyond his dinner, it is his

garden.  He never does anything to it with his own hands; but he

takes great pride in it notwithstanding; and if you are desirous of

paying your addresses to the youngest daughter, be sure to be in

raptures with every flower and shrub it contains.  If your poverty

of expression compel you to make any distinction between the two,

we would certainly recommend your bestowing more admiration on his

garden than his wine.  He always takes a walk round it, before he

starts for town in the morning, and is particularly anxious that

the fish-pond should be kept specially neat.  If you call on him on

Sunday in summer-time, about an hour before dinner, you will find

him sitting in an arm-chair, on the lawn behind the house, with a

straw hat on, reading a Sunday paper.  A short distance from him

you will most likely observe a handsome paroquet in a large brass-

wire cage; ten to one but the two eldest girls are loitering in one

of the side walks accompanied by a couple of young gentlemen, who

are holding parasols over them - of course only to keep the sun off

- while the younger children, with the under nursery-maid, are

strolling listlessly about, in the shade.  Beyond these occasions,

his delight in his garden appears to arise more from the

consciousness of possession than actual enjoyment of it.  When he

drives you down to dinner on a week-day, he is rather fatigued with

the occupations of the morning, and tolerably cross into the

bargain; but when the cloth is removed, and he has drank three or

four glasses of his favourite port, he orders the French windows of

his dining-room (which of course look into the garden) to be

opened, and throwing a silk handkerchief over his head, and leaning

back in his arm-chair, descants at considerable length upon its

beauty, and the cost of maintaining it.  This is to impress you -

who are a young friend of the family - with a due sense of the

excellence of the garden, and the wealth of its owner; and when he

has exhausted the subject, he goes to sleep.



There is another and a very different class of men, whose

recreation is their garden.  An individual of this class, resides

some short distance from town - say in the Hampstead-road, or the

Kilburn-road, or any other road where the houses are small and

neat, and have little slips of back garden.  He and his wife - who

is as clean and compact a little body as himself - have occupied

the same house ever since he retired from business twenty years

ago.  They have no family.  They once had a son, who died at about

five years old.  The child's portrait hangs over the mantelpiece in

the best sitting-room, and a little cart he used to draw about, is

carefully preserved as a relic.



In fine weather the old gentleman is almost constantly in the

garden; and when it is too wet to go into it, he will look out of

the window at it, by the hour together.  He has always something to

do there, and you will see him digging, and sweeping, and cutting,

and planting, with manifest delight.  In spring-time, there is no

end to the sowing of seeds, and sticking little bits of wood over

them, with labels, which look like epitaphs to their memory; and in

the evening, when the sun has gone down, the perseverance with

which he lugs a great watering-pot about is perfectly astonishing.

The only other recreation he has, is the newspaper, which he

peruses every day, from beginning to end, generally reading the

most interesting pieces of intelligence to his wife, during

breakfast.  The old lady is very fond of flowers, as the hyacinth-

glasses in the parlour-window, and geranium-pots in the little

front court, testify.  She takes great pride in the garden too:

and when one of the four fruit-trees produces rather a larger

gooseberry than usual, it is carefully preserved under a wine-glass

on the sideboard, for the edification of visitors, who are duly

informed that Mr. So-and-so planted the tree which produced it,

with his own hands.  On a summer's evening, when the large

watering-pot has been filled and emptied some fourteen times, and

the old couple have quite exhausted themselves by trotting about,

you will see them sitting happily together in the little

summerhouse, enjoying the calm and peace of the twilight, and

watching the shadows as they fall upon the garden, and gradually

growing thicker and more sombre, obscure the tints of their gayest

flowers - no bad emblem of the years that have silently rolled over

their heads, deadening in their course the brightest hues of early

hopes and feelings which have long since faded away.  These are

their only recreations, and they require no more.  They have within

themselves, the materials of comfort and content; and the only

anxiety of each, is to die before the other.



This is no ideal sketch.  There USED to be many old people of this

description; their numbers may have diminished, and may decrease

still more.  Whether the course female education has taken of late

days - whether the pursuit of giddy frivolities, and empty

nothings, has tended to unfit women for that quiet domestic life,

in which they show far more beautifully than in the most crowded

assembly, is a question we should feel little gratification in

discussing:  we hope not.



Let us turn now, to another portion of the London population, whose

recreations present about as strong a contrast as can well be

conceived - we mean the Sunday pleasurers; and let us beg our

readers to imagine themselves stationed by our side in some well-

known rural 'Tea-gardens.'



The heat is intense this afternoon, and the people, of whom there

are additional parties arriving every moment, look as warm as the

tables which have been recently painted, and have the appearance of

being red-hot.  What a dust and noise!  Men and women - boys and

girls - sweethearts and married people - babies in arms, and

children in chaises - pipes and shrimps - cigars and periwinkles -

tea and tobacco.  Gentlemen, in alarming waistcoats, and steel

watch-guards, promenading about, three abreast, with surprising

dignity (or as the gentleman in the next box facetiously observes,

'cutting it uncommon fat!') - ladies, with great, long, white

pocket-handkerchiefs like small table-cloths, in their hands,

chasing one another on the grass in the most playful and

interesting manner, with the view of attracting the attention of

the aforesaid gentlemen - husbands in perspective ordering bottles

of ginger-beer for the objects of their affections, with a lavish

disregard of expense; and the said objects washing down huge

quantities of 'shrimps' and 'winkles,' with an equal disregard of

their own bodily health and subsequent comfort - boys, with great

silk hats just balanced on the top of their heads, smoking cigars,

and trying to look as if they liked them - gentlemen in pink shirts

and blue waistcoats, occasionally upsetting either themselves, or

somebody else, with their own canes.



Some of the finery of these people provokes a smile, but they are

all clean, and happy, and disposed to be good-natured and sociable.

Those two motherly-looking women in the smart pelisses, who are

chatting so confidentially, inserting a 'ma'am' at every fourth

word, scraped an acquaintance about a quarter of an hour ago:  it

originated in admiration of the little boy who belongs to one of

them - that diminutive specimen of mortality in the three-cornered

pink satin hat with black feathers.  The two men in the blue coats

and drab trousers, who are walking up and down, smoking their

pipes, are their husbands.  The party in the opposite box are a

pretty fair specimen of the generality of the visitors.  These are

the father and mother, and old grandmother:  a young man and woman,

and an individual addressed by the euphonious title of 'Uncle

Bill,' who is evidently the wit of the party.  They have some half-

dozen children with them, but it is scarcely necessary to notice

the fact, for that is a matter of course here.  Every woman in 'the

gardens,' who has been married for any length of time, must have

had twins on two or three occasions; it is impossible to account

for the extent of juvenile population in any other way.



Observe the inexpressible delight of the old grandmother, at Uncle

Bill's splendid joke of 'tea for four:  bread-and-butter for

forty;' and the loud explosion of mirth which follows his wafering

a paper 'pigtail' on the waiter's collar.  The young man is

evidently 'keeping company' with Uncle Bill's niece:  and Uncle

Bill's hints - such as 'Don't forget me at the dinner, you know,'

'I shall look out for the cake, Sally,' 'I'll be godfather to your

first - wager it's a boy,' and so forth, are equally embarrassing

to the young people, and delightful to the elder ones.  As to the

old grandmother, she is in perfect ecstasies, and does nothing but

laugh herself into fits of coughing, until they have finished the

'gin-and-water warm with,' of which Uncle Bill ordered 'glasses

round' after tea, 'just to keep the night air out, and to do it up

comfortable and riglar arter sitch an as-tonishing hot day!'



It is getting dark, and the people begin to move.  The field

leading to town is quite full of them; the little hand-chaises are

dragged wearily along, the children are tired, and amuse themselves

and the company generally by crying, or resort to the much more

pleasant expedient of going to sleep - the mothers begin to wish

they were at home again - sweethearts grow more sentimental than

ever, as the time for parting arrives - the gardens look mournful

enough, by the light of the two lanterns which hang against the

trees for the convenience of smokers - and the waiters who have

been running about incessantly for the last six hours, think they

feel a little tired, as they count their glasses and their gains.
