






CHAPTER XXIII - THE PAWNBROKER'S SHOP







Of the numerous receptacles for misery and distress with which the

streets of London unhappily abound, there are, perhaps, none which

present such striking scenes as the pawnbrokers' shops.  The very

nature and description of these places occasions their being but

little known, except to the unfortunate beings whose profligacy or

misfortune drives them to seek the temporary relief they offer.

The subject may appear, at first sight, to be anything but an

inviting one, but we venture on it nevertheless, in the hope that,

as far as the limits of our present paper are concerned, it will

present nothing to disgust even the most fastidious reader.



There are some pawnbrokers' shops of a very superior description.

There are grades in pawning as in everything else, and distinctions

must be observed even in poverty.  The aristocratic Spanish cloak

and the plebeian calico shirt, the silver fork and the flat iron,

the muslin cravat and the Belcher neckerchief, would but ill assort

together; so, the better sort of pawnbroker calls himself a silver-

smith, and decorates his shop with handsome trinkets and expensive

jewellery, while the more humble money-lender boldly advertises his

calling, and invites observation.  It is with pawnbrokers' shops of

the latter class, that we have to do.  We have selected one for our

purpose, and will endeavour to describe it.



The pawnbroker's shop is situated near Drury-Lane, at the corner of

a court, which affords a side entrance for the accommodation of

such customers as may be desirous of avoiding the observation of

the passers-by, or the chance of recognition in the public street.

It is a low, dirty-looking, dusty shop, the door of which stands

always doubtfully, a little way open:  half inviting, half

repelling the hesitating visitor, who, if he be as yet uninitiated,

examines one of the old garnet brooches in the window for a minute

or two with affected eagerness, as if he contemplated making a

purchase; and then looking cautiously round to ascertain that no

one watches him, hastily slinks in:  the door closing of itself

after him, to just its former width.  The shop front and the

window-frames bear evident marks of having been once painted; but,

what the colour was originally, or at what date it was probably

laid on, are at this remote period questions which may be asked,

but cannot be answered.  Tradition states that the transparency in

the front door, which displays at night three red balls on a blue

ground, once bore also, inscribed in graceful waves, the words

'Money advanced on plate, jewels, wearing apparel, and every

description of property,' but a few illegible hieroglyphics are all

that now remain to attest the fact.  The plate and jewels would

seem to have disappeared, together with the announcement, for the

articles of stock, which are displayed in some profusion in the

window, do not include any very valuable luxuries of either kind.

A few old china cups; some modern vases, adorned with paltry

paintings of three Spanish cavaliers playing three Spanish guitars;

or a party of boors carousing:  each boor with one leg painfully

elevated in the air, by way of expressing his perfect freedom and

gaiety; several sets of chessmen, two or three flutes, a few

fiddles, a round-eyed portrait staring in astonishment from a very

dark ground; some gaudily-bound prayer-books and testaments, two

rows of silver watches quite as clumsy and almost as large as

Ferguson's first; numerous old-fashioned table and tea spoons,

displayed, fan-like, in half-dozens; strings of coral with great

broad gilt snaps; cards of rings and brooches, fastened and

labelled separately, like the insects in the British Museum; cheap

silver penholders and snuff-boxes, with a masonic star, complete

the jewellery department; while five or six beds in smeary clouded

ticks, strings of blankets and sheets, silk and cotton

handkerchiefs, and wearing apparel of every description, form the

more useful, though even less ornamental, part, of the articles

exposed for sale.  An extensive collection of planes, chisels,

saws, and other carpenters' tools, which have been pledged, and

never redeemed, form the foreground of the picture; while the large

frames full of ticketed bundles, which are dimly seen through the

dirty casement up-stairs - the squalid neighbourhood - the

adjoining houses, straggling, shrunken, and rotten, with one or two

filthy, unwholesome-looking heads thrust out of every window, and

old red pans and stunted plants exposed on the tottering parapets,

to the manifest hazard of the heads of the passers-by - the noisy

men loitering under the archway at the corner of the court, or

about the gin-shop next door - and their wives patiently standing

on the curb-stone, with large baskets of cheap vegetables slung

round them for sale, are its immediate auxiliaries.



If the outside of the pawnbroker's shop be calculated to attract

the attention, or excite the interest, of the speculative

pedestrian, its interior cannot fail to produce the same effect in

an increased degree.  The front door, which we have before noticed,

opens into the common shop, which is the resort of all those

customers whose habitual acquaintance with such scenes renders them

indifferent to the observation of their companions in poverty.  The

side door opens into a small passage from which some half-dozen

doors (which may be secured on the inside by bolts) open into a

corresponding number of little dens, or closets, which face the

counter.  Here, the more timid or respectable portion of the crowd

shroud themselves from the notice of the remainder, and patiently

wait until the gentleman behind the counter, with the curly black

hair, diamond ring, and double silver watch-guard, shall feel

disposed to favour them with his notice - a consummation which

depends considerably on the temper of the aforesaid gentleman for

the time being.



At the present moment, this elegantly-attired individual is in the

act of entering the duplicate he has just made out, in a thick

book:  a process from which he is diverted occasionally, by a

conversation he is carrying on with another young man similarly

employed at a little distance from him, whose allusions to 'that

last bottle of soda-water last night,' and 'how regularly round my

hat he felt himself when the young 'ooman gave 'em in charge,'

would appear to refer to the consequences of some stolen joviality

of the preceding evening.  The customers generally, however, seem

unable to participate in the amusement derivable from this source,

for an old sallow-looking woman, who has been leaning with both

arms on the counter with a small bundle before her, for half an

hour previously, suddenly interrupts the conversation by addressing

the  jewelled shopman - 'Now, Mr. Henry, do make haste, there's a

good soul, for my two grandchildren's locked up at home, and I'm

afeer'd of the fire.'  The shopman slightly raises his head, with

an air of deep abstraction, and resumes his entry with as much

deliberation as if he were engraving.  'You're in a hurry, Mrs.

Tatham, this ev'nin', an't you?' is the only notice he deigns to

take, after the lapse of five minutes or so.  'Yes, I am indeed,

Mr. Henry; now, do serve me next, there's a good creetur.  I

wouldn't worry you, only it's all along o' them botherin'

children.'  'What have you got here?' inquires the shopman,

unpinning the bundle - 'old concern, I suppose - pair o' stays and

a petticut.  You must look up somethin' else, old 'ooman; I can't

lend you anything more upon them; they're completely worn out by

this time, if it's only by putting in, and taking out again, three

times a week.'  'Oh! you're a rum un, you are,' replies the old

woman, laughing extremely, as in duty bound; 'I wish I'd got the

gift of the gab like you; see if I'd be up the spout so often then!

No, no; it an't the petticut; it's a child's frock and a beautiful

silk ankecher, as belongs to my husband.  He gave four shillin' for

it, the werry same blessed day as he broke his arm.' - 'What do you

want upon these?' inquires Mr. Henry, slightly glancing at the

articles, which in all probability are old acquaintances.  'What do

you want upon these?' - 'Eighteenpence.' - 'Lend you ninepence.' -

'Oh, make it a shillin'; there's a dear - do now?' - 'Not another

farden.' - 'Well, I suppose I must take it.'  The duplicate is made

out, one ticket pinned on the parcel, the other given to the old

woman; the parcel is flung carelessly down into a corner, and some

other customer prefers his claim to be served without further

delay.



The choice falls on an unshaven, dirty, sottish-looking fellow,

whose tarnished paper-cap, stuck negligently over one eye,

communicates an additionally repulsive expression to his very

uninviting countenance.  He was enjoying a little relaxation from

his sedentary pursuits a quarter of an hour ago, in kicking his

wife up the court.  He has come to redeem some tools:- probably to

complete a job with, on account of which he has already received

some money, if his inflamed countenance and drunken staggers may be

taken as evidence of the fact.  Having waited some little time, he

makes his presence known by venting his ill-humour on a ragged

urchin, who, being unable to bring his face on a level with the

counter by any other process, has employed himself in climbing up,

and then hooking himself on with his elbows - an uneasy perch, from

which he has fallen at intervals, generally alighting on the toes

of the person in his immediate vicinity.  In the present case, the

unfortunate little wretch has received a cuff which sends him

reeling to this door; and the donor of the blow is immediately the

object of general indignation.



'What do you strike the boy for, you brute?' exclaims a slipshod

woman, with two flat irons in a little basket.  'Do you think he's

your wife, you willin?'  'Go and hang yourself!' replies the

gentleman addressed, with a drunken look of savage stupidity,

aiming at the same time a blow at the woman which fortunately

misses its object.  'Go and hang yourself; and wait till I come and

cut you down.' - 'Cut you down,' rejoins the woman, 'I wish I had

the cutting of you up, you wagabond! (loud.)  Oh! you precious

wagabond! (rather louder.)  Where's your wife, you willin? (louder

still; women of this class are always sympathetic, and work

themselves into a tremendous passion on the shortest notice.)  Your

poor dear wife as you uses worser nor a dog - strike a woman - you

a man! (very shrill;) I wish I had you - I'd murder you, I would,

if I died for it!' - 'Now be civil,' retorts the man fiercely.  'Be

civil, you wiper!' ejaculates the woman contemptuously.  'An't it

shocking?' she continues, turning round, and appealing to an old

woman who is peeping out of one of the little closets we have

before described, and who has not the slightest objection to join

in the attack, possessing, as she does, the comfortable conviction

that she is bolted in.  'Ain't it shocking, ma'am?  (Dreadful! says

the old woman in a parenthesis, not exactly knowing what the

question refers to.)  He's got a wife, ma'am, as takes in mangling,

and is as 'dustrious and hard-working a young 'ooman as can be,

(very fast) as lives in the back parlour of our 'ous, which my

husband and me lives in the front one (with great rapidity) - and

we hears him a beaten' on her sometimes when he comes home drunk,

the whole night through, and not only a beaten' her, but beaten'

his own child too, to make her more miserable - ugh, you beast! and

she, poor creater, won't swear the peace agin him, nor do nothin',

because she likes the wretch arter all - worse luck!'  Here, as the

woman has completely run herself out of breath, the pawnbroker

himself, who has just appeared behind the counter in a gray

dressing-gown, embraces the favourable opportunity of putting in a

word:- 'Now I won't have none of this sort of thing on my

premises!' he interposes with an air of authority.  'Mrs. Mackin,

keep yourself to yourself, or you don't get fourpence for a flat

iron here; and Jinkins, you leave your ticket here till you're

sober, and send your wife for them two planes, for I won't have you

in my shop at no price; so make yourself scarce, before I make you

scarcer.'



This eloquent address produces anything but the effect desired; the

women rail in concert; the man hits about him in all directions,

and is in the act of establishing an indisputable claim to

gratuitous lodgings for the night, when the entrance of his wife, a

wretched, worn-out woman, apparently in the last stage of

consumption, whose face bears evident marks of recent ill-usage,

and whose strength seems hardly equal to the burden - light enough,

God knows! - of the thin, sickly child she carries in her arms,

turns his cowardly rage in a safer direction.  'Come home, dear,'

cries the miserable creature, in an imploring tone; 'DO come home,

there's a good fellow, and go to bed.' - 'Go home yourself,'

rejoins the furious ruffian.  'Do come home quietly,' repeats the

wife, bursting into tears.  'Go home yourself,' retorts the husband

again, enforcing his argument by a blow which sends the poor

creature flying out of the shop.  Her 'natural protector' follows

her up the court, alternately venting his rage in accelerating her

progress, and in knocking the little scanty blue bonnet of the

unfortunate child over its still more scanty and faded-looking

face.



In the last box, which is situated in the darkest and most obscure

corner of the shop, considerably removed from either of the gas-

lights, are a young delicate girl of about twenty, and an elderly

female, evidently her mother from the resemblance between them, who

stand at some distance back, as if to avoid the observation even of

the shopman.  It is not their first visit to a pawnbroker's shop,

for they answer without a moment's hesitation the usual questions,

put in a rather respectful manner, and in a much lower tone than

usual, of 'What name shall I say? - Your own property, of course? -

Where do you live? - Housekeeper or lodger?'  They bargain, too,

for a higher loan than the shopman is at first inclined to offer,

which a perfect stranger would be little disposed to do; and the

elder female urges her daughter on, in scarcely audible whispers,

to exert her utmost powers of persuasion to obtain an advance of

the sum, and expatiate on the value of the articles they have

brought to raise a present supply upon.  They are a small gold

chain and a 'Forget me not' ring:  the girl's property, for they

are both too small for the mother; given her in better times;

prized, perhaps, once, for the giver's sake, but parted with now

without a struggle; for want has hardened the mother, and her

example has hardened the girl, and the prospect of receiving money,

coupled with a recollection of the misery they have both endured

from the want of it - the coldness of old friends - the stern

refusal of some, and the still more galling compassion of others -

appears to have obliterated the consciousness of self-humiliation,

which the idea of their present situation would once have aroused.



In the next box, is a young female, whose attire, miserably poor,

but extremely gaudy, wretchedly cold, but extravagantly fine, too

plainly bespeaks her station.  The rich satin gown with its faded

trimmings, the worn-out thin shoes, and pink silk stockings, the

summer bonnet in winter, and the sunken face, where a daub of rouge

only serves as an index to the ravages of squandered health never

to be regained, and lost happiness never to be restored, and where

the practised smile is a wretched mockery of the misery of the

heart, cannot be mistaken.  There is something in the glimpse she

has just caught of her young neighbour, and in the sight of the

little trinkets she has offered in pawn, that seems to have

awakened in this woman's mind some slumbering recollection, and to

have changed, for an instant, her whole demeanour.  Her first hasty

impulse was to bend forward as if to scan more minutely the

appearance of her half-concealed companions; her next, on seeing

them involuntarily shrink from her, to retreat to the back of the

box, cover her face with her hands, and burst into tears.



There are strange chords in the human heart, which will lie dormant

through years of depravity and wickedness, but which will vibrate

at last to some slight circumstance apparently trivial in itself,

but connected by some undefined and indistinct association, with

past days that can never be recalled, and with bitter recollections

from which the most degraded creature in existence cannot escape.



There has been another spectator, in the person of a woman in the

common shop; the lowest of the low; dirty, unbonneted, flaunting,

and slovenly.  Her curiosity was at first attracted by the little

she could see of the group; then her attention.  The half-

intoxicated leer changed to an expression of something like

interest, and a feeling similar to that we have described, appeared

for a moment, and only a moment, to extend itself even to her

bosom.



Who shall say how soon these women may change places?  The last has

but two more stages - the hospital and the grave.  How many females

situated as her two companions are, and as she may have been once,

have terminated the same wretched course, in the same wretched

manner!  One is already tracing her footsteps with frightful

rapidity.  How soon may the other follow her example!  How many

have done the same!
