






CHAPTER II - THE STREETS - NIGHT







But the streets of London, to be beheld in the very height of their

glory, should be seen on a dark, dull, murky winter's night, when

there is just enough damp gently stealing down to make the pavement

greasy, without cleansing it of any of its impurities; and when the

heavy lazy mist, which hangs over every object, makes the gas-lamps

look brighter, and the brilliantly-lighted shops more splendid,

from the contrast they present to the darkness around.  All the

people who are at home on such a night as this, seem disposed to

make themselves as snug and comfortable as possible; and the

passengers in the streets have excellent reason to envy the

fortunate individuals who are seated by their own firesides.



In the larger and better kind of streets, dining parlour curtains

are closely drawn, kitchen fires blaze brightly up, and savoury

steams of hot dinners salute the nostrils of the hungry wayfarer,

as he plods wearily by the area railings.  In the suburbs, the

muffin boy rings his way down the little street, much more slowly

than he is wont to do; for Mrs. Macklin, of No. 4, has no sooner

opened her little street-door, and screamed out 'Muffins!' with all

her might, than Mrs. Walker, at No. 5, puts her head out of the

parlour-window, and screams 'Muffins!' too; and Mrs. Walker has

scarcely got the words out of her lips, than Mrs. Peplow, over the

way, lets loose Master Peplow, who darts down the street, with a

velocity which nothing but buttered muffins in perspective could

possibly inspire, and drags the boy back by main force, whereupon

Mrs. Macklin and Mrs. Walker, just to save the boy trouble, and to

say a few neighbourly words to Mrs. Peplow at the same time, run

over the way and buy their muffins at Mrs. Peplow's door, when it

appears from the voluntary statement of Mrs. Walker, that her

'kittle's jist a-biling, and the cups and sarsers ready laid,' and

that, as it was such a wretched night out o' doors, she'd made up

her mind to have a nice, hot, comfortable cup o' tea - a

determination at which, by the most singular coincidence, the other

two ladies had simultaneously arrived.



After a little conversation about the wretchedness of the weather

and the merits of tea, with a digression relative to the

viciousness of boys as a rule, and the amiability of Master Peplow

as an exception, Mrs. Walker sees her husband coming down the

street; and as he must want his tea, poor man, after his dirty walk

from the Docks, she instantly runs across, muffins in hand, and

Mrs. Macklin does the same, and after a few words to Mrs. Walker,

they all pop into their little houses, and slam their little

street-doors, which are not opened again for the remainder of the

evening, except to the nine o'clock 'beer,' who comes round with a

lantern in front of his tray, and says, as he lends Mrs. Walker

'Yesterday's 'Tiser,' that he's blessed if he can hardly hold the

pot, much less feel the paper, for it's one of the bitterest nights

he ever felt, 'cept the night when the man was frozen to death in

the Brick-field.



After a little prophetic conversation with the policeman at the

street-corner, touching a probable change in the weather, and the

setting-in of a hard frost, the nine o'clock beer returns to his

master's house, and employs himself for the remainder of the

evening, in assiduously stirring the tap-room fire, and

deferentially taking part in the conversation of the worthies

assembled round it.



The streets in the vicinity of the Marsh-gate and Victoria Theatre

present an appearance of dirt and discomfort on such a night, which

the groups who lounge about them in no degree tend to diminish.

Even the little block-tin temple sacred to baked potatoes,

surmounted by a splendid design in variegated lamps, looks less gay

than usual, and as to the kidney-pie stand, its glory has quite

departed.  The candle in the transparent lamp, manufactured of oil-

paper, embellished with 'characters,' has been blown out fifty

times, so the kidney-pie merchant, tired with running backwards and

forwards to the next wine-vaults, to get a light, has given up the

idea of illumination in despair, and the only signs of his

'whereabout,' are the bright sparks, of which a long irregular

train is whirled down the street every time he opens his portable

oven to hand a hot kidney-pie to a customer.



Flat-fish, oyster, and fruit vendors linger hopelessly in the

kennel, in vain endeavouring to attract customers; and the ragged

boys who usually disport themselves about the streets, stand

crouched in little knots in some projecting doorway, or under the

canvas blind of a cheesemonger's, where great flaring gas-lights,

unshaded by any glass, display huge piles of blight red and pale

yellow cheeses, mingled with little fivepenny dabs of dingy bacon,

various tubs of weekly Dorset, and cloudy rolls of 'best fresh.'



Here they amuse themselves with theatrical converse, arising out of

their last half-price visit to the Victoria gallery, admire the

terrific combat, which is nightly encored, and expatiate on the

inimitable manner in which Bill Thompson can 'come the double

monkey,' or go through the mysterious involutions of a sailor's

hornpipe.



It is nearly eleven o'clock, and the cold thin rain which has been

drizzling so long, is beginning to pour down in good earnest; the

baked-potato man has departed - the kidney-pie man has just walked

away with his warehouse on his arm - the cheesemonger has drawn in

his blind, and the boys have dispersed.  The constant clicking of

pattens on the slippy and uneven pavement, and the rustling of

umbrellas, as the wind blows against the shop-windows, bear

testimony to the inclemency of the night; and the policeman, with

his oilskin cape buttoned closely round him, seems as he holds his

hat on his head, and turns round to avoid the gust of wind and rain

which drives against him at the street-corner, to be very far from

congratulating himself on the prospect before him.



The little chandler's shop with the cracked bell behind the door,

whose melancholy tinkling has been regulated by the demand for

quarterns of sugar and half-ounces of coffee, is shutting up.  The

crowds which have been passing to and fro during the whole day, are

rapidly dwindling away; and the noise of shouting and quarrelling

which issues from the public-houses, is almost the only sound that

breaks the melancholy stillness of the night.



There was another, but it has ceased.  That wretched woman with the

infant in her arms, round whose meagre form the remnant of her own

scanty shawl is carefully wrapped, has been attempting to sing some

popular ballad, in the hope of wringing a few pence from the

compassionate passer-by.  A brutal laugh at her weak voice is all

she has gained.  The tears fall thick and fast down her own pale

face; the child is cold and hungry, and its low half-stifled

wailing adds to the misery of its wretched mother, as she moans

aloud, and sinks despairingly down, on a cold damp door-step.



Singing!  How few of those who pass such a miserable creature as

this, think of the anguish of heart, the sinking of soul and

spirit, which the very effort of singing produces.  Bitter mockery!

Disease, neglect, and starvation, faintly articulating the words of

the joyous ditty, that has enlivened your hours of feasting and

merriment, God knows how often!  It is no subject of jeering.  The

weak tremulous voice tells a fearful tale of want and famishing;

and the feeble singer of this roaring song may turn away, only to

die of cold and hunger.



One o'clock!  Parties returning from the different theatres foot it

through the muddy streets; cabs, hackney-coaches, carriages, and

theatre omnibuses, roll swiftly by; watermen with dim dirty

lanterns in their hands, and large brass plates upon their breasts,

who have been shouting and rushing about for the last two hours,

retire to their watering-houses, to solace themselves with the

creature comforts of pipes and purl; the half-price pit and box

frequenters of the theatres throng to the different houses of

refreshment; and chops, kidneys, rabbits, oysters, stout, cigars,

and 'goes' innumerable, are served up amidst a noise and confusion

of smoking, running, knife-clattering, and waiter-chattering,

perfectly indescribable.



The more musical portion of the play-going community betake

themselves to some harmonic meeting.  As a matter of curiosity let

us follow them thither for a few moments.



In a lofty room of spacious dimensions, are seated some eighty or a

hundred guests knocking little pewter measures on the tables, and

hammering away, with the handles of their knives, as if they were

so many trunk-makers.  They are applauding a glee, which has just

been executed by the three 'professional gentlemen' at the top of

the centre table, one of whom is in the chair - the little pompous

man with the bald head just emerging from the collar of his green

coat.  The others are seated on either side of him - the stout man

with the small voice, and the thin-faced dark man in black.  The

little man in the chair is a most amusing personage, - such

condescending grandeur, and SUCH a voice!



'Bass!' as the young gentleman near us with the blue stock forcibly

remarks to his companion, 'bass!  I b'lieve you; he can go down

lower than any man:  so low sometimes that you can't hear him.'

And so he does.  To hear him growling away, gradually lower and

lower down, till he can't get back again, is the most delightful

thing in the world, and it is quite impossible to witness unmoved

the impressive solemnity with which he pours forth his soul in 'My

'art's in the 'ighlands,' or 'The brave old Hoak.'  The stout man

is also addicted to sentimentality, and warbles 'Fly, fly from the

world, my Bessy, with me,' or some such song, with lady-like

sweetness, and in the most seductive tones imaginable.



'Pray give your orders, gen'l'm'n - pray give your orders,' - says

the pale-faced man with the red head; and demands for 'goes' of gin

and 'goes' of brandy, and pints of stout, and cigars of peculiar

mildness, are vociferously made from all parts of the room.  The

'professional gentlemen' are in the very height of their glory, and

bestow condescending nods, or even a word or two of recognition, on

the better-known frequenters of the room, in the most bland and

patronising manner possible.



The little round-faced man, with the small brown surtout, white

stockings and shoes, is in the comic line; the mixed air of self-

denial, and mental consciousness of his own powers, with which he

acknowledges the call of the chair, is particularly gratifying.

'Gen'l'men,' says the little pompous man, accompanying the word

with a knock of the president's hammer on the table - 'Gen'l'men,

allow me to claim your attention - our friend, Mr. Smuggins, will

oblige.' - 'Bravo!' shout the company; and Smuggins, after a

considerable quantity of coughing by way of symphony, and a most

facetious sniff or two, which afford general delight, sings a comic

song, with a fal-de-ral - tol-de-ral chorus at the end of every

verse, much longer than the verse itself.  It is received with

unbounded applause, and after some aspiring genius has volunteered

a recitation, and failed dismally therein, the little pompous man

gives another knock, and says 'Gen'l'men, we will attempt a glee,

if you please.'  This announcement calls forth tumultuous applause,

and the more energetic spirits express the unqualified approbation

it affords them, by knocking one or two stout glasses off their

legs - a humorous device; but one which frequently occasions some

slight altercation when the form of paying the damage is proposed

to be gone through by the waiter.



Scenes like these are continued until three or four o'clock in the

morning; and even when they close, fresh ones open to the

inquisitive novice.  But as a description of all of them, however

slight, would require a volume, the contents of which, however

instructive, would be by no means pleasing, we make our bow, and

drop the curtain.
