






CHAPTER XV - EARLY COACHES







We have often wondered how many months' incessant travelling in a

post-chaise it would take to kill a man; and wondering by analogy,

we should very much like to know how many months of constant

travelling in a succession of early coaches, an unfortunate mortal

could endure.  Breaking a man alive upon the wheel, would be

nothing to breaking his rest, his peace, his heart - everything but

his fast - upon four; and the punishment of Ixion (the only

practical person, by-the-bye, who has discovered the secret of the

perpetual motion) would sink into utter insignificance before the

one we have suggested.  If we had been a powerful churchman in

those good times when blood was shed as freely as water, and men

were mowed down like grass, in the sacred cause of religion, we

would have lain by very quietly till we got hold of some especially

obstinate miscreant, who positively refused to be converted to our

faith, and then we would have booked him for an inside place in a

small coach, which travelled day and night:  and securing the

remainder of the places for stout men with a slight tendency to

coughing and spitting, we would have started him forth on his last

travels:  leaving him mercilessly to all the tortures which the

waiters, landlords, coachmen, guards, boots, chambermaids, and

other familiars on his line of road, might think proper to inflict.



Who has not experienced the miseries inevitably consequent upon a

summons to undertake a hasty journey?  You receive an intimation

from your place of business - wherever that may be, or whatever you

may be - that it will be necessary to leave town without delay.

You and your family are forthwith thrown into a state of tremendous

excitement; an express is immediately dispatched to the

washerwoman's; everybody is in a bustle; and you, yourself, with a

feeling of dignity which you cannot altogether conceal, sally forth

to the booking-office to secure your place.  Here a painful

consciousness of your own unimportance first rushes on your mind -

the people are as cool and collected as if nobody were going out of

town, or as if a journey of a hundred odd miles were a mere

nothing.  You enter a mouldy-looking room, ornamented with large

posting-bills; the greater part of the place enclosed behind a

huge, lumbering, rough counter, and fitted up with recesses that

look like the dens of the smaller animals in a travelling

menagerie, without the bars.  Some half-dozen people are 'booking'

brown-paper parcels, which one of the clerks flings into the

aforesaid recesses with an air of recklessness which you,

remembering the new carpet-bag you bought in the morning, feel

considerably annoyed at; porters, looking like so many Atlases,

keep rushing in and out, with large packages on their shoulders;

and while you are waiting to make the necessary inquiries, you

wonder what on earth the booking-office clerks can have been before

they were booking-office clerks; one of them with his pen behind

his ear, and his hands behind him, is standing in front of the

fire, like a full-length portrait of Napoleon; the other with his

hat half off his head, enters the passengers' names in the books

with a coolness which is inexpressibly provoking; and the villain

whistles - actually whistles - while a man asks him what the fare

is outside, all the way to Holyhead! - in frosty weather, too!

They are clearly an isolated race, evidently possessing no

sympathies or feelings in common with the rest of mankind.  Your

turn comes at last, and having paid the fare, you tremblingly

inquire - 'What time will it be necessary for me to be here in the

morning?' - 'Six o'clock,' replies the whistler, carelessly

pitching the sovereign you have just parted with, into a wooden

bowl on the desk.  'Rather before than arter,' adds the man with

the semi-roasted unmentionables, with just as much ease and

complacency as if the whole world got out of bed at five.  You turn

into the street, ruminating as you bend your steps homewards on the

extent to which men become hardened in cruelty, by custom.



If there be one thing in existence more miserable than another, it

most unquestionably is the being compelled to rise by candlelight.

If you have ever doubted the fact, you are painfully convinced of

your error, on the morning of your departure.  You left strict

orders, overnight, to be called at half-past four, and you have

done nothing all night but doze for five minutes at a time, and

start up suddenly from a terrific dream of a large church-clock

with the small hand running round, with astonishing rapidity, to

every figure on the dial-plate.  At last, completely exhausted, you

fall gradually into a refreshing sleep - your thoughts grow

confused - the stage-coaches, which have been 'going off' before

your eyes all night, become less and less distinct, until they go

off altogether; one moment you are driving with all the skill and

smartness of an experienced whip - the next you are exhibiting E LA

Ducrow, on the off-leader; anon you are closely muffled up, inside,

and have just recognised in the person of the guard an old

schoolfellow, whose funeral, even in your dream, you remember to

have attended eighteen years ago.  At last you fall into a state of

complete oblivion, from which you are aroused, as if into a new

state of existence, by a singular illusion.  You are apprenticed to

a trunk-maker; how, or why, or when, or wherefore, you don't take

the trouble to inquire; but there you are, pasting the lining in

the lid of a portmanteau.  Confound that other apprentice in the

back shop, how he is hammering! - rap, rap, rap - what an

industrious fellow he must be! you have heard him at work for half

an hour past, and he has been hammering incessantly the whole time.

Rap, rap, rap, again - he's talking now - what's that he said?

Five o'clock!  You make a violent exertion, and start up in bed.

The vision is at once dispelled; the trunk-maker's shop is your own

bedroom, and the other apprentice your shivering servant, who has

been vainly endeavouring to wake you for the last quarter of an

hour, at the imminent risk of breaking either his own knuckles or

the panels of the door.



You proceed to dress yourself, with all possible dispatch.  The

flaring flat candle with the long snuff, gives light enough to show

that the things you want, are not where they ought to be, and you

undergo a trifling delay in consequence of having carefully packed

up one of your boots in your over-anxiety of the preceding night.

You soon complete your toilet, however, for you are not particular

on such an occasion, and you shaved yesterday evening; so mounting

your Petersham great-coat, and green travelling shawl, and grasping

your carpet-bag in your right hand, you walk lightly down-stairs,

lest you should awaken any of the family, and after pausing in the

common sitting-room for one moment, just to have a cup of coffee

(the said common sitting-room looking remarkably comfortable, with

everything out of its place, and strewed with the crumbs of last

night's supper), you undo the chain and bolts of the street-door,

and find yourself fairly in the street.



A thaw, by all that is miserable!  The frost is completely broken

up. You look down the long perspective of Oxford-street, the gas-

lights mournfully reflected on the wet pavement, and can discern no

speck in the road to encourage the belief that there is a cab or a

coach to be had - the very coachmen have gone home in despair.  The

cold sleet is drizzling down with that gentle regularity, which

betokens a duration of four-and-twenty hours at least; the damp

hangs upon the house-tops and lamp-posts, and clings to you like an

invisible cloak.  The water is 'coming in' in every area, the pipes

have burst, the water-butts are running over; the kennels seem to

be doing matches against time, pump-handles descend of their own

accord, horses in market-carts fall down, and there's no one to

help them up again, policemen look as if they had been carefully

sprinkled with powdered glass; here and there a milk-woman trudges

slowly along, with a bit of list round each foot to keep her from

slipping; boys who 'don't sleep in the house,' and are not allowed

much sleep out of it, can't wake their masters by thundering at the

shop-door, and cry with the cold - the compound of ice, snow, and

water on the pavement, is a couple of inches thick - nobody

ventures to walk fast to keep himself warm, and nobody could

succeed in keeping himself warm if he did.



It strikes a quarter past five as you trudge down Waterloo-place on

your way to the Golden Cross, and you discover, for the first time,

that you were called about an hour too early.  You have not time to

go back; there is no place open to go into, and you have,

therefore, no resource but to go forward, which you do, feeling

remarkably satisfied with yourself, and everything about you.  You

arrive at the office, and look wistfully up the yard for the

Birmingham High-flier, which, for aught you can see, may have flown

away altogether, for preparations appear to be on foot for the

departure of any vehicle in the shape of a coach.  You wander into

the booking-office, which with the gas-lights and blazing fire,

looks quite comfortable by contrast - that is to say, if any place

CAN look comfortable at half-past five on a winter's morning.

There stands the identical book-keeper in the same position as if

he had not moved since you saw him yesterday.  As he informs you,

that the coach is up the yard, and will be brought round in about a

quarter of an hour, you leave your bag, and repair to 'The Tap' -

not with any absurd idea of warming yourself, because you feel such

a result to be utterly hopeless, but for the purpose of procuring

some hot brandy-and-water, which you do, - when the kettle boils!

an event which occurs exactly two minutes and a half before the

time fixed for the starting of the coach.



The first stroke of six, peals from St. Martin's church steeple,

just as you take the first sip of the boiling liquid.  You find

yourself at the booking-office in two seconds, and the tap-waiter

finds himself much comforted by your brandy-and-water, in about the

same period.  The coach is out; the horses are in, and the guard

and two or three porters, are stowing the luggage away, and running

up the steps of the booking-office, and down the steps of the

booking-office, with breathless rapidity.  The place, which a few

minutes ago was so still and quiet, is now all bustle; the early

vendors of the morning papers have arrived, and you are assailed on

all sides with shouts of 'TIMES, gen'lm'n, TIMES,' 'Here's CHRON -

CHRON - CHRON,' 'HERALD, ma'am,'  'Highly interesting murder,

gen'lm'n,' 'Curious case o' breach o' promise, ladies.'  The inside

passengers are already in their dens, and the outsides, with the

exception of yourself, are pacing up and down the pavement to keep

themselves warm; they consist of two young men with very long hair,

to which the sleet has communicated the appearance of crystallised

rats' tails; one thin young woman cold and peevish, one old

gentleman ditto ditto, and something in a cloak and cap, intended

to represent a military officer; every member of the party, with a

large stiff shawl over his chin, looking exactly as if he were

playing a set of Pan's pipes.



'Take off the cloths, Bob,' says the coachman, who now appears for

the first time, in a rough blue great-coat, of which the buttons

behind are so far apart, that you can't see them both at the same

time.  'Now, gen'lm'n,' cries the guard, with the waybill in his

hand.  'Five minutes behind time already!'  Up jump the passengers

- the two young men smoking like lime-kilns, and the old gentleman

grumbling audibly.  The thin young woman is got upon the roof, by

dint of a great deal of pulling, and pushing, and helping and

trouble, and she repays it by expressing her solemn conviction that

she will never be able to get down again.



'All right,' sings out the guard at last, jumping up as the coach

starts, and blowing his horn directly afterwards, in proof of the

soundness of his wind.  'Let 'em go, Harry, give 'em their heads,'

cries the coachman - and off we start as briskly as if the morning

were 'all right,' as well as the coach:  and looking forward as

anxiously to the termination of our journey, as we fear our readers

will have done, long since, to the conclusion of our paper.

