








SCENES









CHAPTER I - THE STREETS - MORNING







The appearance presented by the streets of London an hour before

sunrise, on a summer's morning, is most striking even to the few

whose unfortunate pursuits of pleasure, or scarcely less

unfortunate pursuits of business, cause them to be well acquainted

with the scene.  There is an air of cold, solitary desolation about

the noiseless streets which we are accustomed to see thronged at

other times by a busy, eager crowd, and over the quiet, closely-

shut buildings, which throughout the day are swarming with life and

bustle, that is very impressive.



The last drunken man, who shall find his way home before sunlight,

has just staggered heavily along, roaring out the burden of the

drinking song of the previous night:  the last houseless vagrant

whom penury and police have left in the streets, has coiled up his

chilly limbs in some paved comer, to dream of food and warmth.  The

drunken, the dissipated, and the wretched have disappeared; the

more sober and orderly part of the population have not yet awakened

to the labours of the day, and the stillness of death is over the

streets; its very hue seems to be imparted to them, cold and

lifeless as they look in the grey, sombre light of daybreak.  The

coach-stands in the larger thoroughfares are deserted:  the night-

houses are closed; and the chosen promenades of profligate misery

are empty.



An occasional policeman may alone be seen at the street corners,

listlessly gazing on the deserted prospect before him; and now and

then a rakish-looking cat runs stealthily across the road and

descends his own area with as much caution and slyness - bounding

first on the water-butt, then on the dust-hole, and then alighting

on the flag-stones - as if he were conscious that his character

depended on his gallantry of the preceding night escaping public

observation.  A partially opened bedroom-window here and there,

bespeaks the heat of the weather, and the uneasy slumbers of its

occupant; and the dim scanty flicker of the rushlight, through the

window-blind, denotes the chamber of watching or sickness.  With

these few exceptions, the streets present no signs of life, nor the

houses of habitation.



An hour wears away; the spires of the churches and roofs of the

principal buildings are faintly tinged with the light of the rising

sun; and the streets, by almost imperceptible degrees, begin to

resume their bustle and animation.  Market-carts roll slowly along:

the sleepy waggoner impatiently urging on his tired horses, or

vainly endeavouring to awaken the boy, who, luxuriously stretched

on the top of the fruit-baskets, forgets, in happy oblivion, his

long-cherished curiosity to behold the wonders of London.



Rough, sleepy-looking animals of strange appearance, something

between ostlers and hackney-coachmen, begin to take down the

shutters of early public-houses; and little deal tables, with the

ordinary preparations for a street breakfast, make their appearance

at the customary stations.  Numbers of men and women (principally

the latter), carrying upon their heads heavy baskets of fruit, toil

down the park side of Piccadilly, on their way to Covent-garden,

and, following each other in rapid succession, form a long

straggling line from thence to the turn of the road at

Knightsbridge.



Here and there, a bricklayer's labourer, with the day's dinner tied

up in a handkerchief, walks briskly to his work, and occasionally a

little knot of three or four schoolboys on a stolen bathing

expedition rattle merrily over the pavement, their boisterous mirth

contrasting forcibly with the demeanour of the little sweep, who,

having knocked and rung till his arm aches, and being interdicted

by a merciful legislature from endangering his lungs by calling

out, sits patiently down on the door-step, until the housemaid may

happen to awake.



Covent-garden market, and the avenues leading to it, are thronged

with carts of all sorts, sizes, and descriptions, from the heavy

lumbering waggon, with its four stout horses, to the jingling

costermonger's cart, with its consumptive donkey.  The pavement is

already strewed with decayed cabbage-leaves, broken hay-bands, and

all the indescribable litter of a vegetable market; men are

shouting, carts backing, horses neighing, boys fighting, basket-

women talking, piemen expatiating on the excellence of their

pastry, and donkeys braying.  These and a hundred other sounds form

a compound discordant enough to a Londoner's ears, and remarkably

disagreeable to those of country gentlemen who are sleeping at the

Hummums for the first time.



Another hour passes away, and the day begins in good earnest.  The

servant of all work, who, under the plea of sleeping very soundly,

has utterly disregarded 'Missis's' ringing for half an hour

previously, is warned by Master (whom Missis has sent up in his

drapery to the landing-place for that purpose), that it's half-past

six, whereupon she awakes all of a sudden, with well-feigned

astonishment, and goes down-stairs very sulkily, wishing, while she

strikes a light, that the principle of spontaneous combustion would

extend itself to coals and kitchen range.  When the fire is

lighted, she opens the street-door to take in the milk, when, by

the most singular coincidence in the world, she discovers that the

servant next door has just taken in her milk too, and that Mr.

Todd's young man over the way, is, by an equally extraordinary

chance, taking down his master's shutters.  The inevitable

consequence is, that she just steps, milk-jug in hand, as far as

next door, just to say 'good morning' to Betsy Clark, and that Mr.

Todd's young man just steps over the way to say 'good morning' to

both of 'em; and as the aforesaid Mr. Todd's young man is almost as

good-looking and fascinating as the baker himself, the conversation

quickly becomes very interesting, and probably would become more

so, if Betsy Clark's Missis, who always will be a-followin' her

about, didn't give an angry tap at her bedroom window, on which Mr.

Todd's young man tries to whistle coolly, as he goes back to his

shop much faster than he came from it; and the two girls run back

to their respective places, and shut their street-doors with

surprising softness, each of them poking their heads out of the

front parlour window, a minute afterwards, however, ostensibly with

the view of looking at the mail which just then passes by, but

really for the purpose of catching another glimpse of Mr. Todd's

young man, who being fond of mails, but more of females, takes a

short look at the mails, and a long look at the girls, much to the

satisfaction of all parties concerned.



The mail itself goes on to the coach-office in due course, and the

passengers who are going out by the early coach, stare with

astonishment at the passengers who are coming in by the early

coach, who look blue and dismal, and are evidently under the

influence of that odd feeling produced by travelling, which makes

the events of yesterday morning seem as if they had happened at

least six months ago, and induces people to wonder with

considerable gravity whether the friends and relations they took

leave of a fortnight before, have altered much since they have left

them.  The coach-office is all alive, and the coaches which are

just going out, are surrounded by the usual crowd of Jews and

nondescripts, who seem to consider, Heaven knows why, that it is

quite impossible any man can mount a coach without requiring at

least sixpenny-worth of oranges, a penknife, a pocket-book, a last

year's annual, a pencil-case, a piece of sponge, and a small series

of caricatures.



Half an hour more, and the sun darts his bright rays cheerfully

down the still half-empty streets, and shines with sufficient force

to rouse the dismal laziness of the apprentice, who pauses every

other minute from his task of sweeping out the shop and watering

the pavement in front of it, to tell another apprentice similarly

employed, how hot it will be to-day, or to stand with his right

hand shading his eyes, and his left resting on the broom, gazing at

the 'Wonder,' or the 'Tally-ho,' or the 'Nimrod,' or some other

fast coach, till it is out of sight, when he re-enters the shop,

envying the passengers on the outside of the fast coach, and

thinking of the old red brick house 'down in the country,' where he

went to school:  the miseries of the milk and water, and thick

bread and scrapings, fading into nothing before the pleasant

recollection of the green field the boys used to play in, and the

green pond he was caned for presuming to fall into, and other

schoolboy associations.



Cabs, with trunks and band-boxes between the drivers' legs and

outside the apron, rattle briskly up and down the streets on their

way to the coach-offices or steam-packet wharfs; and the cab-

drivers and hackney-coachmen who are on the stand polish up the

ornamental part of their dingy vehicles - the former wondering how

people can prefer 'them wild beast cariwans of homnibuses, to a

riglar cab with a fast trotter,' and the latter admiring how people

can trust their necks into one of 'them crazy cabs, when they can

have a 'spectable 'ackney cotche with a pair of 'orses as von't run

away with no vun;' a consolation unquestionably founded on fact,

seeing that a hackney-coach horse never was known to run at all,

'except,' as the smart cabman in front of the rank observes,

'except one, and HE run back'ards.'



The shops are now completely opened, and apprentices and shopmen

are busily engaged in cleaning and decking the windows for the day.

The bakers' shops in town are filled with servants and children

waiting for the drawing of the first batch of rolls - an operation

which was performed a full hour ago in the suburbs:  for the early

clerk population of Somers and Camden towns, Islington, and

Pentonville, are fast pouring into the city, or directing their

steps towards Chancery-lane and the Inns of Court.  Middle-aged

men, whose salaries have by no means increased in the same

proportion as their families, plod steadily along, apparently with

no object in view but the counting-house; knowing by sight almost

everybody they meet or overtake, for they have seen them every

morning (Sunday excepted) during the last twenty years, but

speaking to no one.  If they do happen to overtake a personal

acquaintance, they just exchange a hurried salutation, and keep

walking on either by his side, or in front of him, as his rate of

walking may chance to be.  As to stopping to shake hands, or to

take the friend's arm, they seem to think that as it is not

included in their salary, they have no right to do it.  Small

office lads in large hats, who are made men before they are boys,

hurry along in pairs, with their first coat carefully brushed, and

the white trousers of last Sunday plentifully besmeared with dust

and ink.  It evidently requires a considerable mental struggle to

avoid investing part of the day's dinner-money in the purchase of

the stale tarts so temptingly exposed in dusty tins at the pastry-

cooks' doors; but a consciousness of their own importance and the

receipt of seven shillings a-week, with the prospect of an early

rise to eight, comes to their aid, and they accordingly put their

hats a little more on one side, and look under the bonnets of all

the milliners' and stay-makers' apprentices they meet - poor girls!

- the hardest worked, the worst paid, and too often, the worst used

class of the community.



Eleven o'clock, and a new set of people fill the streets.  The

goods in the shop-windows are invitingly arranged; the shopmen in

their white neckerchiefs and spruce coats, look as it they couldn't

clean a window if their lives depended on it; the carts have

disappeared from Covent-garden; the waggoners have returned, and

the costermongers repaired to their ordinary 'beats' in the

suburbs; clerks are at their offices, and gigs, cabs, omnibuses,

and saddle-horses, are conveying their masters to the same

destination.  The streets are thronged with a vast concourse of

people, gay and shabby, rich and poor, idle and industrious; and we

come to the heat, bustle, and activity of NOON.
