





CHAPTER XIV - VAUXHALL-GARDENS BY DAY







There was a time when if a man ventured to wonder how Vauxhall-

gardens would look by day, he was hailed with a shout of derision

at the absurdity of the idea.  Vauxhall by daylight!  A porter-pot

without porter, the House of Commons without the Speaker, a gas-

lamp without the gas - pooh, nonsense, the thing was not to be

thought of.  It was rumoured, too, in those times, that Vauxhall-

gardens by day, were the scene of secret and hidden experiments;

that there, carvers were exercised in the mystic art of cutting a

moderate-sized ham into slices thin enough to pave the whole of the

grounds; that beneath the shade of the tall trees, studious men

were constantly engaged in chemical experiments, with the view of

discovering how much water a bowl of negus could possibly bear; and

that in some retired nooks, appropriated to the study of

ornithology, other sage and learned men were, by a process known

only to themselves, incessantly employed in reducing fowls to a

mere combination of skin and bone.



Vague rumours of this kind, together with many others of a similar

nature, cast over Vauxhall-gardens an air of deep mystery; and as

there is a great deal in the mysterious, there is no doubt that to

a good many people, at all events, the pleasure they afforded was

not a little enhanced by this very circumstance.



Of this class of people we confess to having made one.  We loved to

wander among these illuminated groves, thinking of the patient and

laborious researches which had been carried on there during the

day, and witnessing their results in the suppers which were served

up beneath the light of lamps and to the sound of music at night.

The temples and saloons and cosmoramas and fountains glittered and

sparkled before our eyes; the beauty of the lady singers and the

elegant deportment of the gentlemen, captivated our hearts; a few

hundred thousand of additional lamps dazzled our senses; a bowl or

two of punch bewildered our brains; and we were happy.



In an evil hour, the proprietors of Vauxhall-gardens took to

opening them by day.  We regretted this, as rudely and harshly

disturbing that veil of mystery which had hung about the property

for many years, and which none but the noonday sun, and the late

Mr. Simpson, had ever penetrated.  We shrunk from going; at this

moment we scarcely know why.  Perhaps a morbid consciousness of

approaching disappointment - perhaps a fatal presentiment - perhaps

the weather; whatever it was, we did NOT go until the second or

third announcement of a race between two balloons tempted us, and

we went.



We paid our shilling at the gate, and then we saw for the first

time, that the entrance, if there had been any magic about it at

all, was now decidedly disenchanted, being, in fact, nothing more

nor less than a combination of very roughly-painted boards and

sawdust.  We glanced at the orchestra and supper-room as we hurried

past - we just recognised them, and that was all.  We bent our

steps to the firework-ground; there, at least, we should not be

disappointed.  We reached it, and stood rooted to the spot with

mortification and astonishment.  THAT the Moorish tower - that

wooden shed with a door in the centre, and daubs of crimson and

yellow all round, like a gigantic watch-case!  THAT the place where

night after night we had beheld the undaunted Mr. Blackmore make

his terrific ascent, surrounded by flames of fire, and peals of

artillery, and where the white garments of Madame Somebody (we

forget even her name now), who nobly devoted her life to the

manufacture of fireworks, had so often been seen fluttering in the

wind, as she called up a red, blue, or party-coloured light to

illumine her temple!  THAT the - but at this moment the bell rung;

the people scampered away, pell-mell, to the spot from whence the

sound proceeded; and we, from the mere force of habit, found

ourself running among the first, as if for very life.



It was for the concert in the orchestra.  A small party of dismal

men in cocked hats were 'executing' the overture to TANCREDI, and a

numerous assemblage of ladies and gentlemen, with their families,

had rushed from their half-emptied stout mugs in the supper boxes,

and crowded to the spot.  Intense was the low murmur of admiration

when a particularly small gentleman, in a dress coat, led on a

particularly tall lady in a blue sarcenet pelisse and bonnet of the

same, ornamented with large white feathers, and forthwith commenced

a plaintive duet.



We knew the small gentleman well; we had seen a lithographed

semblance of him, on many a piece of music, with his mouth wide

open as if in the act of singing; a wine-glass in his hand; and a

table with two decanters and four pine-apples on it in the

background.  The tall lady, too, we had gazed on, lost in raptures

of admiration, many and many a time - how different people DO look

by daylight, and without punch, to be sure!  It was a beautiful

duet:  first the small gentleman asked a question, and then the

tall lady answered it; then the small gentleman and the tall lady

sang together most melodiously; then the small gentleman went

through a little piece of vehemence by himself, and got very tenor

indeed, in the excitement of his feelings, to which the tall lady

responded in a similar manner; then the small gentleman had a shake

or two, after which the tall lady had the same, and then they both

merged imperceptibly into the original air:  and the band wound

themselves up to a pitch of fury, and the small gentleman handed

the tall lady out, and the applause was rapturous.



The comic singer, however, was the especial favourite; we really

thought that a gentleman, with his dinner in a pocket-handkerchief,

who stood near us, would have fainted with excess of joy.  A

marvellously facetious gentleman that comic singer is; his

distinguishing characteristics are, a wig approaching to the

flaxen, and an aged countenance, and he bears the name of one of

the English counties, if we recollect right.  He sang a very good

song about the seven ages, the first half-hour of which afforded

the assembly the purest delight; of the rest we can make no report,

as we did not stay to hear any more.



We walked about, and met with a disappointment at every turn; our

favourite views were mere patches of paint; the fountain that had

sparkled so showily by lamp-light, presented very much the

appearance of a water-pipe that had burst; all the ornaments were

dingy, and all the walks gloomy.  There was a spectral attempt at

rope-dancing in the little open theatre.  The sun shone upon the

spangled dresses of the performers, and their evolutions were about

as inspiriting and appropriate as a country-dance in a family

vault.  So we retraced our steps to the firework-ground, and

mingled with the little crowd of people who were contemplating Mr.

Green.



Some half-dozen men were restraining the impetuosity of one of the

balloons, which was completely filled, and had the car already

attached; and as rumours had gone abroad that a Lord was 'going

up,' the crowd were more than usually anxious and talkative.  There

was one little man in faded black, with a dirty face and a rusty

black neckerchief with a red border, tied in a narrow wisp round

his neck, who entered into conversation with everybody, and had

something to say upon every remark that was made within his

hearing.  He was standing with his arms folded, staring up at the

balloon, and every now and then vented his feelings of reverence

for the aeronaut, by saying, as he looked round to catch somebody's

eye, 'He's a rum 'un is Green; think o' this here being up'ards of

his two hundredth ascent; ecod, the man as is ekal to Green never

had the toothache yet, nor won't have within this hundred year, and

that's all about it.  When you meets with real talent, and native,

too, encourage it, that's what I say;' and when he had delivered

himself to this effect, he would fold his arms with more

determination than ever, and stare at the balloon with a sort of

admiring defiance of any other man alive, beyond himself and Green,

that impressed the crowd with the opinion that he was an oracle.



'Ah, you're very right, sir,' said another gentleman, with his

wife, and children, and mother, and wife's sister, and a host of

female friends, in all the gentility of white pocket-handkerchiefs,

frills, and spencers, 'Mr. Green is a steady hand, sir, and there's

no fear about him.'



'Fear!' said the little man:  'isn't it a lovely thing to see him

and his wife a going up in one balloon, and his own son and HIS

wife a jostling up against them in another, and all of them going

twenty or thirty mile in three hours or so, and then coming back in

pochayses?  I don't know where this here science is to stop, mind

you; that's what bothers me.'



Here there was a considerable talking among the females in the

spencers.



'What's the ladies a laughing at, sir?' inquired the little man,

condescendingly.



'It's only my sister Mary,' said one of the girls, 'as says she

hopes his lordship won't be frightened when he's in the car, and

want to come out again.'



'Make yourself easy about that there, my dear,' replied the little

man.  'If he was so much as to move a inch without leave, Green

would jist fetch him a crack over the head with the telescope, as

would send him into the bottom of the basket in no time, and stun

him till they come down again.'



'Would he, though?' inquired the other man.



'Yes, would he,' replied the little one, 'and think nothing of it,

neither, if he was the king himself.  Green's presence of mind is

wonderful.'



Just at this moment all eyes were directed to the preparations

which were being made for starting.  The car was attached to the

second balloon, the two were brought pretty close together, and a

military band commenced playing, with a zeal and fervour which

would render the most timid man in existence but too happy to

accept any means of quitting that particular spot of earth on which

they were stationed.  Then Mr. Green, sen., and his noble companion

entered one car, and Mr. Green, jun., and HIS companion the other;

and then the balloons went up, and the aerial travellers stood up,

and the crowd outside roared with delight, and the two gentlemen

who had never ascended before, tried to wave their flags, as if

they were not nervous, but held on very fast all the while; and the

balloons were wafted gently away, our little friend solemnly

protesting, long after they were reduced to mere specks in the air,

that he could still distinguish the white hat of Mr. Green.  The

gardens disgorged their multitudes, boys ran up and down screaming

'bal-loon;' and in all the crowded thoroughfares people rushed out

of their shops into the middle of the road, and having stared up in

the air at two little black objects till they almost dislocated

their necks, walked slowly in again, perfectly satisfied.



The next day there was a grand account of the ascent in the morning

papers, and the public were informed how it was the finest day but

four in Mr. Green's remembrance; how they retained sight of the

earth till they lost it behind the clouds; and how the reflection

of the balloon on the undulating masses of vapour was gorgeously

picturesque; together with a little science about the refraction of

the sun's rays, and some mysterious hints respecting atmospheric

heat and eddying currents of air.



There was also an interesting account how a man in a boat was

distinctly heard by Mr. Green, jun., to exclaim, 'My eye!' which

Mr. Green, jun., attributed to his voice rising to the balloon, and

the sound being thrown back from its surface into the car; and the

whole concluded with a slight allusion to another ascent next

Wednesday, all of which was very instructive and very amusing, as

our readers will see if they look to the papers.  If we have

forgotten to mention the date, they have only to wait till next

summer, and take the account of the first ascent, and it will

answer the purpose equally well.
