






CHAPTER IV - SCOTLAND-YARD







Scotland-yard is a small - a very small-tract of land, bounded on

one side by the river Thames, on the other by the gardens of

Northumberland House:  abutting at one end on the bottom of

Northumberland-street, at the other on the back of Whitehall-place.

When this territory was first accidentally discovered by a country

gentleman who lost his way in the Strand, some years ago, the

original settlers were found to be a tailor, a publican, two

eating-house keepers, and a fruit-pie maker; and it was also found

to contain a race of strong and bulky men, who repaired to the

wharfs in Scotland-yard regularly every morning, about five or six

o'clock, to fill heavy waggons with coal, with which they proceeded

to distant places up the country, and supplied the inhabitants with

fuel.  When they had emptied their waggons, they again returned for

a fresh supply; and this trade was continued throughout the year.



As the settlers derived their subsistence from ministering to the

wants of these primitive traders, the articles exposed for sale,

and the places where they were sold, bore strong outward marks of

being expressly adapted to their tastes and wishes.  The tailor

displayed in his window a Lilliputian pair of leather gaiters, and

a diminutive round frock, while each doorpost was appropriately

garnished with a model of a coal-sack.  The two eating-house

keepers exhibited joints of a magnitude, and puddings of a

solidity, which coalheavers alone could appreciate; and the fruit-

pie maker displayed on his well-scrubbed window-board large white

compositions of flour and dripping, ornamented with pink stains,

giving rich promise of the fruit within, which made their huge

mouths water, as they lingered past.



But the choicest spot in all Scotland-yard was the old public-house

in the corner.  Here, in a dark wainscoted-room of ancient

appearance, cheered by the glow of a mighty fire, and decorated

with an enormous clock, whereof the face was white, and the figures

black, sat the lusty coalheavers, quaffing large draughts of

Barclay's best, and puffing forth volumes of smoke, which wreathed

heavily above their heads, and involved the room in a thick dark

cloud.  From this apartment might their voices be heard on a

winter's night, penetrating to the very bank of the river, as they

shouted out some sturdy chorus, or roared forth the burden of a

popular song; dwelling upon the last few words with a strength and

length of emphasis which made the very roof tremble above them.



Here, too, would they tell old legends of what the Thames was in

ancient times, when the Patent Shot Manufactory wasn't built, and

Waterloo-bridge had never been thought of; and then they would

shake their heads with portentous looks, to the deep edification of

the rising generation of heavers, who crowded round them, and

wondered where all this would end; whereat the tailor would take

his pipe solemnly from his mouth, and say, how that he hoped it

might end well, but he very much doubted whether it would or not,

and couldn't rightly tell what to make of it - a mysterious

expression of opinion, delivered with a semi-prophetic air, which

never failed to elicit the fullest concurrence of the assembled

company; and so they would go on drinking and wondering till ten

o'clock came, and with it the tailor's wife to fetch him home, when

the little party broke up, to meet again in the same room, and say

and do precisely the same things, on the following evening at the

same hour.



About this time the barges that came up the river began to bring

vague rumours to Scotland-yard of somebody in the city having been

heard to say, that the Lord Mayor had threatened in so many words

to pull down the old London-bridge, and build up a new one.  At

first these rumours were disregarded as idle tales, wholly

destitute of foundation, for nobody in Scotland-yard doubted that

if the Lord Mayor contemplated any such dark design, he would just

be clapped up in the Tower for a week or two, and then killed off

for high treason.



By degrees, however, the reports grew stronger, and more frequent,

and at last a barge, laden with numerous chaldrons of the best

Wallsend, brought up the positive intelligence that several of the

arches of the old bridge were stopped, and that preparations were

actually in progress for constructing the new one.  What an

excitement was visible in the old tap-room on that memorable night!

Each man looked into his neighbour's face, pale with alarm and

astonishment, and read therein an echo of the sentiments which

filled his own breast.  The oldest heaver present proved to

demonstration, that the moment the piers were removed, all the

water in the Thames would run clean off, and leave a dry gully in

its place.  What was to become of the coal-barges - of the trade of

Scotland-yard - of the very existence of its population?  The

tailor shook his head more sagely than usual, and grimly pointing

to a knife on the table, bid them wait and see what happened.  He

said nothing - not he; but if the Lord Mayor didn't fall a victim

to popular indignation, why he would be rather astonished; that was

all.



They did wait; barge after barge arrived, and still no tidings of

the assassination of the Lord Mayor.  The first stone was laid:  it

was done by a Duke - the King's brother.  Years passed away, and

the bridge was opened by the King himself.  In course of time, the

piers were removed; and when the people in Scotland-yard got up

next morning in the confident expectation of being able to step

over to Pedlar's Acre without wetting the soles of their shoes,

they found to their unspeakable astonishment that the water was

just where it used to be.



A result so different from that which they had anticipated from

this first improvement, produced its full effect upon the

inhabitants of Scotland-yard.  One of the eating-house keepers

began to court public opinion, and to look for customers among a

new class of people.  He covered his little dining-tables with

white cloths, and got a painter's apprentice to inscribe something

about hot joints from twelve to two, in one of the little panes of

his shop-window.  Improvement began to march with rapid strides to

the very threshold of Scotland-yard.  A new market sprung up at

Hungerford, and the Police Commissioners established their office

in Whitehall-place.  The traffic in Scotland-yard increased; fresh

Members were added to the House of Commons, the Metropolitan

Representatives found it a near cut, and many other foot passengers

followed their example.



We marked the advance of civilisation, and beheld it with a sigh.

The eating-house keeper who manfully resisted the innovation of

table-cloths, was losing ground every day, as his opponent gained

it, and a deadly feud sprung up between them.  The genteel one no

longer took his evening's pint in Scotland-yard, but drank gin and

water at a 'parlour' in Parliament-street.  The fruit-pie maker

still continued to visit the old room, but he took to smoking

cigars, and began to call himself a pastrycook, and to read the

papers.  The old heavers still assembled round the ancient

fireplace, but their talk was mournful:  and the loud song and the

joyous shout were heard no more.



And what is Scotland-yard now?  How have its old customs changed;

and how has the ancient simplicity of its inhabitants faded away!

The old tottering public-house is converted into a spacious and

lofty 'wine-vaults;' gold leaf has been used in the construction of

the letters which emblazon its exterior, and the poet's art has

been called into requisition, to intimate that if you drink a

certain description of ale, you must hold fast by the rail.  The

tailor exhibits in his window the pattern of a foreign-looking

brown surtout, with silk buttons, a fur collar, and fur cuffs.  He

wears a stripe down the outside of each leg of his trousers:  and

we have detected his assistants (for he has assistants now) in the

act of sitting on the shop-board in the same uniform.



At the other end of the little row of houses a boot-maker has

established himself in a brick box, with the additional innovation

of a first floor; and here he exposes for sale, boots - real

Wellington boots - an article which a few years ago, none of the

original inhabitants had ever seen or heard of.  It was but the

other day, that a dress-maker opened another little box in the

middle of the row; and, when we thought that the spirit of change

could produce no alteration beyond that, a jeweller appeared, and

not content with exposing gilt rings and copper bracelets out of

number, put up an announcement, which still sticks in his window,

that 'ladies' ears may be pierced within.'  The dress-maker employs

a young lady who wears pockets in her apron; and the tailor informs

the public that gentlemen may have their own materials made up.



Amidst all this change, and restlessness, and innovation, there

remains but one old man, who seems to mourn the downfall of this

ancient place.  He holds no converse with human kind, but, seated

on a wooden bench at the angle of the wall which fronts the

crossing from Whitehall-place, watches in silence the gambols of

his sleek and well-fed dogs.  He is the presiding genius of

Scotland-yard.  Years and years have rolled over his head; but, in

fine weather or in foul, hot or cold, wet or dry, hail, rain, or

snow, he is still in his accustomed spot.  Misery and want are

depicted in his countenance; his form is bent by age, his head is

grey with length of trial, but there he sits from day to day,

brooding over the past; and thither he will continue to drag his

feeble limbs, until his eyes have closed upon Scotland-yard, and

upon the world together.



A few years hence, and the antiquary of another generation looking

into some mouldy record of the strife and passions that agitated

the world in these times, may glance his eye over the pages we have

just filled:  and not all his knowledge of the history of the past,

not all his black-letter lore, or his skill in book-collecting, not

all the dry studies of a long life, or the dusty volumes that have

cost him a fortune, may help him to the whereabouts, either of

Scotland-yard, or of any one of the landmarks we have mentioned in

describing it.

