





CHAPTER XIII - PRIVATE THEATRES







'RICHARD THE THIRD. - DUKE OF GLO'STER 2L.; EARL OF RICHMOND, 1L;

DUKE OF BUCKINGHAM, 15S.; CATESBY, 12S.; TRESSEL, 10S. 6D.; LORD

STANLEY, 5S.; LORD MAYOR OF LONDON, 2S. 6D.'



Such are the written placards wafered up in the gentlemen's

dressing-room, or the green-room (where there is any), at a private

theatre; and such are the sums extracted from the shop-till, or

overcharged in the office expenditure, by the donkeys who are

prevailed upon to pay for permission to exhibit their lamentable

ignorance and boobyism on the stage of a private theatre.  This

they do, in proportion to the scope afforded by the character for

the display of their imbecility.  For instance, the Duke of

Glo'ster is well worth two pounds, because he has it all to

himself; he must wear a real sword, and what is better still, he

must draw it, several times in the course of the piece.  The

soliloquies alone are well worth fifteen shillings; then there is

the stabbing King Henry - decidedly cheap at three-and-sixpence,

that's eighteen-and-sixpence; bullying the coffin-bearers - say

eighteen-pence, though it's worth much more - that's a pound.  Then

the love scene with Lady Ann, and the bustle of the fourth act

can't be dear at ten shillings more - that's only one pound ten,

including the 'off with his head!' - which is sure to bring down

the applause, and it is very easy to do - 'Orf with his ed' (very

quick and loud; - then slow and sneeringly) - 'So much for Bu-u-u-

uckingham!'  Lay the emphasis on the 'uck;' get yourself gradually

into a corner, and work with your right hand, while you're saying

it, as if you were feeling your way, and it's sure to do.  The tent

scene is confessedly worth half-a-sovereign, and so you have the

fight in, gratis, and everybody knows what an effect may be

produced by a good combat.  One - two - three - four - over; then,

one - two - three - four - under; then thrust; then dodge and slide

about; then fall down on one knee; then fight upon it, and then get

up again and stagger.  You may keep on doing this, as long as it

seems to take - say ten minutes - and then fall down (backwards, if

you can manage it without hurting yourself), and die game:  nothing

like it for producing an effect.  They always do it at Astley's and

Sadler's Wells, and if they don't know how to do this sort of

thing, who in the world does?  A small child, or a female in white,

increases the interest of a combat materially - indeed, we are not

aware that a regular legitimate terrific broadsword combat could be

done without; but it would be rather difficult, and somewhat

unusual, to introduce this effect in the last scene of Richard the

Third, so the only thing to be done, is, just to make the best of a

bad bargain, and be as long as possible fighting it out.



The principal patrons of private theatres are dirty boys, low

copying-clerks, in attorneys' offices, capacious-headed youths from

city counting-houses, Jews whose business, as lenders of fancy

dresses, is a sure passport to the amateur stage, shop-boys who now

and then mistake their masters' money for their own; and a choice

miscellany of idle vagabonds.  The proprietor of a private theatre

may be an ex-scene-painter, a low coffee-house-keeper, a

disappointed eighth-rate actor, a retired smuggler, or

uncertificated bankrupt.  The theatre itself may be in Catherine-

street, Strand, the purlieus of the city, the neighbourhood of

Gray's-inn-lane, or the vicinity of Sadler's Wells; or it may,

perhaps, form the chief nuisance of some shabby street, on the

Surrey side of Waterloo-bridge.



The lady performers pay nothing for their characters, and it is

needless to add, are usually selected from one class of society;

the audiences are necessarily of much the same character as the

performers, who receive, in return for their contributions to the

management, tickets to the amount of the money they pay.



All the minor theatres in London, especially the lowest, constitute

the centre of a little stage-struck neighbourhood.  Each of them

has an audience exclusively its own; and at any you will see

dropping into the pit at half-price, or swaggering into the back of

a box, if the price of admission be a reduced one, divers boys of

from fifteen to twenty-one years of age, who throw back their coat

and turn up their wristbands, after the portraits of Count D'Orsay,

hum tunes and whistle when the curtain is down, by way of

persuading the people near them, that they are not at all anxious

to have it up again, and speak familiarly of the inferior

performers as Bill Such-a-one, and Ned So-and-so, or tell each

other how a new piece called THE UNKNOWN BANDIT OF THE INVISIBLE

CAVERN, is in rehearsal; how Mister Palmer is to play THE UNKNOWN

BANDIT; how Charley Scarton is to take the part of an English

sailor, and fight a broadsword combat with six unknown bandits, at

one and the same time (one theatrical sailor is always equal to

half a dozen men at least); how Mister Palmer and Charley Scarton

are to go through a double hornpipe in fetters in the second act;

how the interior of the invisible cavern is to occupy the whole

extent of the stage; and other town-surprising theatrical

announcements.  These gentlemen are the amateurs - the RICHARDS,

SHYLOCKS, BEVERLEYS, and OTHELLOS - the YOUNG DORNTONS, ROVERS,

CAPTAIN ABSOLUTES, and CHARLES SURFACES - a private theatre.



See them at the neighbouring public-house or the theatrical coffee-

shop!  They are the kings of the place, supposing no real

performers to be present; and roll about, hats on one side, and

arms a-kimbo, as if they had actually come into possession of

eighteen shillings a-week, and a share of a ticket night.  If one

of them does but know an Astley's supernumerary he is a happy

fellow.  The mingled air of envy and admiration with which his

companions will regard him, as he converses familiarly with some

mouldy-looking man in a fancy neckerchief, whose partially corked

eyebrows, and half-rouged face, testify to the fact of his having

just left the stage or the circle, sufficiently shows in what high

admiration these public characters are held.



With the double view of guarding against the discovery of friends

or employers, and enhancing the interest of an assumed character,

by attaching a high-sounding name to its representative, these

geniuses assume fictitious names, which are not the least amusing

part of the play-bill of a private theatre.  Belville, Melville,

Treville, Berkeley, Randolph, Byron, St. Clair, and so forth, are

among the humblest; and the less imposing titles of Jenkins,

Walker, Thomson, Barker, Solomons, &c., are completely laid aside.

There is something imposing in this, and it is an excellent apology

for shabbiness into the bargain.  A shrunken, faded coat, a decayed

hat, a patched and soiled pair of trousers - nay, even a very dirty

shirt (and none of these appearances are very uncommon among the

members of the CORPS DRAMATIQUE), may be worn for the purpose of

disguise, and to prevent the remotest chance of recognition.  Then

it prevents any troublesome inquiries or explanations about

employment and pursuits; everybody is a gentleman at large, for the

occasion, and there are none of those unpleasant and unnecessary

distinctions to which even genius must occasionally succumb

elsewhere.  As to the ladies (God bless them), they are quite above

any formal absurdities; the mere circumstance of your being behind

the scenes is a sufficient introduction to their society - for of

course they know that none but strictly respectable persons would

be admitted into that close fellowship with them, which acting

engenders.  They place implicit reliance on the manager, no doubt;

and as to the manager, he is all affability when he knows you well,

- or, in other words, when he has pocketed your money once, and

entertains confident hopes of doing so again.



A quarter before eight - there will be a full house to-night - six

parties in the boxes, already; four little boys and a woman in the

pit; and two fiddles and a flute in the orchestra, who have got

through five overtures since seven o'clock (the hour fixed for the

commencement of the performances), and have just begun the sixth.

There will be plenty of it, though, when it does begin, for there

is enough in the bill to last six hours at least.



That gentleman in the white hat and checked shirt, brown coat and

brass buttons, lounging behind the stage-box on the O. P. side, is

Mr. Horatio St. Julien, alias Jem Larkins.  His line is genteel

comedy - his father's, coal and potato.  He DOES Alfred Highflier

in the last piece, and very well he'll do it - at the price.  The

party of gentlemen in the opposite box, to whom he has just nodded,

are friends and supporters of Mr. Beverley (otherwise Loggins), the

MACBETH of the night.  You observe their attempts to appear easy

and gentlemanly, each member of the party, with his feet cocked

upon the cushion in front of the box!  They let them do these

things here, upon the same humane principle which permits poor

people's children to knock double knocks at the door of an empty

house - because they can't do it anywhere else.  The two stout men

in the centre box, with an opera-glass ostentatiously placed before

them, are friends of the proprietor - opulent country managers, as

he confidentially informs every individual among the crew behind

the curtain - opulent country managers looking out for recruits; a

representation which Mr. Nathan, the dresser, who is in the

manager's interest, and has just arrived with the costumes, offers

to confirm upon oath if required - corroborative evidence, however,

is quite unnecessary, for the gulls believe it at once.



The stout Jewess who has just entered, is the mother of the pale,

bony little girl, with the necklace of blue glass beads, sitting by

her; she is being brought up to 'the profession.'  Pantomime is to

be her line, and she is coming out to-night, in a hornpipe after

the tragedy.  The short thin man beside Mr. St. Julien, whose white

face is so deeply seared with the small-pox, and whose dirty shirt-

front is inlaid with open-work, and embossed with coral studs like

ladybirds, is the low comedian and comic singer of the

establishment.  The remainder of the audience - a tolerably

numerous one by this time - are a motley group of dupes and

blackguards.



The foot-lights have just made their appearance:  the wicks of the

six little oil lamps round the only tier of boxes, are being turned

up, and the additional light thus afforded serves to show the

presence of dirt, and absence of paint, which forms a prominent

feature in the audience part of the house.  As these preparations,

however, announce the speedy commencement of the play, let us take

a peep 'behind,' previous to the ringing-up.



The little narrow passages beneath the stage are neither especially

clean nor too brilliantly lighted; and the absence of any flooring,

together with the damp mildewy smell which pervades the place, does

not conduce in any great degree to their comfortable appearance.

Don't fall over this plate basket - it's one of the 'properties' -

the caldron for the witches' cave; and the three uncouth-looking

figures, with broken clothes-props in their hands, who are drinking

gin-and-water out of a pint pot, are the weird sisters.  This

miserable room, lighted by candles in sconces placed at lengthened

intervals round the wall, is the dressing-room, common to the

gentlemen performers, and the square hole in the ceiling is THE

trap-door of the stage above.  You will observe that the ceiling is

ornamented with the beams that support the boards, and tastefully

hung with cobwebs.



The characters in the tragedy are all dressed, and their own

clothes are scattered in hurried confusion over the wooden dresser

which surrounds the room.  That snuff-shop-looking figure, in front

of the glass, is BANQUO,  and the young lady with the liberal

display of legs, who is kindly painting his face with a hare's

foot, is dressed for FLEANCE.  The large woman, who is consulting

the stage directions in Cumberland's edition of MACBETH, is the

LADY MACBETH of the night; she is always selected to play the part,

because she is tall and stout, and LOOKS a little like Mrs. Siddons

- at a considerable distance.  That stupid-looking milksop, with

light hair and bow legs - a kind of man whom you can warrant town-

made - is fresh caught; he plays MALCOLM to-night, just to accustom

himself to an audience.  He will get on better by degrees; he will

play OTHELLO in a month, and in a month more, will very probably be

apprehended on a charge of embezzlement.  The black-eyed female

with whom he is talking so earnestly, is dressed for the

'gentlewoman.'  It is HER first appearance, too - in that

character.  The boy of fourteen who is having his eyebrows smeared

with soap and whitening, is DUNCAN, King of Scotland; and the two

dirty men with the corked countenances, in very old green tunics,

and dirty drab boots, are the 'army.'



'Look sharp below there, gents,' exclaims the dresser, a red-headed

and red-whiskered Jew, calling through the trap, 'they're a-going

to ring up.  The flute says he'll be blowed if he plays any more,

and they're getting precious noisy in front.'  A general rush

immediately takes place to the half-dozen little steep steps

leading to the stage, and the heterogeneous group are soon

assembled at the side scenes, in breathless anxiety and motley

confusion.



'Now,' cries the manager, consulting the written list which hangs

behind the first P. S, wing, 'Scene 1, open country - lamps down -

thunder and lightning - all ready, White?'  [This is addressed to

one of the army.]  'All ready.' - 'Very well.  Scene 2, front

chamber.  Is the front chamber down?' - 'Yes.' - 'Very well.' -

'Jones' [to the other army who is up in the flies].  'Hallo!' -

'Wind up the open country when we ring up.' - 'I'll take care.' -

'Scene 3, back perspective with practical bridge.  Bridge ready,

White?  Got the tressels there?' - 'All right.'



'Very well.  Clear the stage,' cries the manager, hastily packing

every member of the company into the little space there is between

the wings and the wall, and one wing and another.  'Places, places.

Now then, Witches - Duncan - Malcolm - bleeding officer - where's

the bleeding officer?' - 'Here!' replies the officer, who has been

rose-pinking for the character.  'Get ready, then; now, White, ring

the second music-bell.'  The actors who are to be discovered, are

hastily arranged, and the actors who are not to be discovered place

themselves, in their anxiety to peep at the house, just where the

audience can see them.  The bell rings, and the orchestra, in

acknowledgment of the call, play three distinct chords.  The bell

rings - the tragedy (!) opens - and our description closes.

