






CHAPTER VIII - DOCTORS' COMMONS







Walking without any definite object through St. Paul's Churchyard,

a little while ago, we happened to turn down a street entitled

'Paul's-chain,' and keeping straight forward for a few hundred

yards, found ourself, as a natural consequence, in Doctors'

Commons.  Now Doctors' Commons being familiar by name to everybody,

as the place where they grant marriage-licenses to love-sick

couples, and divorces to unfaithful ones; register the wills of

people who have any property to leave, and punish hasty gentlemen

who call ladies by unpleasant names, we no sooner discovered that

we were really within its precincts, than we felt a laudable desire

to become better acquainted therewith; and as the first object of

our curiosity was the Court, whose decrees can even unloose the

bonds of matrimony, we procured a direction to it; and bent our

steps thither without delay.



Crossing a quiet and shady court-yard, paved with stone, and

frowned upon by old red brick houses, on the doors of which were

painted the names of sundry learned civilians, we paused before a

small, green-baized, brass-headed-nailed door, which yielding to

our gentle push, at once admitted us into an old quaint-looking

apartment, with sunken windows, and black carved wainscoting, at

the upper end of which, seated on a raised platform, of

semicircular shape, were about a dozen solemn-looking gentlemen, in

crimson gowns and wigs.



At a more elevated desk in the centre, sat a very fat and red-faced

gentleman, in tortoise-shell spectacles, whose dignified appearance

announced the judge; and round a long green-baized table below,

something like a billiard-table without the cushions and pockets,

were a number of very self-important-looking personages, in stiff

neckcloths, and black gowns with white fur collars, whom we at once

set down as proctors.  At the lower end of the billiard-table was

an individual in an arm-chair, and a wig, whom we afterwards

discovered to be the registrar; and seated behind a little desk,

near the door, were a respectable-looking man in black, of about

twenty-stone weight or thereabouts, and a fat-faced, smirking,

civil-looking body, in a black gown, black kid gloves, knee shorts,

and silks, with a shirt-frill in his bosom, curls on his head, and

a silver staff in his hand, whom we had no difficulty in

recognising as the officer of the Court.  The latter, indeed,

speedily set our mind at rest upon this point, for, advancing to

our elbow, and opening a conversation forthwith, he had

communicated to us, in less than five minutes, that he was the

apparitor, and the other the court-keeper; that this was the Arches

Court, and therefore the counsel wore red gowns, and the proctors

fur collars; and that when the other Courts sat there, they didn't

wear red gowns or fur collars either; with many other scraps of

intelligence equally interesting.  Besides these two officers,

there was a little thin old man, with long grizzly hair, crouched

in a remote corner, whose duty, our communicative friend informed

us, was to ring a large hand-bell when the Court opened in the

morning, and who, for aught his appearance betokened to the

contrary, might have been similarly employed for the last two

centuries at least.



The red-faced gentleman in the tortoise-shell spectacles had got

all the talk to himself just then, and very well he was doing it,

too, only he spoke very fast, but that was habit; and rather thick,

but that was good living.  So we had plenty of time to look about

us.  There was one individual who amused us mightily.  This was one

of the bewigged gentlemen in the red robes, who was straddling

before the fire in the centre of the Court, in the attitude of the

brazen Colossus, to the complete exclusion of everybody else.  He

had gathered up his robe behind, in much the same manner as a

slovenly woman would her petticoats on a very dirty day, in order

that he might feel the full warmth of the fire.  His wig was put on

all awry, with the tail straggling about his neck; his scanty grey

trousers and short black gaiters, made in the worst possible style,

imported an additional inelegant appearance to his uncouth person;

and his limp, badly-starched shirt-collar almost obscured his eyes.

We shall never be able to claim any credit as a physiognomist

again, for, after a careful scrutiny of this gentleman's

countenance, we had come to the conclusion that it bespoke nothing

but conceit and silliness, when our friend with the silver staff

whispered in our ear that he was no other than a doctor of civil

law, and heaven knows what besides.  So of course we were mistaken,

and he must be a very talented man.  He conceals it so well though

- perhaps with the merciful view of not astonishing ordinary people

too much - that you would suppose him to be one of the stupidest

dogs alive.



The gentleman in the spectacles having concluded his judgment, and

a few minutes having been allowed to elapse, to afford time for the

buzz of the Court to subside, the registrar called on the next

cause, which was 'the office of the Judge promoted by Bumple

against Sludberry.'  A general movement was visible in the Court,

at this announcement, and the obliging functionary with silver

staff whispered us that 'there would be some fun now, for this was

a brawling case.'



We were not rendered much the wiser by this piece of information,

till we found by the opening speech of the counsel for the

promoter, that, under a half-obsolete statute of one of the

Edwards, the court was empowered to visit with the penalty of

excommunication, any person who should be proved guilty of the

crime of 'brawling,' or 'smiting,' in any church, or vestry

adjoining thereto; and it appeared, by some eight-and-twenty

affidavits, which were duly referred to, that on a certain night,

at a certain vestry-meeting, in a certain parish particularly set

forth, Thomas Sludberry, the party appeared against in that suit,

had made use of, and applied to Michael Bumple, the promoter, the

words 'You be blowed;' and that, on the said Michael Bumple and

others remonstrating with the said Thomas Sludberry, on the

impropriety of his conduct, the said Thomas Sludberry repeated the

aforesaid expression, 'You be blowed;' and furthermore desired and

requested to know, whether the said Michael Bumple 'wanted anything

for himself;' adding, 'that if the said Michael Bumple did want

anything for himself, he, the said Thomas Sludberry, was the man to

give it him;' at the same time making use of other heinous and

sinful expressions, all of which, Bumple submitted, came within the

intent and meaning of the Act; and therefore he, for the soul's

health and chastening of Sludberry, prayed for sentence of

excommunication against him accordingly.



Upon these facts a long argument was entered into, on both sides,

to the great edification of a number of persons interested in the

parochial squabbles, who crowded the court; and when some very long

and grave speeches had been made PRO and CON, the red-faced

gentleman in the tortoise-shell spectacles took a review of the

case, which occupied half an hour more, and then pronounced upon

Sludberry the awful sentence of excommunication for a fortnight,

and payment of the costs of the suit.  Upon this, Sludberry, who

was a little, red-faced, sly-looking, ginger-beer seller, addressed

the court, and said, if they'd be good enough to take off the

costs, and excommunicate him for the term of his natural life

instead, it would be much more convenient to him, for he never went

to church at all.  To this appeal the gentleman in the spectacles

made no other reply than a look of virtuous indignation; and

Sludberry and his friends retired.  As the man with the silver

staff informed us that the court was on the point of rising, we

retired too - pondering, as we walked away, upon the beautiful

spirit of these ancient ecclesiastical laws, the kind and

neighbourly feelings they are calculated to awaken, and the strong

attachment to religious institutions which they cannot fail to

engender.



We were so lost in these meditations, that we had turned into the

street, and run up against a door-post, before we recollected where

we were walking.  On looking upwards to see what house we had

stumbled upon, the words 'Prerogative-Office,' written in large

characters, met our eye; and as we were in a sight-seeing humour

and the place was a public one, we walked in.



The room into which we walked, was a long, busy-looking place,

partitioned off, on either side, into a variety of little boxes, in

which a few clerks were engaged in copying or examining deeds.

Down the centre of the room were several desks nearly breast high,

at each of which, three or four people were standing, poring over

large volumes.  As we knew that they were searching for wills, they

attracted our attention at once.



It was curious to contrast the lazy indifference of the attorneys'

clerks who were making a search for some legal purpose, with the

air of earnestness and interest which distinguished the strangers

to the place, who were looking up the will of some deceased

relative; the former pausing every now and then with an impatient

yawn, or raising their heads to look at the people who passed up

and down the room; the latter stooping over the book, and running

down column after column of names in the deepest abstraction.



There was one little dirty-faced man in a blue apron, who after a

whole morning's search, extending some fifty years back, had just

found the will to which he wished to refer, which one of the

officials was reading to him in a low hurried voice from a thick

vellum book with large clasps.  It was perfectly evident that the

more the clerk read, the less the man with the blue apron

understood about the matter.  When the volume was first brought

down, he took off his hat, smoothed down his hair, smiled with

great self-satisfaction, and looked up in the reader's face with

the air of a man who had made up his mind to recollect every word

he heard.  The first two or three lines were intelligible enough;

but then the technicalities began, and the little man began to look

rather dubious.  Then came a whole string of complicated trusts,

and he was regularly at sea.  As the reader proceeded, it was quite

apparent that it was a hopeless case, and the little man, with his

mouth open and his eyes fixed upon his face, looked on with an

expression of bewilderment and perplexity irresistibly ludicrous.



A little further on, a hard-featured old man with a deeply-wrinkled

face, was intently perusing a lengthy will with the aid of a pair

of horn spectacles:  occasionally pausing from his task, and slily

noting down some brief memorandum of the bequests contained in it.

Every wrinkle about his toothless mouth, and sharp keen eyes, told

of avarice and cunning.  His clothes were nearly threadbare, but it

was easy to see that he wore them from choice and not from

necessity; all his looks and gestures down to the very small

pinches of snuff which he every now and then took from a little tin

canister, told of wealth, and penury, and avarice.



As he leisurely closed the register, put up his spectacles, and

folded his scraps of paper in a large leathern pocket-book, we

thought what a nice hard bargain he was driving with some poverty-

stricken legatee, who, tired of waiting year after year, until some

life-interest should fall in, was selling his chance, just as it

began to grow most valuable, for a twelfth part of its worth.  It

was a good speculation - a very safe one.  The old man stowed his

pocket-book carefully in the breast of his great-coat, and hobbled

away with a leer of triumph.  That will had made him ten years

younger at the lowest computation.



Having commenced our observations, we should certainly have

extended them to another dozen of people at least, had not a sudden

shutting up and putting away of the worm-eaten old books, warned us

that the time for closing the office had arrived; and thus deprived

us of a pleasure, and spared our readers an infliction.



We naturally fell into a train of reflection as we walked

homewards, upon the curious old records of likings and dislikings;

of jealousies and revenges; of affection defying the power of

death, and hatred pursued beyond the grave, which these

depositories contain; silent but striking tokens, some of them, of

excellence of heart, and nobleness of soul; melancholy examples,

others, of the worst passions of human nature.  How many men as

they lay speechless and helpless on the bed of death, would have

given worlds but for the strength and power to blot out the silent

evidence of animosity and bitterness, which now stands registered

against them in Doctors' Commons!

