





CHAPTER XX - THE FIRST OF MAY







'Now ladies, up in the sky-parlour:  only once a year, if you

please!'

YOUNG LADY WITH BRASS LADLE.



'Sweep - sweep - sw-e-ep!'

ILLEGAL WATCHWORD.





The first of May!  There is a merry freshness in the sound, calling

to our minds a thousand thoughts of all that is pleasant in nature

and beautiful in her most delightful form.  What man is there, over

whose mind a bright spring morning does not exercise a magic

influence - carrying him back to the days of his childish sports,

and conjuring up before him the old green field with its gently-

waving trees, where the birds sang as he has never heard them since

- where the butterfly fluttered far more gaily than he ever sees

him now, in all his ramblings - where the sky seemed bluer, and the

sun shone more brightly - where the air blew more freshly over

greener grass, and sweeter-smelling flowers - where everything wore

a richer and more brilliant hue than it is ever dressed in now!

Such are the deep feelings of childhood, and such are the

impressions which every lovely object stamps upon its heart!  The

hardy traveller wanders through the maze of thick and pathless

woods, where the sun's rays never shone, and heaven's pure air

never played; he stands on the brink of the roaring waterfall, and,

giddy and bewildered, watches the foaming mass as it leaps from

stone to stone, and from crag to crag; he lingers in the fertile

plains of a land of perpetual sunshine, and revels in the luxury of

their balmy breath.  But what are the deep forests, or the

thundering waters, or the richest landscapes that bounteous nature

ever spread, to charm the eyes, and captivate the senses of man,

compared with the recollection of the old scenes of his early

youth?  Magic scenes indeed; for the fancies of childhood dressed

them in colours brighter than the rainbow, and almost as fleeting!



In former times, spring brought with it not only such associations

as these, connected with the past, but sports and games for the

present - merry dances round rustic pillars, adorned with emblems

of the season, and reared in honour of its coming.  Where are they

now!  Pillars we have, but they are no longer rustic ones; and as

to dancers, they are used to rooms, and lights, and would not show

well in the open air.  Think of the immorality, too!  What would

your sabbath enthusiasts say, to an aristocratic ring encircling

the Duke of York's column in Carlton-terrace - a grand POUSSETTE of

the middle classes, round Alderman Waithman's monument in Fleet-

street, - or a general hands-four-round of ten-pound householders,

at the foot of the Obelisk in St. George's-fields?  Alas! romance

can make no head against the riot act; and pastoral simplicity is

not understood by the police.



Well; many years ago we began to be a steady and matter-of-fact

sort of people, and dancing in spring being beneath our dignity, we

gave it up, and in course of time it descended to the sweeps - a

fall certainly, because, though sweeps are very good fellows in

their way, and moreover very useful in a civilised community, they

are not exactly the sort of people to give the tone to the little

elegances of society.  The sweeps, however, got the dancing to

themselves, and they kept it up, and handed it down.  This was a

severe blow to the romance of spring-time, but, it did not entirely

destroy it, either; for a portion of it descended to the sweeps

with the dancing, and rendered them objects of great interest.  A

mystery hung over the sweeps in those days.  Legends were in

existence of wealthy gentlemen who had lost children, and who,

after many years of sorrow and suffering, had found them in the

character of sweeps.  Stories were related of a young boy who,

having been stolen from his parents in his infancy, and devoted to

the occupation of chimney-sweeping, was sent, in the course of his

professional career, to sweep the chimney of his mother's bedroom;

and how, being hot and tired when he came out of the chimney, he

got into the bed he had so often slept in as an infant, and was

discovered and recognised therein by his mother, who once every

year of her life, thereafter, requested the pleasure of the company

of every London sweep, at half-past one o'clock, to roast beef,

plum-pudding, porter, and sixpence.



Such stories as these, and there were many such, threw an air of

mystery round the sweeps, and produced for them some of those good

effects which animals derive from the doctrine of the

transmigration of souls.  No one (except the masters) thought of

ill-treating a sweep, because no one knew who he might be, or what

nobleman's or gentleman's son he might turn out.  Chimney-sweeping

was, by many believers in the marvellous, considered as a sort of

probationary term, at an earlier or later period of which, divers

young noblemen were to come into possession of their rank and

titles:  and the profession was held by them in great respect

accordingly.



We remember, in our young days, a little sweep about our own age,

with curly hair and white teeth, whom we devoutly and sincerely

believed to be the lost son and heir of some illustrious personage

- an impression which was resolved into an unchangeable conviction

on our infant mind, by the subject of our speculations informing

us, one day, in reply to our question, propounded a few moments

before his ascent to the summit of the kitchen chimney, 'that he

believed he'd been born in the vurkis, but he'd never know'd his

father.'  We felt certain, from that time forth, that he would one

day be owned by a lord:  and we never heard the church-bells ring,

or saw a flag hoisted in the neighbourhood, without thinking that

the happy event had at last occurred, and that his long-lost parent

had arrived in a coach and six, to take him home to Grosvenor-

square.  He never came, however; and, at the present moment, the

young gentleman in question is settled down as a master sweep in

the neighbourhood of Battle-bridge, his distinguishing

characteristics being a decided antipathy to washing himself, and

the possession of a pair of legs very inadequate to the support of

his unwieldy and corpulent body.



The romance of spring having gone out before our time, we were fain

to console ourselves as we best could with the uncertainty that

enveloped the birth and parentage of its attendant dancers, the

sweeps; and we DID console ourselves with it, for many years.  But,

even this wicked source of comfort received a shock from which it

has never recovered - a shock which has been in reality its death-

blow.  We could not disguise from ourselves the fact that whole

families of sweeps were regularly born of sweeps, in the rural

districts of Somers Town and Camden Town - that the eldest son

succeeded to the father's business, that the other branches

assisted him therein, and commenced on their own account; that

their children again, were educated to the profession; and that

about their identity there could be no mistake whatever.  We could

not be blind, we say, to this melancholy truth, but we could not

bring ourselves to admit it, nevertheless, and we lived on for some

years in a state of voluntary ignorance.  We were roused from our

pleasant slumber by certain dark insinuations thrown out by a

friend of ours, to the effect that children in the lower ranks of

life were beginning to CHOOSE chimney-sweeping as their particular

walk; that applications had been made by various boys to the

constituted authorities, to allow them to pursue the object of

their ambition with the full concurrence and sanction of the law;

that the affair, in short, was becoming one of mere legal contract.

We turned a deaf ear to these rumours at first, but slowly and

surely they stole upon us.  Month after month, week after week,

nay, day after day, at last, did we meet with accounts of similar

applications.  The veil was removed, all mystery was at an end, and

chimney-sweeping had become a favourite and chosen pursuit.  There

is no longer any occasion to steal boys; for boys flock in crowds

to bind themselves.  The romance of the trade has fled, and the

chimney-sweeper of the present day, is no more like unto him of

thirty years ago, than is a Fleet-street pickpocket to a Spanish

brigand, or Paul Pry to Caleb Williams.



This gradual decay and disuse of the practice of leading noble

youths into captivity, and compelling them to ascend chimneys, was

a severe blow, if we may so speak, to the romance of chimney-

sweeping, and to the romance of spring at the same time.  But even

this was not all, for some few years ago the dancing on May-day

began to decline; small sweeps were observed to congregate in twos

or threes, unsupported by a 'green,' with no 'My Lord' to act as

master of the ceremonies, and no 'My Lady' to preside over the

exchequer.  Even in companies where there was a 'green' it was an

absolute nothing - a mere sprout - and the instrumental

accompaniments rarely extended beyond the shovels and a set of

Panpipes, better known to the many, as a 'mouth-organ.'



These were signs of the times, portentous omens of a coming change;

and what was the result which they shadowed forth?  Why, the master

sweeps, influenced by a restless spirit of innovation, actually

interposed their authority, in opposition to the dancing, and

substituted a dinner - an anniversary dinner at White Conduit House

- where clean faces appeared in lieu of black ones smeared with

rose pink; and knee cords and tops superseded nankeen drawers and

rosetted shoes.



Gentlemen who were in the habit of riding shy horses; and steady-

going people who have no vagrancy in their souls, lauded this

alteration to the skies, and the conduct of the master sweeps was

described beyond the reach of praise.  But how stands the real

fact?  Let any man deny, if he can, that when the cloth had been

removed, fresh pots and pipes laid upon the table, and the

customary loyal and patriotic toasts proposed, the celebrated Mr.

Sluffen, of Adam-and-Eve-court, whose authority not the most

malignant of our opponents can call in question, expressed himself

in a manner following:  'That now he'd cotcht the cheerman's hi, he

vished he might be jolly vell blessed, if he worn't a goin' to have

his innings, vich he vould say these here obserwashuns - that how

some mischeevus coves as know'd nuffin about the consarn, had tried

to sit people agin the mas'r swips, and take the shine out o' their

bis'nes, and the bread out o' the traps o' their preshus kids, by a

makin' o' this here remark, as chimblies could be as vell svept by

'sheenery as by boys; and that the makin' use o' boys for that

there purpuss vos barbareous; vereas, he 'ad been a chummy - he

begged the cheerman's parding for usin' such a wulgar hexpression -

more nor thirty year - he might say he'd been born in a chimbley -

and he know'd uncommon vell as 'sheenery vos vus nor o' no use:

and as to kerhewelty to the boys, everybody in the chimbley line

know'd as vell as he did, that they liked the climbin' better nor

nuffin as vos.'  From this day, we date the total fall of the last

lingering remnant of May-day dancing, among the ELITE of the

profession:  and from this period we commence a new era in that

portion of our spring associations which relates to the first of

May.



We are aware that the unthinking part of the population will meet

us here, with the assertion, that dancing on May-day still

continues - that 'greens' are annually seen to roll along the

streets - that youths in the garb of clowns, precede them, giving

vent to the ebullitions of their sportive fancies; and that lords

and ladies follow in their wake.



Granted.  We are ready to acknowledge that in outward show, these

processions have greatly improved:  we do not deny the introduction

of solos on the drum; we will even go so far as to admit an

occasional fantasia on the triangle, but here our admissions end.

We positively deny that the sweeps have art or part in these

proceedings.  We distinctly charge the dustmen with throwing what

they ought to clear away, into the eyes of the public.  We accuse

scavengers, brickmakers, and gentlemen who devote their energies to

the costermongering line, with obtaining money once a-year, under

false pretences.  We cling with peculiar fondness to the custom of

days gone by, and have shut out conviction as long as we could, but

it has forced itself upon us; and we now proclaim to a deluded

public, that the May-day dancers are NOT sweeps.  The size of them,

alone, is sufficient to repudiate the idea.  It is a notorious fact

that the widely-spread taste for register-stoves has materially

increased the demand for small boys; whereas the men, who, under a

fictitious character, dance about the streets on the first of May

nowadays, would be a tight fit in a kitchen flue, to say nothing of

the parlour.  This is strong presumptive evidence, but we have

positive proof - the evidence of our own senses.  And here is our

testimony.



Upon the morning of the second of the merry month of May, in the

year of our Lord one thousand eight hundred and thirty-six, we went

out for a stroll, with a kind of forlorn hope of seeing something

or other which might induce us to believe that it was really

spring, and not Christmas.  After wandering as far as Copenhagen

House, without meeting anything calculated to dispel our impression

that there was a mistake in the almanacks, we turned back down

Maidenlane, with the intention of passing through the extensive

colony lying between it and Battle-bridge, which is inhabited by

proprietors of donkey-carts, boilers of horse-flesh, makers of

tiles, and sifters of cinders; through which colony we should have

passed, without stoppage or interruption, if a little crowd

gathered round a shed had not attracted our attention, and induced

us to pause.



When we say a 'shed,' we do not mean the conservatory sort of

building, which, according to the old song, Love tenanted when he

was a young man, but a wooden house with windows stuffed with rags

and paper, and a small yard at the side, with one dust-cart, two

baskets, a few shovels, and little heaps of cinders, and fragments

of china and tiles, scattered about it.  Before this inviting spot

we paused; and the longer we looked, the more we wondered what

exciting circumstance it could be, that induced the foremost

members of the crowd to flatten their noses against the parlour

window, in the vain hope of catching a glimpse of what was going on

inside.  After staring vacantly about us for some minutes, we

appealed, touching the cause of this assemblage, to a gentleman in

a suit of tarpaulin, who was smoking his pipe on our right hand;

but as the only answer we obtained was a playful inquiry whether

our mother had disposed of her mangle, we determined to await the

issue in silence.



Judge of our virtuous indignation, when the street-door of the shed

opened, and a party emerged therefrom, clad in the costume and

emulating the appearance, of May-day sweeps!



The first person who appeared was 'my lord,' habited in a blue coat

and bright buttons, with gilt paper tacked over the seams, yellow

knee-breeches, pink cotton stockings, and shoes; a cocked hat,

ornamented with shreds of various-coloured paper, on his head, a

BOUQUET the size of a prize cauliflower in his button-hole, a long

Belcher handkerchief in his right hand, and a thin cane in his

left.  A murmur of applause ran through the crowd (which was

chiefly composed of his lordship's personal friends), when this

graceful figure made his appearance, which swelled into a burst of

applause as his fair partner in the dance bounded forth to join

him.  Her ladyship was attired in pink crape over bed-furniture,

with a low body and short sleeves.  The symmetry of her ankles was

partially concealed by a very perceptible pair of frilled trousers;

and the inconvenience which might have resulted from the

circumstance of her white satin shoes being a few sizes too large,

was obviated by their being firmly attached to her legs with strong

tape sandals.



Her head was ornamented with a profusion of artificial flowers; and

in her hand she bore a large brass ladle, wherein to receive what

she figuratively denominated 'the tin.'  The other characters were

a young gentleman in girl's clothes and a widow's cap; two clowns

who walked upon their hands in the mud, to the immeasurable delight

of all the spectators; a man with a drum; another man with a

flageolet; a dirty woman in a large shawl, with a box under her arm

for the money, - and last, though not least, the 'green,' animated

by no less a personage than our identical friend in the tarpaulin

suit.



The man hammered away at the drum, the flageolet squeaked, the

shovels rattled, the 'green' rolled about, pitching first on one

side and then on the other; my lady threw her right foot over her

left ankle, and her left foot over her right ankle, alternately; my

lord ran a few paces forward, and butted at the 'green,' and then a

few paces backward upon the toes of the crowd, and then went to the

right, and then to the left, and then dodged my lady round the

'green;' and finally drew her arm through his, and called upon the

boys to shout, which they did lustily - for this was the dancing.



We passed the same group, accidentally, in the evening.  We never

saw a 'green' so drunk, a lord so quarrelsome (no:  not even in the

house of peers after dinner), a pair of clowns so melancholy, a

lady so muddy, or a party so miserable.



How has May-day decayed!
