






CHAPTER XIX - PUBLIC DINNERS







All public dinners in London, from the Lord Mayor's annual banquet

at Guildhall, to the Chimney-sweepers' anniversary at White Conduit

House; from the Goldsmiths' to the Butchers', from the Sheriffs' to

the Licensed Victuallers'; are amusing scenes.  Of all

entertainments of this description, however, we think the annual

dinner of some public charity is the most amusing.  At a Company's

dinner, the people are nearly all alike - regular old stagers, who

make it a matter of business, and a thing not to be laughed at.  At

a political dinner, everybody is disagreeable, and inclined to

speechify - much the same thing, by-the-bye; but at a charity

dinner you see people of all sorts, kinds, and descriptions.  The

wine may not be remarkably special, to be sure, and we have heard

some hardhearted monsters grumble at the collection; but we really

think the amusement to be derived from the occasion, sufficient to

counterbalance even these disadvantages.



Let us suppose you are induced to attend a dinner of this

description - 'Indigent Orphans' Friends' Benevolent Institution,'

we think it is.  The name of the charity is a line or two longer,

but never mind the rest.  You have a distinct recollection,

however, that you purchased a ticket at the solicitation of some

charitable friend:  and you deposit yourself in a hackney-coach,

the driver of which - no doubt that you may do the thing in style -

turns a deaf ear to your earnest entreaties to be set down at the

corner of Great Queen-street, and persists in carrying you to the

very door of the Freemasons', round which a crowd of people are

assembled to witness the entrance of the indigent orphans' friends.

You hear great speculations as you pay the fare, on the possibility

of your being the noble Lord who is announced to fill the chair on

the occasion, and are highly gratified to hear it eventually

decided that you are only a 'wocalist.'



The first thing that strikes you, on your entrance, is the

astonishing importance of the committee.  You observe a door on the

first landing, carefully guarded by two waiters, in and out of

which stout gentlemen with very red faces keep running, with a

degree of speed highly unbecoming the gravity of persons of their

years and corpulency.  You pause, quite alarmed at the bustle, and

thinking, in your innocence, that two or three people must have

been carried out of the dining-room in fits, at least.  You are

immediately undeceived by the waiter - 'Up-stairs, if you please,

sir; this is the committee-room.'  Up-stairs you go, accordingly;

wondering, as you mount, what the duties of the committee can be,

and whether they ever do anything beyond confusing each other, and

running over the waiters.



Having deposited your hat and cloak, and received a remarkably

small scrap of pasteboard in exchange (which, as a matter of

course, you lose, before you require it again), you enter the hall,

down which there are three long tables for the less distinguished

guests, with a cross table on a raised platform at the upper end

for the reception of the very particular friends of the indigent

orphans.  Being fortunate enough to find a plate without anybody's

card in it, you wisely seat yourself at once, and have a little

leisure to look about you.  Waiters, with wine-baskets in their

hands, are placing decanters of sherry down the tables, at very

respectable distances; melancholy-looking salt-cellars, and decayed

vinegar-cruets, which might have belonged to the parents of the

indigent orphans in their time, are scattered at distant intervals

on the cloth; and the knives and forks look as if they had done

duty at every public dinner in London since the accession of George

the First.  The musicians are scraping and grating and screwing

tremendously - playing no notes but notes of preparation; and

several gentlemen are gliding along the sides of the tables,

looking into plate after plate with frantic eagerness, the

expression of their countenances growing more and more dismal as

they meet with everybody's card but their own.



You turn round to take a look at the table behind you, and - not

being in the habit of attending public dinners - are somewhat

struck by the appearance of the party on which your eyes rest.  One

of its principal members appears to be a little man, with a long

and rather inflamed face, and gray hair brushed bolt upright in

front; he wears a wisp of black silk round his neck, without any

stiffener, as an apology for a neckerchief, and is addressed by his

companions by the familiar appellation of 'Fitz,' or some such

monosyllable.  Near him is a stout man in a white neckerchief and

buff waistcoat, with shining dark hair, cut very short in front,

and a great, round, healthy-looking face, on which he studiously

preserves a half sentimental simper.  Next him, again, is a large-

headed man, with black hair and bushy whiskers; and opposite them

are two or three others, one of whom is a little round-faced

person, in a dress-stock and blue under-waistcoat.  There is

something peculiar in their air and manner, though you could hardly

describe what it is; you cannot divest yourself of the idea that

they have come for some other purpose than mere eating and

drinking.  You have no time to debate the matter, however, for the

waiters (who have been arranged in lines down the room, placing the

dishes on table) retire to the lower end; the dark man in the blue

coat and bright buttons, who has the direction of the music, looks

up to the gallery, and calls out 'band' in a very loud voice; out

burst the orchestra, up rise the visitors, in march fourteen

stewards, each with a long wand in his hand, like the evil genius

in a pantomime; then the chairman, then the titled visitors; they

all make their way up the room, as fast as they can, bowing, and

smiling, and smirking, and looking remarkably amiable.  The

applause ceases, grace is said, the clatter of plates and dishes

begins; and every one appears highly gratified, either with the

presence of the distinguished visitors, or the commencement of the

anxiously-expected dinner.



As to the dinner itself - the mere dinner - it goes off much the

same everywhere.  Tureens of soup are emptied with awful rapidity -

waiters take plates of turbot away, to get lobster-sauce, and bring

back plates of lobster-sauce without turbot; people who can carve

poultry, are great fools if they own it, and people who can't have

no wish to learn.  The knives and forks form a pleasing

accompaniment to Auber's music, and Auber's music would form a

pleasing accompaniment to the dinner, if you could hear anything

besides the cymbals.  The substantials disappear - moulds of jelly

vanish like lightning - hearty eaters wipe their foreheads, and

appear rather overcome by their recent exertions - people who have

looked very cross hitherto, become remarkably bland, and ask you to

take wine in the most friendly manner possible - old gentlemen

direct your attention to the ladies' gallery, and take great pains

to impress you with the fact that the charity is always peculiarly

favoured in this respect - every one appears disposed to become

talkative - and the hum of conversation is loud and general.



'Pray, silence, gentlemen, if you please, for NON NOBIS!' shouts

the toast-master with stentorian lungs - a toast-master's shirt-

front, waistcoat, and neckerchief, by-the-bye, always exhibit three

distinct shades of cloudy-white. - 'Pray, silence, gentlemen, for

NON NOBIS!'  The singers, whom you discover to be no other than the

very party that excited your curiosity at first, after 'pitching'

their voices immediately begin TOO-TOOing most dismally, on which

the regular old stagers burst into occasional cries of - 'Sh - Sh -

waiters! - Silence, waiters - stand still, waiters - keep back,

waiters,' and other exorcisms, delivered in a tone of indignant

remonstrance.  The grace is soon concluded, and the company resume

their seats.  The uninitiated portion of the guests applaud NON

NOBIS as vehemently as if it were a capital comic song, greatly to

the scandal and indignation of the regular diners, who immediately

attempt to quell this sacrilegious approbation, by cries of 'Hush,

hush!' whereupon the others, mistaking these sounds for hisses,

applaud more tumultuously than before, and, by way of placing their

approval beyond the possibility of doubt, shout 'ENCORE!' most

vociferously.



The moment the noise ceases, up starts the toast-master:-

'Gentlemen, charge your glasses, if you please!'  Decanters having

been handed about, and glasses filled, the toast-master proceeds,

in a regular ascending scale:- 'Gentlemen - AIR - you - all

charged?  Pray - silence - gentlemen - for - the cha-i-r!'  The

chairman rises, and, after stating that he feels it quite

unnecessary to preface the toast he is about to propose, with any

observations whatever, wanders into a maze of sentences, and

flounders about in the most extraordinary manner, presenting a

lamentable spectacle of mystified humanity, until he arrives at the

words, 'constitutional sovereign of these realms,' at which elderly

gentlemen exclaim 'Bravo!' and hammer the table tremendously with

their knife-handles.  'Under any circumstances, it would give him

the greatest pride, it would give him the greatest pleasure - he

might almost say, it would afford him satisfaction [cheers] to

propose that toast.  What must be his feelings, then, when he has

the gratification of announcing, that he has received her Majesty's

commands to apply to the Treasurer of her Majesty's Household, for

her Majesty's annual donation of 25L. in aid of the funds of this

charity!'  This announcement (which has been regularly made by

every chairman, since the first foundation of the charity, forty-

two years ago) calls forth the most vociferous applause; the toast

is drunk with a great deal of cheering and knocking; and 'God save

the Queen' is sung by the 'professional gentlemen;' the

unprofessional gentlemen joining in the chorus, and giving the

national anthem an effect which the newspapers, with great justice,

describe as 'perfectly electrical.'



The other 'loyal and patriotic' toasts having been drunk with all

due enthusiasm, a comic song having been well sung by the gentleman

with the small neckerchief, and a sentimental one by the second of

the party, we come to the most important toast of the evening -

'Prosperity to the charity.'  Here again we are compelled to adopt

newspaper phraseology, and to express our regret at being

'precluded from giving even the substance of the noble lord's

observations.'  Suffice it to say, that the speech, which is

somewhat of the longest, is rapturously received; and the toast

having been drunk, the stewards (looking more important than ever)

leave the room, and presently return, heading a procession of

indigent orphans, boys and girls, who walk round the room,

curtseying, and bowing, and treading on each other's heels, and

looking very much as if they would like a glass of wine apiece, to

the high gratification of the company generally, and especially of

the lady patronesses in the gallery.  EXEUNT children, and re-enter

stewards, each with a blue plate in his hand.  The band plays a

lively air; the majority of the company put their hands in their

pockets and look rather serious; and the noise of sovereigns,

rattling on crockery, is heard from all parts of the room.



After a short interval, occupied in singing and toasting, the

secretary puts on his spectacles, and proceeds to read the report

and list of subscriptions, the latter being listened to with great

attention.  'Mr. Smith, one guinea - Mr. Tompkins, one guinea - Mr.

Wilson, one guinea - Mr. Hickson, one guinea - Mr.  Nixon, one

guinea - Mr. Charles Nixon, one guinea - [hear, hear!] - Mr. James

Nixon, one guinea - Mr. Thomas Nixon, one pound one [tremendous

applause].  Lord Fitz Binkle, the chairman of the day, in addition

to an annual donation of fifteen pounds - thirty guineas [prolonged

knocking:  several gentlemen knock the stems off their wine-

glasses, in the vehemence of their approbation].  Lady, Fitz

Binkle, in addition to an annual donation of ten pound - twenty

pound' [protracted knocking and shouts of 'Bravo!']  The list being

at length concluded, the chairman rises, and proposes the health of

the secretary, than whom he knows no more zealous or estimable

individual.  The secretary, in returning thanks, observes that HE

knows no more excellent individual than the chairman - except the

senior officer of the charity, whose health HE begs to propose.

The senior officer, in returning thanks, observes that HE knows no

more worthy man than the secretary - except Mr. Walker, the

auditor, whose health HE begs to propose.  Mr. Walker, in returning

thanks, discovers some other estimable individual, to whom alone

the senior officer is inferior - and so they go on toasting and

lauding and thanking:  the only other toast of importance being

'The Lady Patronesses now present!' on which all the gentlemen turn

their faces towards the ladies' gallery, shouting tremendously; and

little priggish men, who have imbibed more wine than usual, kiss

their hands and exhibit distressing contortions of visage.



We have protracted our dinner to so great a length, that we have

hardly time to add one word by way of grace.  We can only entreat

our readers not to imagine, because we have attempted to extract

some amusement from a charity dinner, that we are at all disposed

to underrate, either the excellence of the benevolent institutions

with which London abounds, or the estimable motives of those who

support them.

