





CHAPTER VI - MEDITATIONS IN MONMOUTH-STREET







We have always entertained a particular attachment towards

Monmouth-street, as the only true and real emporium for second-hand

wearing apparel.  Monmouth-street is venerable from its antiquity,

and respectable from its usefulness.  Holywell-street we despise;

the red-headed and red-whiskered Jews who forcibly haul you into

their squalid houses, and thrust you into a suit of clothes,

whether you will or not, we detest.



The inhabitants of Monmouth-street are a distinct class; a

peaceable and retiring race, who immure themselves for the most

part in deep cellars, or small back parlours, and who seldom come

forth into the world, except in the dusk and coolness of the

evening, when they may be seen seated, in chairs on the pavement,

smoking their pipes, or watching the gambols of their engaging

children as they revel in the gutter, a happy troop of infantine

scavengers.  Their countenances bear a thoughtful and a dirty cast,

certain indications of their love of traffic; and their habitations

are distinguished by that disregard of outward appearance and

neglect of personal comfort, so common among people who are

constantly immersed in profound speculations, and deeply engaged in

sedentary pursuits.



We have hinted at the antiquity of our favourite spot.  'A

Monmouth-street laced coat' was a by-word a century ago; and still

we find Monmouth-street the same.  Pilot great-coats with wooden

buttons, have usurped the place of the ponderous laced coats with

full skirts; embroidered waistcoats with large flaps, have yielded

to double-breasted checks with roll-collars; and three-cornered

hats of quaint appearance, have given place to the low crowns and

broad brims of the coachman school; but it is the times that have

changed, not Monmouth-street.  Through every alteration and every

change, Monmouth-street has still remained the burial-place of the

fashions; and such, to judge from all present appearances, it will

remain until there are no more fashions to bury.



We love to walk among these extensive groves of the illustrious

dead, and to indulge in the speculations to which they give rise;

now fitting a deceased coat, then a dead pair of trousers, and anon

the mortal remains of a gaudy waistcoat, upon some being of our own

conjuring up, and endeavouring, from the shape and fashion of the

garment itself, to bring its former owner before our mind's eye.

We have gone on speculating in this way, until whole rows of coats

have started from their pegs, and buttoned up, of their own accord,

round the waists of imaginary wearers; lines of trousers have

jumped down to meet them; waistcoats have almost burst with anxiety

to put themselves on; and half an acre of shoes have suddenly found

feet to fit them, and gone stumping down the street with a noise

which has fairly awakened us from our pleasant reverie, and driven

us slowly away, with a bewildered stare, an object of astonishment

to the good people of Monmouth-street, and of no slight suspicion

to the policemen at the opposite street corner.



We were occupied in this manner the other day, endeavouring to fit

a pair of lace-up half-boots on an ideal personage, for whom, to

say the truth, they were full a couple of sizes too small, when our

eyes happened to alight on a few suits of clothes ranged outside a

shop-window, which it immediately struck us, must at different

periods have all belonged to, and been worn by, the same

individual, and had now, by one of those strange conjunctions of

circumstances which will occur sometimes, come to be exposed

together for sale in the same shop.  The idea seemed a fantastic

one, and we looked at the clothes again with a firm determination

not to be easily led away.  No, we were right; the more we looked,

the more we were convinced of the accuracy of our previous

impression.  There was the man's whole life written as legibly on

those clothes, as if we had his autobiography engrossed on

parchment before us.



The first was a patched and much-soiled skeleton suit; one of those

straight blue cloth cases in which small boys used to be confined,

before belts and tunics had come in, and old notions had gone out:

an ingenious contrivance for displaying the full symmetry of a

boy's figure, by fastening him into a very tight jacket, with an

ornamental row of buttons over each shoulder, and then buttoning

his trousers over it, so as to give his legs the appearance of

being hooked on, just under the armpits.  This was the boy's dress.

It had belonged to a town boy, we could see; there was a shortness

about the legs and arms of the suit; and a bagging at the knees,

peculiar to the rising youth of London streets.  A small day-school

he had been at, evidently.  If it had been a regular boys' school

they wouldn't have let him play on the floor so much, and rub his

knees so white.  He had an indulgent mother too, and plenty of

halfpence, as the numerous smears of some sticky substance about

the pockets, and just below the chin, which even the salesman's

skill could not succeed in disguising, sufficiently betokened.

They were decent people, but not overburdened with riches, or he

would not have so far outgrown the suit when he passed into those

corduroys with the round jacket; in which he went to a boys'

school, however, and learnt to write - and in ink of pretty

tolerable blackness, too, if the place where he used to wipe his

pen might be taken as evidence.



A black suit and the jacket changed into a diminutive coat.  His

father had died, and the mother had got the boy a message-lad's

place in some office.  A long-worn suit that one; rusty and

threadbare before it was laid aside, but clean and free from soil

to the last.  Poor woman!  We could imagine her assumed

cheerfulness over the scanty meal, and the refusal of her own small

portion, that her hungry boy might have enough.  Her constant

anxiety for his welfare, her pride in his growth mingled sometimes

with the thought, almost too acute to bear, that as he grew to be a

man his old affection might cool, old kindnesses fade from his

mind, and old promises be forgotten - the sharp pain that even then

a careless word or a cold look would give her - all crowded on our

thoughts as vividly as if the very scene were passing before us.



These things happen every hour, and we all know it; and yet we felt

as much sorrow when we saw, or fancied we saw - it makes no

difference which - the change that began to take place now, as if

we had just conceived the bare possibility of such a thing for the

first time.  The next suit, smart but slovenly; meant to be gay,

and yet not half so decent as the threadbare apparel; redolent of

the idle lounge, and the blackguard companions, told us, we

thought, that the widow's comfort had rapidly faded away.  We could

imagine that coat - imagine! we could see it; we HAD seen it a

hundred times - sauntering in company with three or four other

coats of the same cut, about some place of profligate resort at

night.



We dressed, from the same shop-window in an instant, half a dozen

boys of from fifteen to twenty; and putting cigars into their

mouths, and their hands into their pockets, watched them as they

sauntered down the street, and lingered at the corner, with the

obscene jest, and the oft-repeated oath.  We never lost sight of

them, till they had cocked their hats a little more on one side,

and swaggered into the public-house; and then we entered the

desolate home, where the mother sat late in the night, alone; we

watched her, as she paced the room in feverish anxiety, and every

now and then opened the door, looked wistfully into the dark and

empty street, and again returned, to be again and again

disappointed.  We beheld the look of patience with which she bore

the brutish threat, nay, even the drunken blow; and we heard the

agony of tears that gushed from her very heart, as she sank upon

her knees in her solitary and wretched apartment.



A long period had elapsed, and a greater change had taken place, by

the time of casting off the suit that hung above.  It was that of a

stout, broad-shouldered, sturdy-chested man; and we knew at once,

as anybody would, who glanced at that broad-skirted green coat,

with the large metal buttons, that its wearer seldom walked forth

without a dog at his heels, and some idle ruffian, the very

counterpart of himself, at his side.  The vices of the boy had

grown with the man, and we fancied his home then - if such a place

deserve the name.



We saw the bare and miserable room, destitute of furniture, crowded

with his wife and children, pale, hungry, and emaciated; the man

cursing their lamentations, staggering to the tap-room, from whence

he had just returned, followed by his wife and a sickly infant,

clamouring for bread; and heard the street-wrangle and noisy

recrimination that his striking her occasioned.  And then

imagination led us to some metropolitan workhouse, situated in the

midst of crowded streets and alleys, filled with noxious vapours,

and ringing with boisterous cries, where an old and feeble woman,

imploring pardon for her son, lay dying in a close dark room, with

no child to clasp her hand, and no pure air from heaven to fan her

brow.  A stranger closed the eyes that settled into a cold

unmeaning glare, and strange ears received the words that murmured

from the white and half-closed lips.



A coarse round frock, with a worn cotton neckerchief, and other

articles of clothing of the commonest description, completed the

history.  A prison, and the sentence - banishment or the gallows.

What would the man have given then, to be once again the contented

humble drudge of his boyish years; to have been restored to life,

but for a week, a day, an hour, a minute, only for so long a time

as would enable him to say one word of passionate regret to, and

hear one sound of heartfelt forgiveness from, the cold and ghastly

form that lay rotting in the pauper's grave!  The children wild in

the streets, the mother a destitute widow; both deeply tainted with

the deep disgrace of the husband and father's name, and impelled by

sheer necessity, down the precipice that had led him to a lingering

death, possibly of many years' duration, thousands of miles away.

We had no clue to the end of the tale; but it was easy to guess its

termination.



We took a step or two further on, and by way of restoring the

naturally cheerful tone of our thoughts, began fitting visionary

feet and legs into a cellar-board full of boots and shoes, with a

speed and accuracy that would have astonished the most expert

artist in leather, living.  There was one pair of boots in

particular - a jolly, good-tempered, hearty-looking pair of tops,

that excited our warmest regard; and we had got a fine, red-faced,

jovial fellow of a market-gardener into them, before we had made

their acquaintance half a minute.  They were just the very thing

for him.  There was his huge fat legs bulging over the tops, and

fitting them too tight to admit of his tucking in the loops he had

pulled them on by; and his knee-cords with an interval of stocking;

and his blue apron tucked up round his waist; and his red

neckerchief and blue coat, and a white hat stuck on one side of his

head; and there he stood with a broad grin on his great red face,

whistling away, as if any other idea but that of being happy and

comfortable had never entered his brain.



This was the very man after our own heart; we knew all about him;

we had seen him coming up to Covent-garden in his green chaise-

cart, with the fat, tubby little horse, half a thousand times; and

even while we cast an affectionate look upon his boots, at that

instant, the form of a coquettish servant-maid suddenly sprung into

a pair of Denmark satin shoes that stood beside them, and we at

once recognised the very girl who accepted his offer of a ride,

just on this side the Hammersmith suspension-bridge, the very last

Tuesday morning we rode into town from Richmond.



A very smart female, in a showy bonnet, stepped into a pair of grey

cloth boots, with black fringe and binding, that were studiously

pointing out their toes on the other side of the top-boots, and

seemed very anxious to engage his attention, but we didn't observe

that our friend the market-gardener appeared at all captivated with

these blandishments; for beyond giving a knowing wink when they

first began, as if to imply that he quite understood their end and

object, he took no further notice of them.  His indifference,

however, was amply recompensed by the excessive gallantry of a very

old gentleman with a silver-headed stick, who tottered into a pair

of large list shoes, that were standing in one corner of the board,

and indulged in a variety of gestures expressive of his admiration

of the lady in the cloth boots, to the immeasurable amusement of a

young fellow we put into a pair of long-quartered pumps, who we

thought would have split the coat that slid down to meet him, with

laughing.



We had been looking on at this little pantomime with great

satisfaction for some time, when, to our unspeakable astonishment,

we perceived that the whole of the characters, including a numerous

CORPS DE BALLET of boots and shoes in the background, into which we

had been hastily thrusting as many feet as we could press into the

service, were arranging themselves in order for dancing; and some

music striking up at the moment, to it they went without delay.  It

was perfectly delightful to witness the agility of the market-

gardener.  Out went the boots, first on one side, then on the

other, then cutting, then shuffling, then setting to the Denmark

satins, then advancing, then retreating, then going round, and then

repeating the whole of the evolutions again, without appearing to

suffer in the least from the violence of the exercise.



Nor were the Denmark satins a bit behindhand, for they jumped and

bounded about, in all directions; and though they were neither so

regular, nor so true to the time as the cloth boots, still, as they

seemed to do it from the heart, and to enjoy it more, we candidly

confess that we preferred their style of dancing to the other.  But

the old gentleman in the list shoes was the most amusing object in

the whole party; for, besides his grotesque attempts to appear

youthful, and amorous, which were sufficiently entertaining in

themselves, the young fellow in the pumps managed so artfully that

every time the old gentleman advanced to salute the lady in the

cloth boots, he trod with his whole weight on the old fellow's

toes, which made him roar with anguish, and rendered all the others

like to die of laughing.



We were in the full enjoyment of these festivities when we heard a

shrill, and by no means musical voice, exclaim, 'Hope you'll know

me agin, imperence!' and on looking intently forward to see from

whence the sound came, we found that it proceeded, not from the

young lady in the cloth boots, as we had at first been inclined to

suppose, but from a bulky lady of elderly appearance who was seated

in a chair at the head of the cellar-steps, apparently for the

purpose of superintending the sale of the articles arranged there.



A barrel-organ, which had been in full force close behind us,

ceased playing; the people we had been fitting into the shoes and

boots took to flight at the interruption; and as we were conscious

that in the depth of our meditations we might have been rudely

staring at the old lady for half an hour without knowing it, we

took to flight too, and were soon immersed in the deepest obscurity

of the adjacent 'Dials.'

