






CHAPTER X - THE RIVER







'Are you fond of the water?' is a question very frequently asked,

in hot summer weather, by amphibious-looking young men.  'Very,' is

the general reply.  'An't you?' - 'Hardly ever off it,' is the

response, accompanied by sundry adjectives, expressive of the

speaker's heartfelt admiration of that element.  Now, with all

respect for the opinion of society in general, and cutter clubs in

particular, we humbly suggest that some of the most painful

reminiscences in the mind of every individual who has occasionally

disported himself on the Thames, must be connected with his aquatic

recreations.  Who ever heard of a successful water-party? - or to

put the question in a still more intelligible form, who ever saw

one?  We have been on water excursions out of number, but we

solemnly declare that we cannot call to mind one single occasion of

the kind, which was not marked by more miseries than any one would

suppose could be reasonably crowded into the space of some eight or

nine hours.  Something has always gone wrong.  Either the cork of

the salad-dressing has come out, or the most anxiously expected

member of the party has not come out, or the most disagreeable man

in company would come out, or a child or two have fallen into the

water, or the gentleman who undertook to steer has endangered

everybody's life all the way, or the gentlemen who volunteered to

row have been 'out of practice,' and performed very alarming

evolutions, putting their oars down into the water and not being

able to get them up again, or taking terrific pulls without putting

them in at all; in either case, pitching over on the backs of their

heads with startling violence, and exhibiting the soles of their

pumps to the 'sitters' in the boat, in a very humiliating manner.



We grant that the banks of the Thames are very beautiful at

Richmond and Twickenham, and other distant havens, often sought

though seldom reached; but from the 'Red-us' back to Blackfriars-

bridge, the scene is wonderfully changed.  The Penitentiary is a

noble building, no doubt, and the sportive youths who 'go in' at

that particular part of the river, on a summer's evening, may be

all very well in perspective; but when you are obliged to keep in

shore coming home, and the young ladies will colour up, and look

perseveringly the other way, while the married dittos cough

slightly, and stare very hard at the water, you feel awkward -

especially if you happen to have been attempting the most distant

approach to sentimentality, for an hour or two previously.



Although experience and suffering have produced in our minds the

result we have just stated, we are by no means blind to a proper

sense of the fun which a looker-on may extract from the amateurs of

boating.  What can be more amusing than Searle's yard on a fine

Sunday morning?  It's a Richmond tide, and some dozen boats are

preparing for the reception of the parties who have engaged them.

Two or three fellows in great rough trousers and Guernsey shirts,

are getting them ready by easy stages; now coming down the yard

with a pair of sculls and a cushion - then having a chat with the

'Jack,' who, like all his tribe, seems to be wholly incapable of

doing anything but lounging about - then going back again, and

returning with a rudder-line and a stretcher - then solacing

themselves with another chat - and then wondering, with their hands

in their capacious pockets, 'where them gentlemen's got to as

ordered the six.'  One of these, the head man, with the legs of his

trousers carefully tucked up at the bottom, to admit the water, we

presume - for it is an element in which he is infinitely more at

home than on land - is quite a character, and shares with the

defunct oyster-swallower the celebrated name of 'Dando.'  Watch

him, as taking a few minutes' respite from his toils, he

negligently seats himself on the edge of a boat, and fans his broad

bushy chest with a cap scarcely half so furry.  Look at his

magnificent, though reddish whiskers, and mark the somewhat native

humour with which he 'chaffs' the boys and 'prentices, or cunningly

gammons the gen'lm'n into the gift of a glass of gin, of which we

verily believe he swallows in one day as much as any six ordinary

men, without ever being one atom the worse for it.



But the party arrives, and Dando, relieved from his state of

uncertainty, starts up into activity.  They approach in full

aquatic costume, with round blue jackets, striped shirts, and caps

of all sizes and patterns, from the velvet skull-cap of French

manufacture, to the easy head-dress familiar to the students of the

old spelling-books, as having, on the authority of the portrait,

formed part of the costume of the Reverend Mr. Dilworth.



This is the most amusing time to observe a regular Sunday water-

party.  There has evidently been up to this period no

inconsiderable degree of boasting on everybody's part relative to

his knowledge of navigation; the sight of the water rapidly cools

their courage, and the air of self-denial with which each of them

insists on somebody else's taking an oar, is perfectly delightful.

At length, after a great deal of changing and fidgeting, consequent

upon the election of a stroke-oar:  the inability of one gentleman

to pull on this side, of another to pull on that, and of a third to

pull at all, the boat's crew are seated.  'Shove her off!' cries

the cockswain, who looks as easy and comfortable as if he were

steering in the Bay of Biscay.  The order is obeyed; the boat is

immediately turned completely round, and proceeds towards

Westminster-bridge, amidst such a splashing and struggling as never

was seen before, except when the Royal George went down.  'Back

wa'ater, sir,' shouts Dando, 'Back wa'ater, you sir, aft;' upon

which everybody thinking he must be the individual referred to,

they all back water, and back comes the boat, stern first, to the

spot whence it started.  'Back water, you sir, aft; pull round, you

sir, for'ad, can't you?' shouts Dando, in a frenzy of excitement.

'Pull round, Tom, can't you?' re-echoes one of the party.  'Tom

an't for'ad,' replies another.  'Yes, he is,' cries a third; and

the unfortunate young man, at the imminent risk of breaking a

blood-vessel, pulls and pulls, until the head of the boat fairly

lies in the direction of Vauxhall-bridge.  'That's right - now pull

all on you!' shouts Dando again, adding, in an under-tone, to

somebody by him, 'Blowed if hever I see sich a set of muffs!' and

away jogs the boat in a zigzag direction, every one of the six oars

dipping into the water at a different time; and the yard is once

more clear, until the arrival of the next party.



A well-contested rowing-match on the Thames, is a very lively and

interesting scene.  The water is studded with boats of all sorts,

kinds, and descriptions; places in the coal-barges at the different

wharfs are let to crowds of spectators, beer and tobacco flow

freely about; men, women, and children wait for the start in

breathless expectation; cutters of six and eight oars glide gently

up and down, waiting to accompany their PROTEGES during the race;

bands of music add to the animation, if not to the harmony of the

scene; groups of watermen are assembled at the different stairs,

discussing the merits of the respective candidates; and the prize

wherry, which is rowed slowly about by a pair of sculls, is an

object of general interest.



Two o'clock strikes, and everybody looks anxiously in the direction

of the bridge through which the candidates for the prize will come

- half-past two, and the general attention which has been preserved

so long begins to flag, when suddenly a gun is heard, and a noise

of distant hurra'ing along each bank of the river - every head is

bent forward - the noise draws nearer and nearer - the boats which

have been waiting at the bridge start briskly up the river, and a

well-manned galley shoots through the arch, the sitters cheering on

the boats behind them, which are not yet visible.



'Here they are,' is the general cry - and through darts the first

boat, the men in her, stripped to the skin, and exerting every

muscle to preserve the advantage they have gained - four other

boats follow close astern; there are not two boats' length between

them - the shouting is tremendous, and the interest intense.  'Go

on, Pink' - 'Give it her, Red' - 'Sulliwin for ever' - 'Bravo!

George' - 'Now, Tom, now - now - now - why don't your partner

stretch out?' - 'Two pots to a pint on Yellow,' &c., &c.  Every

little public-house fires its gun, and hoists its flag; and the men

who win the heat, come in, amidst a splashing and shouting, and

banging and confusion, which no one can imagine who has not

witnessed it, and of which any description would convey a very

faint idea.



One of the most amusing places we know is the steam-wharf of the

London Bridge, or St. Katharine's Dock Company, on a Saturday

morning in summer, when the Gravesend and Margate steamers are

usually crowded to excess; and as we have just taken a glance at

the river above bridge, we hope our readers will not object to

accompany us on board a Gravesend packet.



Coaches are every moment setting down at the entrance to the wharf,

and the stare of bewildered astonishment with which the 'fares'

resign themselves and their luggage into the hands of the porters,

who seize all the packages at once as a matter of course, and run

away with them, heaven knows where, is laughable in the extreme.  A

Margate boat lies alongside the wharf, the Gravesend boat (which

starts first) lies alongside that again; and as a temporary

communication is formed between the two, by means of a plank and

hand-rail, the natural confusion of the scene is by no means

diminished.



'Gravesend?' inquires a stout father of a stout family, who follow

him, under the guidance of their mother, and a servant, at the no

small risk of two or three of them being left behind in the

confusion.  'Gravesend?'



'Pass on, if you please, sir,' replies the attendant - 'other boat,

sir.'



Hereupon the stout father, being rather mystified, and the stout

mother rather distracted by maternal anxiety, the whole party

deposit themselves in the Margate boat, and after having

congratulated himself on having secured very comfortable seats, the

stout father sallies to the chimney to look for his luggage, which

he has a faint recollection of having given some man, something, to

take somewhere.  No luggage, however, bearing the most remote

resemblance to his own, in shape or form, is to be discovered; on

which the stout father calls very loudly for an officer, to whom he

states the case, in the presence of another father of another

family - a little thin man - who entirely concurs with him (the

stout father) in thinking that it's high time something was done

with these steam companies, and that as the Corporation Bill failed

to do it, something else must; for really people's property is not

to be sacrificed in this way; and that if the luggage isn't

restored without delay, he will take care it shall be put in the

papers, for the public is not to be the victim of these great

monopolies.  To this, the officer, in his turn, replies, that that

company, ever since it has been St. Kat'rine's Dock Company, has

protected life and property; that if it had been the London Bridge

Wharf Company, indeed, he shouldn't have wondered, seeing that the

morality of that company (they being the opposition) can't be

answered for, by no one; but as it is, he's convinced there must be

some mistake, and he wouldn't mind making a solemn oath afore a

magistrate that the gentleman'll find his luggage afore he gets to

Margate.



Here the stout father, thinking he is making a capital point,

replies, that as it happens, he is not going to Margate at all, and

that 'Passenger to Gravesend' was on the luggage, in letters of

full two inches long; on which the officer rapidly explains the

mistake, and the stout mother, and the stout children, and the

servant, are hurried with all possible despatch on board the

Gravesend boat, which they reached just in time to discover that

their luggage is there, and that their comfortable seats are not.

Then the bell, which is the signal for the Gravesend boat starting,

begins to ring most furiously:  and people keep time to the bell,

by running in and out of our boat at a double-quick pace.  The bell

stops; the boat starts:  people who have been taking leave of their

friends on board, are carried away against their will; and people

who have been taking leave of their friends on shore, find that

they have performed a very needless ceremony, in consequence of

their not being carried away at all.  The regular passengers, who

have season tickets, go below to breakfast; people who have

purchased morning papers, compose themselves to read them; and

people who have not been down the river before, think that both the

shipping and the water, look a great deal better at a distance.



When we get down about as far as Blackwall, and begin to move at a

quicker rate, the spirits of the passengers appear to rise in

proportion.  Old women who have brought large wicker hand-baskets

with them, set seriously to work at the demolition of heavy

sandwiches, and pass round a wine-glass, which is frequently

replenished from a flat bottle like a stomach-warmer, with

considerable glee:  handing it first to the gentleman in the

foraging-cap, who plays the harp - partly as an expression of

satisfaction with his previous exertions, and partly to induce him

to play 'Dumbledumbdeary,' for 'Alick' to dance to; which being

done, Alick, who is a damp earthy child in red worsted socks, takes

certain small jumps upon the deck, to the unspeakable satisfaction

of his family circle.  Girls who have brought the first volume of

some new novel in their reticule, become extremely plaintive, and

expatiate to Mr. Brown, or young Mr. O'Brien, who has been looking

over them, on the blueness of the sky, and brightness of the water;

on which Mr. Brown or Mr. O'Brien, as the case may be, remarks in a

low voice that he has been quite insensible of late to the beauties

of nature, that his whole thoughts and wishes have centred in one

object alone - whereupon the young lady looks up, and failing in

her attempt to appear unconscious, looks down again; and turns over

the next leaf with great difficulty, in order to afford opportunity

for a lengthened pressure of the hand.



Telescopes, sandwiches, and glasses of brandy-and-water cold

without, begin to be in great requisition; and bashful men who have

been looking down the hatchway at the engine, find, to their great

relief, a subject on which they can converse with one another - and

a copious one too - Steam.



'Wonderful thing steam, sir.'  'Ah! (a deep-drawn sigh) it is

indeed, sir.'  'Great power, sir.'  'Immense - immense!'  'Great

deal done by steam, sir.'  'Ah! (another sigh at the immensity of

the subject, and a knowing shake of the head) you may say that,

sir.'  'Still in its infancy, they say, sir.'  Novel remarks of

this kind, are generally the commencement of a conversation which

is prolonged until the conclusion of the trip, and, perhaps, lays

the foundation of a speaking acquaintance between half-a-dozen

gentlemen, who, having their families at Gravesend, take season

tickets for the boat, and dine on board regularly every afternoon.

