






CHAPTER XXI - BROKERS' AND MARINE-STORE SHOPS







When we affirm that brokers' shops are strange places, and that if

an authentic history of their contents could be procured, it would

furnish many a page of amusement, and many a melancholy tale, it is

necessary to explain the class of shops to which we allude.

Perhaps when we make use of the term 'Brokers' Shop,' the minds of

our readers will at once picture large, handsome warehouses,

exhibiting a long perspective of French-polished dining-tables,

rosewood chiffoniers, and mahogany wash-hand-stands, with an

occasional vista of a four-post bedstead and hangings, and an

appropriate foreground of dining-room chairs.  Perhaps they will

imagine that we mean an humble class of second-hand furniture

repositories.  Their imagination will then naturally lead them to

that street at the back of Long-acre, which is composed almost

entirely of brokers' shops; where you walk through groves of

deceitful, showy-looking furniture, and where the prospect is

occasionally enlivened by a bright red, blue, and yellow hearth-

rug, embellished with the pleasing device of a mail-coach at full

speed, or a strange animal, supposed to have been originally

intended for a dog, with a mass of worsted-work in his mouth, which

conjecture has likened to a basket of flowers.



This, by-the-bye, is a tempting article to young wives in the

humbler ranks of life, who have a first-floor front to furnish -

they are lost in admiration, and hardly know which to admire most.

The dog is very beautiful, but they have a dog already on the best

tea-tray, and two more on the mantel-piece.  Then, there is

something so genteel about that mail-coach; and the passengers

outside (who are all hat) give it such an air of reality!



The goods here are adapted to the taste, or rather to the means, of

cheap purchasers.  There are some of the most beautiful LOOKING

Pembroke tables that were ever beheld:  the wood as green as the

trees in the Park, and the leaves almost as certain to fall off in

the course of a year.  There is also a most extensive assortment of

tent and turn-up bedsteads, made of stained wood, and innumerable

specimens of that base imposition on society - a sofa bedstead.



A turn-up bedstead is a blunt, honest piece of furniture; it may be

slightly disguised with a sham drawer; and sometimes a mad attempt

is even made to pass it off for a book-case; ornament it as you

will, however, the turn-up bedstead seems to defy disguise, and to

insist on having it distinctly understood that he is a turn-up

bedstead, and nothing else - that he is indispensably necessary,

and that being so useful, he disdains to be ornamental.



How different is the demeanour of a sofa bedstead!  Ashamed of its

real use, it strives to appear an article of luxury and gentility -

an attempt in which it miserably fails.  It has neither the

respectability of a sofa, nor the virtues of a bed; every man who

keeps a sofa bedstead in his house, becomes a party to a wilful and

designing fraud - we question whether you could insult him more,

than by insinuating that you entertain the least suspicion of its

real use.



To return from this digression, we beg to say, that neither of

these classes of brokers' shops, forms the subject of this sketch.

The shops to which we advert, are immeasurably inferior to those on

whose outward appearance we have slightly touched.  Our readers

must often have observed in some by-street, in a poor

neighbourhood, a small dirty shop, exposing for sale the most

extraordinary and confused jumble of old, worn-out, wretched

articles, that can well be imagined.  Our wonder at their ever

having been bought, is only to be equalled by our astonishment at

the idea of their ever being sold again.  On a board, at the side

of the door, are placed about twenty books - all odd volumes; and

as many wine-glasses - all different patterns; several locks, an

old earthenware pan, full of rusty keys; two or three gaudy

chimney-ornaments - cracked, of course; the remains of a lustre,

without any drops; a round frame like a capital O, which has once

held a mirror; a flute, complete with the exception of the middle

joint; a pair of curling-irons; and a tinder-box.  In front of the

shop-window, are ranged some half-dozen high-backed chairs, with

spinal complaints and wasted legs; a corner cupboard; two or three

very dark mahogany tables with flaps like mathematical problems;

some pickle-jars, some surgeons' ditto, with gilt labels and

without stoppers; an unframed portrait of some lady who flourished

about the beginning of the thirteenth century, by an artist who

never flourished at all; an incalculable host of miscellanies of

every description, including bottles and cabinets, rags and bones,

fenders and street-door knockers, fire-irons, wearing apparel and

bedding, a hall-lamp, and a room-door.  Imagine, in addition to

this incongruous mass, a black doll in a white frock, with two

faces - one looking up the street, and the other looking down,

swinging over the door; a board with the squeezed-up inscription

'Dealer in marine stores,' in lanky white letters, whose height is

strangely out of proportion to their width; and you have before you

precisely the kind of shop to which we wish to direct your

attention.



Although the same heterogeneous mixture of things will be found at

all these places, it is curious to observe how truly and accurately

some of the minor articles which are exposed for sale - articles of

wearing apparel, for instance - mark the character of the

neighbourhood.  Take Drury-Lane and Covent-garden for example.



This is essentially a theatrical neighbourhood.  There is not a

potboy in the vicinity who is not, to a greater or less extent, a

dramatic character.  The errand-boys and chandler's-shop-keepers'

sons, are all stage-struck:  they 'gets up' plays in back kitchens

hired for the purpose, and will stand before a shop-window for

hours, contemplating a great staring portrait of Mr. Somebody or

other, of the Royal Coburg Theatre, 'as he appeared in the

character of Tongo the Denounced.'  The consequence is, that there

is not a marine-store shop in the neighbourhood, which does not

exhibit for sale some faded articles of dramatic finery, such as

three or four pairs of soiled buff boots with turn-over red tops,

heretofore worn by a 'fourth robber,' or 'fifth mob;' a pair of

rusty broadswords, a few gauntlets, and certain resplendent

ornaments, which, if they were yellow instead of white, might be

taken for insurance plates of the Sun Fire-office.  There are

several of these shops in the narrow streets and dirty courts, of

which there are so many near the national theatres, and they all

have tempting goods of this description, with the addition,

perhaps, of a lady's pink dress covered with spangles; white

wreaths, stage shoes, and a tiara like a tin lamp reflector.  They

have been purchased of some wretched supernumeraries, or sixth-rate

actors, and are now offered for the benefit of the rising

generation, who, on condition of making certain weekly payments,

amounting in the whole to about ten times their value, may avail

themselves of such desirable bargains.



Let us take a very different quarter, and apply it to the same

test.  Look at a marine-store dealer's, in that reservoir of dirt,

drunkenness, and drabs:  thieves, oysters, baked potatoes, and

pickled salmon - Ratcliff-highway.  Here, the wearing apparel is

all nautical.  Rough blue jackets, with mother-of-pearl buttons,

oil-skin hats, coarse checked shirts, and large canvas trousers

that look as if they were made for a pair of bodies instead of a

pair of legs, are the staple commodities.  Then, there are large

bunches of cotton pocket-handkerchiefs, in colour and pattern

unlike any one ever saw before, with the exception of those on the

backs of the three young ladies without bonnets who passed just

now.  The furniture is much the same as elsewhere, with the

addition of one or two models of ships, and some old prints of

naval engagements in still older frames.  In the window, are a few

compasses, a small tray containing silver watches in clumsy thick

cases; and tobacco-boxes, the lid of each ornamented with a ship,

or an anchor, or some such trophy.  A sailor generally pawns or

sells all he has before he has been long ashore, and if he does

not, some favoured companion kindly saves him the trouble.  In

either case, it is an even chance that he afterwards unconsciously

repurchases the same things at a higher price than he gave for them

at first.



Again:  pay a visit with a similar object, to a part of London, as

unlike both of these as they are to each other.  Cross over to the

Surrey side, and look at such shops of this description as are to

be found near the King's Bench prison, and in 'the Rules.'  How

different, and how strikingly illustrative of the decay of some of

the unfortunate residents in this part of the metropolis!

Imprisonment and neglect have done their work.  There is

contamination in the profligate denizens of a debtor's prison; old

friends have fallen off; the recollection of former prosperity has

passed away; and with it all thoughts for the past, all care for

the future.  First, watches and rings, then cloaks, coats, and all

the more expensive articles of dress, have found their way to the

pawnbroker's.  That miserable resource has failed at last, and the

sale of some trifling article at one of these shops, has been the

only mode left of raising a shilling or two, to meet the urgent

demands of the moment.  Dressing-cases and writing-desks, too old

to pawn but too good to keep; guns, fishing-rods, musical

instruments, all in the same condition; have first been sold, and

the sacrifice has been but slightly felt.  But hunger must be

allayed, and what has already become a habit, is easily resorted

to, when an emergency arises.  Light articles of clothing, first of

the ruined man, then of his wife, at last of their children, even

of the youngest, have been parted with, piecemeal.  There they are,

thrown carelessly together until a purchaser presents himself, old,

and patched and repaired, it is true; but the make and materials

tell of better days; and the older they are, the greater the misery

and destitution of those whom they once adorned.

