






CHAPTER XXIV - CRIMINAL COURTS







We shall never forget the mingled feelings of awe and respect with

which we used to gaze on the exterior of Newgate in our schoolboy

days.  How dreadful its rough heavy walls, and low massive doors,

appeared to us - the latter looking as if they were made for the

express purpose of letting people in, and never letting them out

again.  Then the fetters over the debtors' door, which we used to

think were a BONA FIDE set of irons, just hung up there, for

convenience' sake, ready to be taken down at a moment's notice, and

riveted on the limbs of some refractory felon!  We were never tired

of wondering how the hackney-coachmen on the opposite stand could

cut jokes in the presence of such horrors, and drink pots of half-

and-half so near the last drop.



Often have we strayed here, in sessions time, to catch a glimpse of

the whipping-place, and that dark building on one side of the yard,

in which is kept the gibbet with all its dreadful apparatus, and on

the door of which we half expected to see a brass plate, with the

inscription 'Mr. Ketch;' for we never imagined that the

distinguished functionary could by possibility live anywhere else!

The days of these childish dreams have passed away, and with them

many other boyish ideas of a gayer nature.  But we still retain so

much of our original feeling, that to this hour we never pass the

building without something like a shudder.



What London pedestrian is there who has not, at some time or other,

cast a hurried glance through the wicket at which prisoners are

admitted into this gloomy mansion, and surveyed the few objects he

could discern, with an indescribable feeling of curiosity?  The

thick door, plated with iron and mounted with spikes, just low

enough to enable you to see, leaning over them, an ill-looking

fellow, in a broad-brimmed hat, Belcher handkerchief and top-boots:

with a brown coat, something between a great-coat and a 'sporting'

jacket, on his back, and an immense key in his left hand.  Perhaps

you are lucky enough to pass, just as the gate is being opened;

then, you see on the other side of the lodge, another gate, the

image of its predecessor, and two or three more turnkeys, who look

like multiplications of the first one, seated round a fire which

just lights up the whitewashed apartment sufficiently to enable you

to catch a hasty glimpse of these different objects.  We have a

great respect for Mrs. Fry, but she certainly ought to have written

more romances than Mrs. Radcliffe.



We were walking leisurely down the Old Bailey, some time ago, when,

as we passed this identical gate, it was opened by the officiating

turnkey.  We turned quickly round, as a matter of course, and saw

two persons descending the steps.  We could not help stopping and

observing them.



They were an elderly woman, of decent appearance, though evidently

poor, and a boy of about fourteen or fifteen.  The woman was crying

bitterly; she carried a small bundle in her hand, and the boy

followed at a short distance behind her.  Their little history was

obvious.  The boy was her son, to whose early comfort she had

perhaps sacrificed her own - for whose sake she had borne misery

without repining, and poverty without a murmur - looking steadily

forward to the time, when he who had so long witnessed her

struggles for himself, might be enabled to make some exertions for

their joint support.  He had formed dissolute connexions; idleness

had led to crime; and he had been committed to take his trial for

some petty theft.  He had been long in prison, and, after receiving

some trifling additional punishment, had been ordered to be

discharged that morning.  It was his first offence, and his poor

old mother, still hoping to reclaim him, had been waiting at the

gate to implore him to return home.



We cannot forget the boy; he descended the steps with a dogged

look, shaking his head with an air of bravado and obstinate

determination.  They walked a few paces, and paused.  The woman put

her hand upon his shoulder in an agony of entreaty, and the boy

sullenly raised his head as if in refusal.  It was a brilliant

morning, and every object looked fresh and happy in the broad, gay

sunlight; he gazed round him for a few moments, bewildered with the

brightness of the scene, for it was long since he had beheld

anything save the gloomy walls of a prison.  Perhaps the

wretchedness of his mother made some impression on the boy's heart;

perhaps some undefined recollection of the time when he was a happy

child, and she his only friend, and best companion, crowded on him

- he burst into tears; and covering his face with one hand, and

hurriedly placing the other in his mother's, walked away with her.



Curiosity has occasionally led us into both Courts at the Old

Bailey.  Nothing is so likely to strike the person who enters them

for the first time, as the calm indifference with which the

proceedings are conducted; every trial seems a mere matter of

business.  There is a great deal of form, but no compassion;

considerable interest, but no sympathy.  Take the Old Court for

example.  There sit the judges, with whose great dignity everybody

is acquainted, and of whom therefore we need say no more.  Then,

there is the Lord Mayor in the centre, looking as cool as a Lord

Mayor CAN look, with an immense BOUQUET before him, and habited in

all the splendour of his office.  Then, there are the Sheriffs, who

are almost as dignified as the Lord Mayor himself; and the

Barristers, who are quite dignified enough in their own opinion;

and the spectators, who having paid for their admission, look upon

the whole scene as if it were got up especially for their

amusement.  Look upon the whole group in the body of the Court -

some wholly engrossed in the morning papers, others carelessly

conversing in low whispers, and others, again, quietly dozing away

an hour - and you can scarcely believe that the result of the trial

is a matter of life or death to one wretched being present.  But

turn your eyes to the dock; watch the prisoner attentively for a

few moments; and the fact is before you, in all its painful

reality.  Mark how restlessly he has been engaged for the last ten

minutes, in forming all sorts of fantastic figures with the herbs

which are strewed upon the ledge before him; observe the ashy

paleness of his face when a particular witness appears, and how he

changes his position and wipes his clammy forehead, and feverish

hands, when the case for the prosecution is closed, as if it were a

relief to him to feel that the jury knew the worst.



The defence is concluded; the judge proceeds to sum up the

evidence; and the prisoner watches the countenances of the jury, as

a dying man, clinging to life to the very last, vainly looks in the

face of his physician for a slight ray of hope.  They turn round to

consult; you can almost hear the man's heart beat, as he bites the

stalk of rosemary, with a desperate effort to appear composed.

They resume their places - a dead silence prevails as the foreman

delivers in the verdict - 'Guilty!'  A shriek bursts from a female

in the gallery; the prisoner casts one look at the quarter from

whence the noise proceeded; and is immediately hurried from the

dock by the gaoler.  The clerk directs one of the officers of the

Court to 'take the woman out,' and fresh business is proceeded

with, as if nothing had occurred.



No imaginary contrast to a case like this, could be as complete as

that which is constantly presented in the New Court, the gravity of

which is frequently disturbed in no small degree, by the cunning

and pertinacity of juvenile offenders.  A boy of thirteen is tried,

say for picking the pocket of some subject of her Majesty, and the

offence is about as clearly proved as an offence can be.  He is

called upon for his defence, and contents himself with a little

declamation about the jurymen and his country - asserts that all

the witnesses have committed perjury, and hints that the police

force generally have entered into a conspiracy 'again' him.

However probable this statement may be, it fails to convince the

Court, and some such scene as the following then takes place:



COURT:  Have you any witnesses to speak to your character, boy?



BOY:  Yes, my Lord; fifteen gen'lm'n is a vaten outside, and vos a

vaten all day yesterday, vich they told me the night afore my trial

vos a comin' on.



COURT.  Inquire for these witnesses.



Here, a stout beadle runs out, and vociferates for the witnesses at

the very top of his voice; for you hear his cry grow fainter and

fainter as he descends the steps into the court-yard below.  After

an absence of five minutes, he returns, very warm and hoarse, and

informs the Court of what it knew perfectly well before - namely,

that there are no such witnesses in attendance.  Hereupon, the boy

sets up a most awful howling; screws the lower part of the palms of

his hands into the corners of his eyes; and endeavours to look the

picture of injured innocence.  The jury at once find him 'guilty,'

and his endeavours to squeeze out a tear or two are redoubled.  The

governor of the gaol then states, in reply to an inquiry from the

bench, that the prisoner has been under his care twice before.

This the urchin resolutely denies in some such terms as - 'S'elp

me, gen'lm'n, I never vos in trouble afore - indeed, my Lord, I

never vos.  It's all a howen to my having a twin brother, vich has

wrongfully got into trouble, and vich is so exactly like me, that

no vun ever knows the difference atween us.'



This representation, like the defence, fails in producing the

desired effect, and the boy is sentenced, perhaps, to seven years'

transportation.  Finding it impossible to excite compassion, he

gives vent to his feelings in an imprecation bearing reference to

the eyes of 'old big vig!' and as he declines to take the trouble

of walking from the dock, is forthwith carried out, congratulating

himself on having succeeded in giving everybody as much trouble as

possible.
