





CHAPTER XXII - GIN-SHOPS







It is a remarkable circumstance, that different trades appear to

partake of the disease to which elephants and dogs are especially

liable, and to run stark, staring, raving mad, periodically.  The

great distinction between the animals and the trades, is, that the

former run mad with a certain degree of propriety - they are very

regular in their irregularities.  We know the period at which the

emergency will arise, and provide against it accordingly.  If an

elephant run mad, we are all ready for him - kill or cure - pills

or bullets, calomel in conserve of roses, or lead in a musket-

barrel.  If a dog happen to look unpleasantly warm in the summer

months, and to trot about the shady side of the streets with a

quarter of a yard of tongue hanging out of his mouth, a thick

leather muzzle, which has been previously prepared in compliance

with the thoughtful injunctions of the Legislature, is instantly

clapped over his head, by way of making him cooler, and he either

looks remarkably unhappy for the next six weeks, or becomes legally

insane, and goes mad, as it were, by Act of Parliament.  But these

trades are as eccentric as comets; nay, worse, for no one can

calculate on the recurrence of the strange appearances which

betoken the disease.  Moreover, the contagion is general, and the

quickness with which it diffuses itself, almost incredible.



We will cite two or three cases in illustration of our meaning.

Six or eight years ago, the epidemic began to display itself among

the linen-drapers and haberdashers.  The primary symptoms were an

inordinate love of plate-glass, and a passion for gas-lights and

gilding.  The disease gradually progressed, and at last attained a

fearful height.  Quiet, dusty old shops in different parts of town,

were pulled down; spacious premises with stuccoed fronts and gold

letters, were erected instead; floors were covered with Turkey

carpets; roofs supported by massive pillars; doors knocked into

windows; a dozen squares of glass into one; one shopman into a

dozen; and there is no knowing what would have been done, if it had

not been fortunately discovered, just in time, that the

Commissioners of Bankruptcy were as competent to decide such cases

as the Commissioners of Lunacy, and that a little confinement and

gentle examination did wonders.  The disease abated.  It died away.

A year or two of comparative tranquillity ensued.  Suddenly it

burst out again amongst the chemists; the symptoms were the same,

with the addition of a strong desire to stick the royal arms over

the shop-door, and a great rage for mahogany, varnish, and

expensive floor-cloth.  Then, the hosiers were infected, and began

to pull down their shop-fronts with frantic recklessness.  The

mania again died away, and the public began to congratulate

themselves on its entire disappearance, when it burst forth with

tenfold violence among the publicans, and keepers of 'wine vaults.'

From that moment it has spread among them with unprecedented

rapidity, exhibiting a concatenation of all the previous symptoms;

onward it has rushed to every part of town, knocking down all the

old public-houses, and depositing splendid mansions, stone

balustrades, rosewood fittings, immense lamps, and illuminated

clocks, at the corner of every street.



The extensive scale on which these places are established, and the

ostentatious manner in which the business of even the smallest

among them is divided into branches, is amusing.  A handsome plate

of ground glass in one door directs you 'To the Counting-house;'

another to the 'Bottle Department; a third to the 'Wholesale

Department;' a fourth to 'The Wine Promenade;' and so forth, until

we are in daily expectation of meeting with a 'Brandy Bell,' or a

'Whiskey Entrance.'  Then, ingenuity is exhausted in devising

attractive titles for the different descriptions of gin; and the

dram-drinking portion of the community as they gaze upon the

gigantic black and white announcements, which are only to be

equalled in size by the figures beneath them, are left in a state

of pleasing hesitation between 'The Cream of the Valley,' 'The Out

and Out,' 'The No Mistake,' 'The Good for Mixing,' 'The real Knock-

me-down,' 'The celebrated Butter Gin,' 'The regular Flare-up,' and

a dozen other, equally inviting and wholesome LIQUEURS.  Although

places of this description are to be met with in every second

street, they are invariably numerous and splendid in precise

proportion to the dirt and poverty of the surrounding

neighbourhood.  The gin-shops in and near Drury-Lane, Holborn, St.

Giles's, Covent-garden, and Clare-market, are the handsomest in

London.  There is more of filth and squalid misery near those great

thorough-fares than in any part of this mighty city.



We will endeavour to sketch the bar of a large gin-shop, and its

ordinary customers, for the edification of such of our readers as

may not have had opportunities of observing such scenes; and on the

chance of finding one well suited to our purpose, we will make for

Drury-Lane, through the narrow streets and dirty courts which

divide it from Oxford-street, and that classical spot adjoining the

brewery at the bottom of Tottenham-court-road, best known to the

initiated as the 'Rookery.'



The filthy and miserable appearance of this part of London can

hardly be imagined by those (and there are many such) who have not

witnessed it.  Wretched houses with broken windows patched with

rags and paper:  every room let out to a different family, and in

many instances to two or even three - fruit and 'sweet-stuff'

manufacturers in the cellars, barbers and red-herring vendors in

the front parlours, cobblers in the back; a bird-fancier in the

first floor, three families on the second, starvation in the

attics, Irishmen in the passage, a 'musician' in the front kitchen,

and a charwoman and five hungry children in the back one - filth

everywhere - a gutter before the houses and a drain behind -

clothes drying and slops emptying, from the windows; girls of

fourteen or fifteen, with matted hair, walking about barefoot, and

in white great-coats, almost their only covering; boys of all ages,

in coats of all sizes and no coats at all; men and women, in every

variety of scanty and dirty apparel, lounging, scolding, drinking,

smoking, squabbling, fighting, and swearing.



You turn the corner.  What a change!  All is light and brilliancy.

The hum of many voices issues from that splendid gin-shop which

forms the commencement of the two streets opposite; and the gay

building with the fantastically ornamented parapet, the illuminated

clock, the plate-glass windows surrounded by stucco rosettes, and

its profusion of gas-lights in richly-gilt burners, is perfectly

dazzling when contrasted with the darkness and dirt we have just

left.  The interior is even gayer than the exterior.  A bar of

French-polished mahogany, elegantly carved, extends the whole width

of the place; and there are two side-aisles of great casks, painted

green and gold, enclosed within a light brass rail, and bearing

such inscriptions, as 'Old Tom, 549;' 'Young Tom, 360;' 'Samson,

1421' - the figures agreeing, we presume, with 'gallons,'

understood.  Beyond the bar is a lofty and spacious saloon, full of

the same enticing vessels, with a gallery running round it, equally

well furnished.  On the counter, in addition to the usual spirit

apparatus, are two or three little baskets of cakes and biscuits,

which are carefully secured at top with wicker-work, to prevent

their contents being unlawfully abstracted.  Behind it, are two

showily-dressed damsels with large necklaces, dispensing the

spirits and 'compounds.'  They are assisted by the ostensible

proprietor of the concern, a stout, coarse fellow in a fur cap, put

on very much on one side to give him a knowing air, and to display

his sandy whiskers to the best advantage.



The two old washerwomen, who are seated on the little bench to the

left of the bar, are rather overcome by the head-dresses and

haughty demeanour of the young ladies who officiate.  They receive

their half-quartern of gin and peppermint, with considerable

deference, prefacing a request for 'one of them soft biscuits,'

with a 'Jist be good enough, ma'am.'  They are quite astonished at

the impudent air of the young fellow in a brown coat and bright

buttons, who, ushering in his two companions, and walking up to the

bar in as careless a manner as if he had been used to green and

gold ornaments all his life, winks at one of the young ladies with

singular coolness, and calls for a 'kervorten and a three-out-

glass,' just as if the place were his own.  'Gin for you, sir?'

says the young lady when she has drawn it:  carefully looking every

way but the right one, to show that the wink had no effect upon

her.  'For me, Mary, my dear,' replies the gentleman in brown.  'My

name an't Mary as it happens,' says the young girl, rather relaxing

as she delivers the change.  'Well, if it an't, it ought to be,'

responds the irresistible one; 'all the Marys as ever I see, was

handsome gals.'  Here the young lady, not precisely remembering how

blushes are managed in such cases, abruptly ends the flirtation by

addressing the female in the faded feathers who has just entered,

and who, after stating explicitly, to prevent any subsequent

misunderstanding, that 'this gentleman pays,' calls for 'a glass of

port wine and a bit of sugar.'



Those two old men who came in 'just to have a drain,' finished

their third quartern a few seconds ago; they have made themselves

crying drunk; and the fat comfortable-looking elderly women, who

had 'a glass of rum-srub' each, having chimed in with their

complaints on the hardness of the times, one of the women has

agreed to stand a glass round, jocularly observing that 'grief

never mended no broken bones, and as good people's wery scarce,

what I says is, make the most on 'em, and that's all about it!' a

sentiment which appears to afford unlimited satisfaction to those

who have nothing to pay.



It is growing late, and the throng of men, women, and children, who

have been constantly going in and out, dwindles down to two or

three occasional stragglers - cold, wretched-looking creatures, in

the last stage of emaciation and disease.  The knot of Irish

labourers at the lower end of the place, who have been alternately

shaking hands with, and threatening the life of each other, for the

last hour, become furious in their disputes, and finding it

impossible to silence one man, who is particularly anxious to

adjust the difference, they resort to the expedient of knocking him

down and jumping on him afterwards.  The man in the fur cap, and

the potboy rush out; a scene of riot and confusion ensues; half the

Irishmen get shut out, and the other half get shut in; the potboy

is knocked among the tubs in no time; the landlord hits everybody,

and everybody hits the landlord; the barmaids scream; the police

come in; the rest is a confused mixture of arms, legs, staves, torn

coats, shouting, and struggling.  Some of the party are borne off

to the station-house, and the remainder slink home to beat their

wives for complaining, and kick the children for daring to be

hungry.



We have sketched this subject very slightly, not only because our

limits compel us to do so, but because, if it were pursued farther,

it would be painful and repulsive.  Well-disposed gentlemen, and

charitable ladies, would alike turn with coldness and disgust from

a description of the drunken besotted men, and wretched broken-down

miserable women, who form no inconsiderable portion of the

frequenters of these haunts; forgetting, in the pleasant

consciousness of their own rectitude, the poverty of the one, and

the temptation of the other.  Gin-drinking is a great vice in

England, but wretchedness and dirt are a greater; and until you

improve the homes of the poor, or persuade a half-famished wretch

not to seek relief in the temporary oblivion of his own misery,

with the pittance which, divided among his family, would furnish a

morsel of bread for each, gin-shops will increase in number and

splendour.  If Temperance Societies would suggest an antidote

against hunger, filth, and foul air, or could establish

dispensaries for the gratuitous distribution of bottles of Lethe-

water, gin-palaces would be numbered among the things that were.
