






CHAPTER XVIII - A PARLIAMENTARY SKETCH







We hope our readers will not be alarmed at this rather ominous

title.  We assure them that we are not about to become political,

neither have we the slightest intention of being more prosy than

usual - if we can help it.  It has occurred to us that a slight

sketch of the general aspect of 'the House,' and the crowds that

resort to it on the night of an important debate, would be

productive of some amusement:  and as we have made some few calls

at the aforesaid house in our time - have visited it quite often

enough for our purpose, and a great deal too often for our personal

peace and comfort - we have determined to attempt the description.

Dismissing from our minds, therefore, all that feeling of awe,

which vague ideas of breaches of privilege, Serjeant-at-Arms, heavy

denunciations, and still heavier fees, are calculated to awaken, we

enter at once into the building, and upon our subject.



Half-past four o'clock - and at five the mover of the Address will

be 'on his legs,' as the newspapers announce sometimes by way of

novelty, as if speakers were occasionally in the habit of standing

on their heads.  The members are pouring in, one after the other,

in shoals.  The few spectators who can obtain standing-room in the

passages, scrutinise them as they pass, with the utmost interest,

and the man who can identify a member occasionally, becomes a

person of great importance.  Every now and then you hear earnest

whispers of 'That's Sir John Thomson.'  'Which? him with the gilt

order round his neck?'  'No, no; that's one of the messengers -

that other with the yellow gloves, is Sir John Thomson.'  'Here's

Mr. Smith.'  'Lor!'  'Yes, how d'ye do, sir? - (He is our new

member) - How do you do, sir?'  Mr. Smith stops:  turns round with

an air of enchanting urbanity (for the rumour of an intended

dissolution has been very extensively circulated this morning);

seizes both the hands of his gratified constituent, and, after

greeting him with the most enthusiastic warmth, darts into the

lobby with an extraordinary display of ardour in the public cause,

leaving an immense impression in his favour on the mind of his

'fellow-townsman.'



The arrivals increase in number, and the heat and noise increase in

very unpleasant proportion.  The livery servants form a complete

lane on either side of the passage, and you reduce yourself into

the smallest possible space to avoid being turned out.  You see

that stout man with the hoarse voice, in the blue coat, queer-

crowned, broad-brimmed hat, white corduroy breeches, and great

boots, who has been talking incessantly for half an hour past, and

whose importance has occasioned no small quantity of mirth among

the strangers.  That is the great conservator of the peace of

Westminster.  You cannot fail to have remarked the grace with which

he saluted the noble Lord who passed just now, or the excessive

dignity of his air, as he expostulates with the crowd.  He is

rather out of temper now, in consequence of the very irreverent

behaviour of those two young fellows behind him, who have done

nothing but laugh all the time they have been here.



'Will they divide to-night, do you think, Mr. -' timidly inquires a

little thin man in the crowd, hoping to conciliate the man of

office.



'How CAN you ask such questions, sir?' replies the functionary, in

an incredibly loud key, and pettishly grasping the thick stick he

carries in his right hand.  'Pray do not, sir.  I beg of you; pray

do not, sir.'  The little man looks remarkably out of his element,

and the uninitiated part of the throng are in positive convulsions

of laughter.



Just at this moment some unfortunate individual appears, with a

very smirking air, at the bottom of the long passage.  He has

managed to elude the vigilance of the special constable downstairs,

and is evidently congratulating himself on having made his way so

far.



'Go back, sir - you must NOT come here,' shouts the hoarse one,

with tremendous emphasis of voice and gesture, the moment the

offender catches his eye.



The stranger pauses.



'Do you hear, sir - will you go back?' continues the official

dignitary, gently pushing the intruder some half-dozen yards.



'Come, don't push me,' replies the stranger, turning angrily round.



'I will, sir.'



'You won't, sir.'



'Go out, sir.'



'Take your hands off me, sir.'



'Go out of the passage, sir.'



'You're a Jack-in-office, sir.'



'A what?' ejaculates he of the boots.



'A Jack-in-office, sir, and a very insolent fellow,' reiterates the

stranger, now completely in a passion.



'Pray do not force me to put you out, sir,' retorts the other -

'pray do not - my instructions are to keep this passage clear -

it's the Speaker's orders, sir.'



'D-n the Speaker, sir!' shouts the intruder.



'Here, Wilson! - Collins!' gasps the officer, actually paralysed at

this insulting expression, which in his mind is all but high

treason; 'take this man out - take him out, I say!  How dare you,

sir?' and down goes the unfortunate man five stairs at a time,

turning round at every stoppage, to come back again, and denouncing

bitter vengeance against the commander-in-chief, and all his

supernumeraries.



'Make way, gentlemen, - pray make way for the Members, I beg of

you!' shouts the zealous officer, turning back, and preceding a

whole string of the liberal and independent.



You see this ferocious-looking gentleman, with a complexion almost

as sallow as his linen, and whose large black moustache would give

him the appearance of a figure in a hairdresser's window, if his

countenance possessed the thought which is communicated to those

waxen caricatures of the human face divine.  He is a militia-

officer, and the most amusing person in the House.  Can anything be

more exquisitely absurd than the burlesque grandeur of his air, as

he strides up to the lobby, his eyes rolling like those of a Turk's

head in a cheap Dutch clock?  He never appears without that bundle

of dirty papers which he carries under his left arm, and which are

generally supposed to be the miscellaneous estimates for 1804, or

some equally important documents.  He is very punctual in his

attendance at the House, and his self-satisfied 'He-ar-He-ar,' is

not unfrequently the signal for a general titter.



This is the gentleman who once actually sent a messenger up to the

Strangers' gallery in the old House of Commons, to inquire the name

of an individual who was using an eye-glass, in order that he might

complain to the Speaker that the person in question was quizzing

him!  On another occasion, he is reported to have repaired to

Bellamy's kitchen - a refreshment-room, where persons who are not

Members are admitted on sufferance, as it were - and perceiving two

or three gentlemen at supper, who, he was aware, were not Members,

and could not, in that place, very well resent his behaviour, he

indulged in the pleasantry of sitting with his booted leg on the

table at which they were supping!  He is generally harmless,

though, and always amusing.



By dint of patience, and some little interest with our friend the

constable, we have contrived to make our way to the Lobby, and you

can just manage to catch an occasional glimpse of the House, as the

door is opened for the admission of Members.  It is tolerably full

already, and little groups of Members are congregated together

here, discussing the interesting topics of the day.



That smart-looking fellow in the black coat with velvet facings and

cuffs, who wears his D'ORSAY hat so rakishly, is 'Honest Tom,' a

metropolitan representative; and the large man in the cloak with

the white lining - not the man by the pillar; the other with the

light hair hanging over his coat collar behind - is his colleague.

The quiet gentlemanly-looking man in the blue surtout, gray

trousers, white neckerchief and gloves, whose closely-buttoned coat

displays his manly figure and broad chest to great advantage, is a

very well-known character.  He has fought a great many battles in

his time, and conquered like the heroes of old, with no other arms

than those the gods gave him.  The old hard-featured man who is

standing near him, is really a good specimen of a class of men, now

nearly extinct.  He is a county Member, and has been from time

whereof the memory of man is not to the contrary.  Look at his

loose, wide, brown coat, with capacious pockets on each side; the

knee-breeches and boots, the immensely long waistcoat, and silver

watch-chain dangling below it, the wide-brimmed brown hat, and the

white handkerchief tied in a great bow, with straggling ends

sticking out beyond his shirt-frill.  It is a costume one seldom

sees nowadays, and when the few who wear it have died off, it will

be quite extinct.  He can tell you long stories of Fox, Pitt,

Sheridan, and Canning, and how much better the House was managed in

those times, when they used to get up at eight or nine o'clock,

except on regular field-days, of which everybody was apprised

beforehand.  He has a great contempt for all young Members of

Parliament, and thinks it quite impossible that a man can say

anything worth hearing, unless he has sat in the House for fifteen

years at least, without saying anything at all.  He is of opinion

that 'that young Macaulay' was a regular impostor; he allows, that

Lord Stanley may do something one of these days, but 'he's too

young, sir - too young.'  He is an excellent authority on points of

precedent, and when he grows talkative, after his wine, will tell

you how Sir Somebody Something, when he was whipper-in for the

Government, brought four men out of their beds to vote in the

majority, three of whom died on their way home again; how the House

once divided on the question, that fresh candles be now brought in;

how the Speaker was once upon a time left in the chair by accident,

at the conclusion of business, and was obliged to sit in the House

by himself for three hours, till some Member could be knocked up

and brought back again, to move the adjournment; and a great many

other anecdotes of a similar description.



There he stands, leaning on his stick; looking at the throng of

Exquisites around him with most profound contempt; and conjuring

up, before his mind's eye, the scenes he beheld in the old House,

in days gone by, when his own feelings were fresher and brighter,

and when, as he imagines, wit, talent, and patriotism flourished

more brightly too.



You are curious to know who that young man in the rough great-coat

is, who has accosted every Member who has entered the House since

we have been standing here.  He is not a Member; he is only an

'hereditary bondsman,' or, in other words, an Irish correspondent

of an Irish newspaper, who has just procured his forty-second frank

from a Member whom he never saw in his life before.  There he goes

again - another!  Bless the man, he has his hat and pockets full

already.



We will try our fortune at the Strangers' gallery, though the

nature of the debate encourages very little hope of success.  What

on earth are you about?  Holding up your order as if it were a

talisman at whose command the wicket would fly open?  Nonsense.

Just preserve the order for an autograph, if it be worth keeping at

all, and make your appearance at the door with your thumb and

forefinger expressively inserted in your waistcoat-pocket.  This

tall stout man in black is the door-keeper.  'Any room?'  'Not an

inch - two or three dozen gentlemen waiting down-stairs on the

chance of somebody's going out.'  Pull out your purse - 'Are you

QUITE sure there's no room?' - 'I'll go and look,' replies the

door-keeper, with a wistful glance at your purse, 'but I'm afraid

there's not.'  He returns, and with real feeling assures you that

it is morally impossible to get near the gallery.  It is of no use

waiting.  When you are refused admission into the Strangers'

gallery at the House of Commons, under such circumstances, you may

return home thoroughly satisfied that the place must be remarkably

full indeed. (1)



Retracing our steps through the long passage, descending the

stairs, and crossing Palace-yard, we halt at a small temporary

doorway adjoining the King's entrance to the House of Lords.  The

order of the serjeant-at-arms will admit you into the Reporters'

gallery, from whence you can obtain a tolerably good view of the

House.  Take care of the stairs, they are none of the best; through

this little wicket - there.  As soon as your eyes become a little

used to the mist of the place, and the glare of the chandeliers

below you, you will see that some unimportant personage on the

Ministerial side of the House (to your right hand) is speaking,

amidst a hum of voices and confusion which would rival Babel, but

for the circumstance of its being all in one language.



The 'hear, hear,' which occasioned that laugh, proceeded from our

warlike friend with the moustache; he is sitting on the back seat

against the wall, behind the Member who is speaking, looking as

ferocious and intellectual as usual.  Take one look around you, and

retire!  The body of the House and the side galleries are full of

Members; some, with their legs on the back of the opposite seat;

some, with theirs stretched out to their utmost length on the

floor; some going out, others coming in; all talking, laughing,

lounging, coughing, oh-ing, questioning, or groaning; presenting a

conglomeration of noise and confusion, to be met with in no other

place in existence, not even excepting Smithfield on a market-day,

or a cock-pit in its glory.



But let us not omit to notice Bellamy's kitchen, or, in other

words, the refreshment-room, common to both Houses of Parliament,

where Ministerialists and Oppositionists, Whigs and Tories,

Radicals, Peers, and Destructives, strangers from the gallery, and

the more favoured strangers from below the bar, are alike at

liberty to resort; where divers honourable members prove their

perfect independence by remaining during the whole of a heavy

debate, solacing themselves with the creature comforts; and whence

they are summoned by whippers-in, when the House is on the point of

dividing; either to give their 'conscientious votes' on questions

of which they are conscientiously innocent of knowing anything

whatever, or to find a vent for the playful exuberance of their

wine-inspired fancies, in boisterous shouts of 'Divide,'

occasionally varied with a little howling, barking, crowing, or

other ebullitions of senatorial pleasantry.



When you have ascended the narrow staircase which, in the present

temporary House of Commons, leads to the place we are describing,

you will probably observe a couple of rooms on your right hand,

with tables spread for dining.  Neither of these is the kitchen,

although they are both devoted to the same purpose; the kitchen is

further on to our left, up these half-dozen stairs.  Before we

ascend the staircase, however, we must request you to pause in

front of this little bar-place with the sash-windows; and beg your

particular attention to the steady, honest-looking old fellow in

black, who is its sole occupant.  Nicholas (we do not mind

mentioning the old fellow's name, for if Nicholas be not a public

man, who is? - and public men's names are public property) -

Nicholas is the butler of Bellamy's, and has held the same place,

dressed exactly in the same manner, and said precisely the same

things, ever since the oldest of its present visitors can remember.

An excellent servant Nicholas is - an unrivalled compounder of

salad-dressing - an admirable preparer of soda-water and lemon - a

special mixer of cold grog and punch - and, above all, an

unequalled judge of cheese.  If the old man have such a thing as

vanity in his composition, this is certainly his pride; and if it

be possible to imagine that anything in this world could disturb

his impenetrable calmness, we should say it would be the doubting

his judgment on this important point.



We needn't tell you all this, however, for if you have an atom of

observation, one glance at his sleek, knowing-looking head and face

- his prim white neckerchief, with the wooden tie into which it has

been regularly folded for twenty years past, merging by

imperceptible degrees into a small-plaited shirt-frill - and his

comfortable-looking form encased in a well-brushed suit of black -

would give you a better idea of his real character than a column of

our poor description could convey.



Nicholas is rather out of his element now; he cannot see the

kitchen as he used to in the old House; there, one window of his

glass-case opened into the room, and then, for the edification and

behoof of more juvenile questioners, he would stand for an hour

together, answering deferential questions about Sheridan, and

Percival, and Castlereagh, and Heaven knows who beside, with

manifest delight, always inserting a 'Mister' before every

commoner's name.



Nicholas, like all men of his age and standing, has a great idea of

the degeneracy of the times.  He seldom expresses any political

opinions, but we managed to ascertain, just before the passing of

the Reform Bill, that Nicholas was a thorough Reformer.  What was

our astonishment to discover shortly after the meeting of the first

reformed Parliament, that he was a most inveterate and decided

Tory!  It was very odd:  some men change their opinions from

necessity, others from expediency, others from inspiration; but

that Nicholas should undergo any change in any respect, was an

event we had never contemplated, and should have considered

impossible.  His strong opinion against the clause which empowered

the metropolitan districts to return Members to Parliament, too,

was perfectly unaccountable.



We discovered the secret at last; the metropolitan Members always

dined at home.  The rascals!  As for giving additional Members to

Ireland, it was even worse - decidedly unconstitutional.  Why, sir,

an Irish Member would go up there, and eat more dinner than three

English Members put together.  He took no wine; drank table-beer by

the half-gallon; and went home to Manchester-buildings, or

Millbank-street, for his whiskey-and-water.  And what was the

consequence?  Why, the concern lost - actually lost, sir - by his

patronage.  A queer old fellow is Nicholas, and as completely a

part of the building as the house itself.  We wonder he ever left

the old place, and fully expected to see in the papers, the morning

after the fire, a pathetic account of an old gentleman in black, of

decent appearance, who was seen at one of the upper windows when

the flames were at their height, and declared his resolute

intention of falling with the floor.  He must have been got out by

force.  However, he was got out - here he is again, looking as he

always does, as if he had been in a bandbox ever since the last

session.  There he is, at his old post every night, just as we have

described him:  and, as characters are scarce, and faithful

servants scarcer, long may he be there, say we!



Now, when you have taken your seat in the kitchen, and duly noticed

the large fire and roasting-jack at one end of the room - the

little table for washing glasses and draining jugs at the other -

the clock over the window opposite St. Margaret's Church - the deal

tables and wax candles - the damask table-cloths and bare floor -

the plate and china on the tables, and the gridiron on the fire;

and a few other anomalies peculiar to the place - we will point out

to your notice two or three of the people present, whose station or

absurdities render them the most worthy of remark.



It is half-past twelve o'clock, and as the division is not expected

for an hour or two, a few Members are lounging away the time here

in preference to standing at the bar of the House, or sleeping in

one of the side galleries.  That singularly awkward and ungainly-

looking man, in the brownish-white hat, with the straggling black

trousers which reach about half-way down the leg of his boots, who

is leaning against the meat-screen, apparently deluding himself

into the belief that he is thinking about something, is a splendid

sample of a Member of the House of Commons concentrating in his own

person the wisdom of a constituency.  Observe the wig, of a dark

hue but indescribable colour, for if it be naturally brown, it has

acquired a black tint by long service, and if it be naturally

black, the same cause has imparted to it a tinge of rusty brown;

and remark how very materially the great blinker-like spectacles

assist the expression of that most intelligent face.  Seriously

speaking, did you ever see a countenance so expressive of the most

hopeless extreme of heavy dulness, or behold a form so strangely

put together?  He is no great speaker:  but when he DOES address

the House, the effect is absolutely irresistible.



The small gentleman with the sharp nose, who has just saluted him,

is a Member of Parliament, an ex-Alderman, and a sort of amateur

fireman.  He, and the celebrated fireman's dog, were observed to be

remarkably active at the conflagration of the two Houses of

Parliament - they both ran up and down, and in and out, getting

under people's feet, and into everybody's way, fully impressed with

the belief that they were doing a great deal of good, and barking

tremendously.  The dog went quietly back to his kennel with the

engine, but the gentleman kept up such an incessant noise for some

weeks after the occurrence, that he became a positive nuisance.  As

no more parliamentary fires have occurred, however, and as he has

consequently had no more opportunities of writing to the newspapers

to relate how, by way of preserving pictures he cut them out of

their frames, and performed other great national services, he has

gradually relapsed into his old state of calmness.



That female in black - not the one whom the Lord's-Day-Bill Baronet

has just chucked under the chin; the shorter of the two - is

'Jane:' the Hebe of Bellamy's.  Jane is as great a character as

Nicholas, in her way.  Her leading features are a thorough contempt

for the great majority of her visitors; her predominant quality,

love of admiration, as you cannot fail to observe, if you mark the

glee with which she listens to something the young Member near her

mutters somewhat unintelligibly in her ear (for his speech is

rather thick from some cause or other), and how playfully she digs

the handle of a fork into the arm with which he detains her, by way

of reply.



Jane is no bad hand at repartees, and showers them about, with a

degree of liberality and total absence of reserve or constraint,

which occasionally excites no small amazement in the minds of

strangers.  She cuts jokes with Nicholas, too, but looks up to him

with a great deal of respect - the immovable stolidity with which

Nicholas receives the aforesaid jokes, and looks on, at certain

pastoral friskings and rompings (Jane's only recreations, and they

are very innocent too) which occasionally take place in the

passage, is not the least amusing part of his character.



The two persons who are seated at the table in the corner, at the

farther end of the room, have been constant guests here, for many

years past; and one of them has feasted within these walls, many a

time, with the most brilliant characters of a brilliant period.  He

has gone up to the other House since then; the greater part of his

boon companions have shared Yorick's fate, and his visits to

Bellamy's are comparatively few.



If he really be eating his supper now, at what hour can he possibly

have dined!  A second solid mass of rump-steak has disappeared, and

he eat the first in four minutes and three quarters, by the clock

over the window.  Was there ever such a personification of

Falstaff!  Mark the air with which he gloats over that Stilton, as

he removes the napkin which has been placed beneath his chin to

catch the superfluous gravy of the steak, and with what gusto he

imbibes the porter which has been fetched, expressly for him, in

the pewter pot.  Listen to the hoarse sound of that voice, kept

down as it is by layers of solids, and deep draughts of rich wine,

and tell us if you ever saw such a perfect picture of a regular

GOURMAND; and whether he is not exactly the man whom you would

pitch upon as having been the partner of Sheridan's parliamentary

carouses, the volunteer driver of the hackney-coach that took him

home, and the involuntary upsetter of the whole party?



What an amusing contrast between his voice and appearance, and that

of the spare, squeaking old man, who sits at the same table, and

who, elevating a little cracked bantam sort of voice to its highest

pitch, invokes damnation upon his own eyes or somebody else's at

the commencement of every sentence he utters.  'The Captain,' as

they call him, is a very old frequenter of Bellamy's; much addicted

to stopping 'after the House is up' (an inexpiable crime in Jane's

eyes), and a complete walking reservoir of spirits and water.



The old Peer - or rather, the old man - for his peerage is of

comparatively recent date - has a huge tumbler of hot punch brought

him; and the other damns and drinks, and drinks and damns, and

smokes.  Members arrive every moment in a great bustle to report

that 'The Chancellor of the Exchequer's up,' and to get glasses of

brandy-and-water to sustain them during the division; people who

have ordered supper, countermand it, and prepare to go down-stairs,

when suddenly a bell is heard to ring with tremendous violence, and

a cry of 'Di-vi-sion!' is heard in the passage.  This is enough;

away rush the members pell-mell.  The room is cleared in an

instant; the noise rapidly dies away; you hear the creaking of the

last boot on the last stair, and are left alone with the leviathan

of rump-steaks.
