



                               APPENDIX A


      (FROM THE NEW ORLEANS TIMES DEMOCRAT OF MARCH 29, 1882.)



   VOYAGE OF THE TIMES-DEMOCRAT'S RELIEF BOAT THROUGH THE INUNDATED

                                REGIONS



IT was nine o'clock Thursday morning when the 'Susie'

left the Mississippi and entered Old River, or what is

now called the mouth of the Red.  Ascending on the left,

a flood was pouring in through and over the levees on

the Chandler plantation, the most northern point in Pointe

Coupee parish.  The water completely covered the place,

although the levees had given way but a short time before.

The stock had been gathered in a large flat-boat, where,

without food, as we passed, the animals were huddled together,

waiting for a boat to tow them off.  On the right-hand side

of the river is Turnbull's Island, and on it is a large plantation

which formerly was pronounced one of the most fertile in the State.

The water has hitherto allowed it to go scot-free in usual floods,

but now broad sheets of water told only where fields were.

The top of the protecting levee could be seen here and there,

but nearly all of it was submerged.



The trees have put on a greener foliage since the water has poured in,

and the woods look bright and fresh, but this pleasant aspect to the eye

is neutralized by the interminable waste of water.  We pass mile after mile,

and it is nothing but trees standing up to their branches in water.

A water-turkey now and again rises and flies ahead into the long avenue

of silence.  A pirogue sometimes flits from the bushes and crosses

the Red River on its way out to the Mississippi, but the sad-faced

paddlers never turn their heads to look at our boat.  The puffing

of the boat is music in this gloom, which affects one most curiously.

It is not the gloom of deep forests or dark caverns, but a peculiar kind of

solemn silence and impressive awe that holds one perforce to its recognition.

We passed two negro families on a raft tied up in the willows this morning.

They were evidently of the well-to-do class, as they had a supply of meal

and three or four hogs with them.  Their rafts were about twenty feet square,

and in front of an improvised shelter earth had been placed, on which they

built their fire.



The current running down the Atchafalaya was very swift,

the Mississippi showing a predilection in that direction,

which needs only to be seen to enforce the opinion of that

river's desperate endeavors to find a short way to the Gulf.

Small boats, skiffs, pirogues, etc., are in great demand,

and many have been stolen by piratical negroes,

who take them where they will bring the greatest price.

From what was told me by Mr. C. P. Ferguson, a planter

near Red River Landing, whose place has just gone under,

there is much suffering in the rear of that place.

The negroes had given up all thoughts of a crevasse there,

as the upper levee had stood so long, and when it did

come they were at its mercy.  On Thursday a number were

taken out of trees and off of cabin roofs and brought in,

many yet remaining.



One does not appreciate the sight of earth until he has traveled

through a flood.  At sea one does not expect or look for it,

but here, with fluttering leaves, shadowy forest aisles, house-tops

barely visible, it is expected.  In fact a grave-yard, if the mounds

were above water, would be appreciated.  The river here is known

only because there is an opening in the trees, and that is all.

It is in width, from Fort Adams on the left bank of the Mississippi

to the bank of Rapides Parish, a distance of about sixty miles.

A large portion of this was under cultivation, particularly along

the Mississippi and back of the Red.  When Red River proper

was entered, a strong current was running directly across it,

pursuing the same direction as that of the Mississippi.



After a run of some hours, Black River was reached.

Hardly was it entered before signs of suffering became visible.

All the willows along the banks were stripped of their leaves.

One man, whom your correspondent spoke to, said that he had had one

hundred and fifty head of cattle and one hundred head of hogs.

At the first appearance of water he had started to drive

them to the high lands of Avoyelles, thirty-five miles off,

but he lost fifty head of the beef cattle and sixty hogs.

Black River is quite picturesque, even if its shores are under water.

A dense growth of ash, oak, gum, and hickory make the shores

almost impenetrable, and where one can get a view down some

avenue in the trees, only the dim outlines of distant trunks

can be barely distinguished in the gloom.



A few miles up this river, the depth of water on the banks

was fully eight feet, and on all sides could be seen,

still holding against the strong current, the tops of cabins.

Here and there one overturned was surrounded by drift-wood, forming

the nucleus of possibly some future island.



In order to save coal, as it was impossible to get that fuel at any point

to be touched during the expedition, a look-out was kept for a wood-pile.

On rounding a point a pirogue, skilfully paddled by a youth, shot out,

and in its bow was a girl of fifteen, of fair face, beautiful black eyes,

and demure manners.  The boy asked for a paper, which was thrown to him,

and the couple pushed their tiny craft out into the swell of the boat.



Presently a little girl, not certainly over twelve years, paddled out

in the smallest little canoe and handled it with all the deftness

of an old voyageur.  The little one looked more like an Indian

than a white child, and laughed when asked if she were afraid.

She had been raised in a pirogue and could go anywhere.

She was bound out to pick willow leaves for the stock, and she pointed

to a house near by with water three inches deep on the floors.

At its back door was moored a raft about thirty feet square,

with a sort of fence built upon it, and inside of this some sixteen

cows and twenty hogs were standing.  The family did not complain,

except on account of losing their stock, and promptly brought a

supply of wood in a flat.



From this point to the Mississippi River, fifteen miles, there is not a spot

of earth above water, and to the westward for thirty-five miles there

is nothing but the river's flood.  Black River had risen during Thursday,

the 23rd, 1<three-quarters> inches, and was going up at night still.

As we progress up the river habitations become more frequent,

but are yet still miles apart.  Nearly all of them are deserted,

and the out-houses floated off.  To add to the gloom, almost every

living thing seems to have departed, and not a whistle of a bird

nor the bark of the squirrel can be heard in this solitude.

Sometimes a morose gar will throw his tail aloft and disappear in the river,

but beyond this everything is quiet--the quiet of dissolution.

Down the river floats now a neatly whitewashed hen-house, then

a cluster of neatly split fence-rails, or a door and a bloated carcass,

solemnly guarded by a pair of buzzards, the only bird to be seen,

which feast on the carcass as it bears them along.  A picture-frame

in which there was a cheap lithograph of a soldier on horseback,

as it floated on told of some hearth invaded by the water and despoiled

of this ornament.



At dark, as it was not prudent to run, a place alongside the woods was hunted

and to a tall gum-tree the boat was made fast for the night.



A pretty quarter of the moon threw a pleasant light over forest and river,

making a picture that would be a delightful piece of landscape study,

could an artist only hold it down to his canvas.  The motion of

the engines had ceased, the puffing of the escaping steam was stilled,

and the enveloping silence closed upon us, and such silence it was!

Usually in a forest at night one can hear the piping of frogs,

the hum of insects, or the dropping of limbs; but here nature was dumb.

The dark recesses, those aisles into this cathedral, gave forth no sound,

and even the ripplings of the current die away.



At daylight Friday morning all hands were up, and up the Black we started.

The morning was a beautiful one, and the river, which is remarkably

straight, put on its loveliest garb.  The blossoms of the haw perfumed

the air deliciously, and a few birds whistled blithely along the banks.

The trees were larger, and the forest seemed of older growth than below.

More fields were passed than nearer the mouth, but the same scene

presented itself--smoke-houses drifting out in the pastures, negro quarters

anchored in confusion against some oak, and the modest residence just

showing its eaves above water.  The sun came up in a glory of carmine,

and the trees were brilliant in their varied shades of green.

Not a foot of soil is to be seen anywhere, and the water is apparently growing

deeper and deeper, for it reaches up to the branches of the largest trees.

All along, the bordering willows have been denuded of leaves, showing how long

the people have been at work gathering this fodder for their animals.  An old

man in a pirogue was asked how the willow leaves agreed with his cattle.

He stopped in his work, and with an ominous shake of his head replied:

'Well, sir, it 's enough to keep warmth in their bodies and that's

all we expect, but it's hard on the hogs, particularly the small ones.

They is dropping off powerful fast.  But what can you do?  It 's

all we've got.'



At thirty miles above the mouth of Black River the water

extends from Natchez on the Mississippi across to the pine

hills of Louisiana, a distance of seventy-three miles,

and there is hardly a spot that is not ten feet under it.

The tendency of the current up the Black is toward the west.

In fact, so much is this the case, the waters of Red River

have been driven down from toward the Calcasieu country,

and the waters of the Black enter the Red some fifteen miles

above the mouth of the former, a thing never before seen by even

the oldest steamboatmen.  The water now in sight of us is entirely

from the Mississippi.



Up to Trinity, or rather Troy, which is but a short

distance below, the people have nearly all moved out,

those remaining having enough for their present personal needs.

Their cattle, though, are suffering and dying off quite fast,

as the confinement on rafts and the food they get breeds disease.



After a short stop we started, and soon came to a section where

there were many open fields and cabins thickly scattered about.

Here were seen more pictures of distress.  On the inside of the houses

the inmates had built on boxes a scaffold on which they placed

the furniture.  The bed-posts were sawed off on top, as the ceiling

was not more than four feet from the improvised floor.  The buildings

looked very insecure, and threatened every moment to float off.

Near the houses were cattle standing breast high in the water,

perfectly impassive.  They did not move in their places, but stood

patiently waiting for help to come.  The sight was a distressing one,

and the poor creatures will be sure to die unless speedily rescued.

Cattle differ from horses in this peculiar quality.  A horse,

after finding no relief comes, will swim off in search of food,

whereas a beef will stand in its tracks until with exhaustion it drops in

the water and drowns.



At half-past twelve o'clock a hail was given from a flat-boat

inside the line of the bank.  Rounding to we ran alongside,

and General York stepped aboard.  He was just then engaged

in getting off stock, and welcomed the 'Times-Democrat'

boat heartily, as he said there was much need for her.

He said that the distress was not exaggerated in the least.

People were in a condition it was difficult even for one to imagine.

The water was so high there was great danger of their houses

being swept away.  It had already risen so high that it was

approaching the eaves, and when it reaches this point there is

always imminent risk of their being swept away.  If this occurs,

there will be great loss of life.  The General spoke of the gallant

work of many of the people in their attempts to save their stock,

but thought that fully twenty-five per cent.  had perished.

Already twenty-five hundred people had received rations from Troy,

on Black River, and he had towed out a great many cattle,

but a very great quantity remained and were in dire need.

The water was now eighteen inches higher than in 1874, and there was

no land between Vidalia and the hills of Catahoula.



At two o'clock the 'Susie' reached Troy, sixty-five miles above

the mouth of Black River.  Here on the left comes in Little River;

just beyond that the Ouachita, and on the right the Tensas.

These three rivers form the Black River.  Troy, or a portion

of it, is situated on and around three large Indian mounds,

circular in shape, which rise above the present water

about twelve feet.  They are about one hundred and fifty

feet in diameter, and are about two hundred yards apart.

The houses are all built between these mounds, and hence are all

flooded to a depth of eighteen inches on their floors.



These elevations, built by the aborigines, hundreds of years ago,

are the only points of refuge for miles.  When we arrived we found them

crowded with stock, all of which was thin and hardly able to stand up.

They were mixed together, sheep, hogs, horses, mules, and cattle.

One of these mounds has been used for many years as the grave-yard,

and to-day we saw attenuated cows lying against the marble tomb-stones,

chewing their cud in contentment, after a meal of corn furnished

by General York.  Here, as below, the remarkable skill of the women

and girls in the management of the smaller pirogues was noticed.

Children were paddling about in these most ticklish crafts with all the

nonchalance of adepts.



General York has put into operation a perfect system in regard

to furnishing relief.  He makes a personal inspection of the place

where it is asked, sees what is necessary to be done, and then,

having two boats chartered, with flats, sends them promptly

to the place, when the cattle are loaded and towed to the pine

hills and uplands of Catahoula.  He has made Troy his headquarters,

and to this point boats come for their supply of feed for cattle.

On the opposite side of Little River, which branches to the left

out of Black, and between it and the Ouachita, is situated

the town of Trinity, which is hourly threatened with destruction.

It is much lower than Troy, and the water is eight and nine

feet deep in the houses.  A strong current sweeps through it,

and it is remarkable that all of its houses have not gone before.

The residents of both Troy and Trinity have been cared for, yet some

of their stock have to be furnished with food.



As soon as the 'Susie' reached Troy, she was turned over to General York,

and placed at his disposition to carry out the work of relief more rapidly.

Nearly all her supplies were landed on one of the mounds to lighten her,

and she was headed down stream to relieve those below.  At Tom Hooper's place,

a few miles from Troy, a large flat, with about fifty head of stock on board,

was taken in tow.  The animals were fed, and soon regained some strength.

To-day we go on Little River, where the suffering is greatest.



                            DOWN BLACK RIVER



                                             Saturday Evening, March 25.



We started down Black River quite early, under the direction of General York,

to bring out what stock could be reached.  Going down river a flat

in tow was left in a central locality, and from there men poled her back

in the rear of plantations, picking up the animals wherever found.

In the loft of a gin-house there were seventeen head found, and after

a gangway was built they were led down into the flat without difficulty.

Taking a skiff with the General, your reporter was pulled up to a little

house of two rooms, in which the water was standing two feet on the floors.

In one of the large rooms were huddled the horses and cows of the place,

while in the other the Widow Taylor and her son were seated on a scaffold

raised on the floor.  One or two dug-outs were drifting about in the roam

ready to be put in service at any time.  When the flat was brought up,

the side of the house was cut away as the only means of getting

the animals out, and the cattle were driven on board the boat.

General York, in this as in every case, inquired if the family desired

to leave, informing them that Major Burke, of 'The Times-Democrat,'

has sent the 'Susie' up for that purpose.  Mrs. Taylor said she thanked

Major Burke, but she would try and hold out.  The remarkable tenacity

of the people here to their homes is beyond all comprehension.  Just below,

at a point sixteen miles from Troy, information was received that the house

of Mr. Tom Ellis was in danger, and his family were all in it.  We steamed

there immediately, and a sad picture was presented.  Looking out of the half

of the window left above water, was Mrs. Ellis, who is in feeble health,

whilst at the door were her seven children, the oldest not fourteen years.

One side of the house was given up to the work animals, some twelve head,

besides hogs.  In the next room the family lived, the water coming within two

inches of the bed-rail. The stove was below water, and the cooking was done

on a fire on top of it.  The house threatened to give way at any moment:

one end of it was sinking, and, in fact, the building looked a mere shell.

As the boat rounded to, Mr. Ellis came out in a dug-out, and General

York told him that he had come to his relief; that 'The Times-Democrat'

boat was at his service, and would remove his family at once to the hills,

and on Monday a flat would take out his stock, as, until that time,

they would be busy.  Notwithstanding the deplorable situation himself

and family were in, Mr. Ellis did not want to leave.  He said he thought

he would wait until Monday, and take the risk of his house falling.

The children around the door looked perfectly contented, seeming to care

little for the danger they were in.  These are but two instances of the many.

After weeks of privation and suffering, people still cling to their houses

and leave only when there is not room between the water and the ceiling

to build a scaffold on which to stand.  It seemed to be incomprehensible,

yet the love for the old place was stronger than that for safety.



After leaving the Ellis place, the next spot touched at

was the Oswald place.  Here the flat was towed alongside

the gin-house where there were fifteen head standing in water;

and yet, as they stood on scaffolds, their heads were above

the top of the entrance.  It was found impossible to get

them out without cutting away a portion of the front;

and so axes were brought into requisition and a gap made.

After much labor the horses and mules were securely placed

on the flat.



At each place we stop there are always three, four, or more dug-outs

arriving, bringing information of stock in other places in need.

Notwithstanding the fact that a great many had driven a part of their

stock to the hills some time ago, there yet remains a large quantity,

which General York, who is working with indomitable energy, will get

landed in the pine hills by Tuesday.



All along Black River the 'Susie' has been visited by scores

of planters, whose tales are the repetition of those already

heard of suffering and loss.  An old planter, who has lived on

the river since 1844, said there never was such a rise, and he was

satisfied more than one quarter of the stock has been lost.

Luckily the people cared first for their work stock, and when they

could find it horses and mules were housed in a place of safety.

The rise which still continues, and was two inches last night,

compels them to get them out to the hills; hence it is

that the work of General York is of such a great value.

From daylight to late at night he is going this way and that,

cheering by his kindly words and directing with calm judgment

what is to be done.  One unpleasant story, of a certain

merchant in New Orleans, is told all along the river.

It appears for some years past the planters have been dealing

with this individual, and many of them had balances in his hands.

When the overflow came they wrote for coffee, for meal, and,

in fact, for such little necessities as were required.

No response to these letters came, and others were written,

and yet these old customers, with plantations under water,

were refused even what was necessary to sustain life.  It is needless

to say he is not popular now on Back River.



The hills spoken of as the place of refuge for the people and stock on Black

River are in Catahoula parish, twenty-four miles from Black River.



After filling the flat with cattle we took on board the family

of T. S. Hooper, seven in number, who could not longer remain

in their dwelling, and we are now taking them up Little River

to the hills.



                         THE FLOOD STILL RISING



                                             Troy: March 27, 1882, noon.



The flood here is rising about three and a half inches every

twenty-four hours, and rains have set in which will increase this.

General York feels now that our efforts ought to be directed towards

saving life, as the increase of the water has jeopardized many houses.

We intend to go up the Tensas in a few minutes, and then we

will return and go down Black River to take off families.

There is a lack of steam transportation here to meet the emergency.

The General has three boats chartered, with flats in tow,

but the demand for these to tow out stock is greater than they

can meet with promptness.  All are working night and day,

and the 'Susie' hardly stops for more than an hour anywhere.

The rise has placed Trinity in a dangerous plight, and momentarily

it is expected that some of the houses will float off.

Troy is a little higher, yet all are in the water.

Reports have come in that a woman and child have been

washed away below here, and two cabins floated off.

Their occupants are the same who refused to come off day

before yesterday.  One would not believe the utter passiveness

of the people.



As yet no news has been received of the steamer 'Delia,' which is

supposed to be the one sunk in yesterday's storm on Lake Catahoula.

She is due here now, but has not arrived.  Even the mail here is

most uncertain, and this I send by skiff to Natchez to get it to you.

It is impossible to get accurate data as to past crops, etc., as

those who know much about the matter have gone, and those who remain

are not well versed in the production of this section.



General York desires me to say that the amount of rations

formerly sent should be duplicated and sent at once.

It is impossible to make any estimate, for the people are fleeing

to the hills, so rapid is the rise.  The residents here are

in a state of commotion that can only be appreciated when seen,

and complete demoralization has set in,



If rations are drawn for any particular section hereabouts, they would

not be certain to be distributed, so everything should be sent to Troy

as a center, and the General will have it properly disposed of.

He has sent for one hundred tents, and, if all go to the hills who are

in motion now, two hundred will be required.

