




                        CHAPTER ONE.

                        The Descent.





                Christ look upon us in this city,

                And keep our sympathy and pity

                  Fresh, and our faces heavenward,

                    Lest we grow hard.

                                    -THOMAS ASHE.



  'BUT YOU CAN'T DO IT, you know,' friends said, to whom I applied for

assistance in the matter of sinking myself down into the East End of

London. 'You had better see the police for a guide,' they added, on

second thought, painfully endeavoring to adjust themselves to the

psychological processes of a madman who had come to them with better

credentials than brains.

  'But I don't want to see the police,' I protested. 'What I wish to

do, is to go down into the East End and see things for myself. I

wish to know how those people are living there, and why they are

living there, and what they are living for. In short, I am going to

live there myself.'

  'You don't want to live down there!' everybody said, with

disapprobation writ large upon their faces. 'Why, it is said there

places where a man's life isn't worth tu'pence.'

  'The very places I wish to see,' I broke in.

  'But you can't, you know,' was the unfailing rejoinder.

  'Which is not what I came to see you about,' I answered brusquely,

somewhat nettled by their incomprehension. 'I am a stranger here,

and I want you to tell me what you know of the East End, in order that

I may have something to start on.'

  'But we know nothing of the East End. It is over there,

somewhere.' And they waved their hands vaguely in the direction

where the sun on rare occasions may be seen to rise.

  'Then I shall go to Cook's,' I announced.

  'Oh, yes,' they said, with relief. 'Cook's will be sure to know.'

  But O Cook, O Thomas Cook & Son, pathfinders and trail-clearers,

living sign-posts to all the world and bestowers of first aid to

bewildered travellers- unhesitatingly and instantly, with ease and

celerity, could you send me to Darkest Africa or Innermost Thibet, but

to the East End of London, barely a stone's throw distant from Ludgate

Circus, you know not the way!

  'You can't do it, you know,' said the human emporium of routes and

fares at Cook's Cheapside branch. 'It is so- ahem- so unusual.'

  'Consult the police,' he concluded authoritatively, when I

persisted. 'We are not accustomed to taking travellers to the East

End; we receive no call to take them there, and we know nothing

whatsoever about the place at all.'

  'Never mind that,' I interposed, to save myself from being swept out

of the office by his flood of negations. 'Here's something you can

do for me. I wish you to understand in advance what I intend doing, so

that in case of trouble you may be able to identify me.'

  'Ah, I see; should you be murdered, we would be in position to

identify the corpse.'

  He said it so cheerfully and cold-bloodedly that on the instant I

saw my stark and mutilated cadaver stretched upon a slab where cool

waters trickle ceaselessly, and him I saw bending over and sadly and

patiently identifying it as the body of the insane American who

would see the East End.

  'No, no,' I answered; 'merely to identify me in case I get into a

scrape with the "bobbies."' This last I said with a thrill; truly, I

was gripping hold of the vernacular.

  'That,' he said, 'is a matter for the consideration of the Chief

Office.'

  'It is so unprecedented, you know,' he added apologetically.

  The man at the Chief Office hemmed and hawed. 'We make it a rule,'

he explained, 'to give no information concerning our clients.'

  'But in this case,' I urged, 'it is the client who requests you to

give the information concerning himself.'

  Again he hemmed and hawed.

  'Of course,' I hastily anticipated, 'I know it is unprecedented,

but-'

  'As I was about to remark,' he went on steadily, 'it is

unprecedented, and I don't think we can do anything for you.'

  However, I departed with the address of a detective who lived in the

East End, and took my way to the American consul-general. And here, at

last, I found a man with whom I could 'do business.' There was no

hemming and hawing, no lifted brows, open incredulity, or blank

amazement. In one minute I explained myself and my project, which he

accepted as a matter of course. In the second minute he asked my

age, height, and weight, and looked me over. And in the third

minute, as we shook hands at parting, he said: 'All right, Jack.

I'll remember you and keep track.'

  I breathed a sigh of relief. Having built my ships behind me, I

was now free to plunge into that human wilderness of which nobody

seemed to know anything. But at once I encountered a new difficulty in

the shape of my cabby, a gray-whiskered and eminently decorous

personage, who had imperturbably driven me for several hours about the

'City.'

  'Drive me down to the East End,' I ordered, taking my seat.

  'Where, sir?' he demanded with frank surprise.

  'To the East End, anywhere. Go on.'

  The hansom pursued an aimless way for several minutes, then came

to a puzzled stop. The aperture above my head was uncovered, and the

cabman peered down perplexedly at me.

  'I say,' he said, 'wot plyce yer wanter go?'

  'East End,' I repeated. 'Nowhere in particular. Just drive me

around, anywhere.'

  'But wot's the haddress, sir?'

  'See here!' I thundered. 'Drive me down to the East End, and at

once!'

  It was evident that he did not understand, but he withdrew his

head and grumblingly started his horse.

  Nowhere in the streets of London may one escape the sight of

abject poverty, while five minutes' walk from almost any point will

bring one to a slum; but the region my hansom was now penetrating

was one unending slum. The streets were filled with a new and

different race of people, short of stature, and of wretched or

beer-sodden appearance. We rolled along through miles of bricks and

squalor, and from each cross street and alley flashed long vistas of

bricks and misery. Here and there lurched a drunken man or woman,

and the air was obscene with sounds of jangling and squabbling. At a

market, tottery old men and women were searching in the garbage thrown

in the mud for rotten potatoes, beans, and vegetables, while little

children clustered like flies around a festering mass of fruit,

thrusting their arms to the shoulders into the liquid corruption,

and drawing forth morsels, but partially decayed, which they

devoured on the spot.

  Not a hansom did I meet with in all my drive, while mine was like an

apparition from another and better world, the way the children ran

after it and alongside. And as far as I could see were the solid walls

of brick, the slimy pavements, and the screaming streets; and for

the first time in my life the fear of the crowd smote me. It was

like the fear of the sea; and the miserable multitudes, street upon

street, seemed so many waves of a vast and malodorous sea, lapping

about me and threatening to well up and over me.

  'Stepney, sir; Stepney Station,' the cabby called down.

  I looked about. It was really a railroad station, and he had

driven desperately to it as the one familiar spot he had ever heard of

in all that wilderness.

  'Well?' I said.

  He spluttered unintelligibly, shook his head, and looked very

miserable. 'I'm a strynger 'ere,' he managed to articulate. 'An' if

yer don't want Stepney Station, I'm blessed if I know wotcher do

want.'

  'I'll tell you what I want,' I said. 'You drive along and keep

your eye out for a shop where old clothes are sold. Now, when you

see such a shop, drive right on till you turn the corner, then stop

and let me out.'

  I could see that he was growing dubious of his fare, but not long

afterward he pulled up to the curb and informed me that an old clothes

shop was to be found a bit of the way back.

  'Won'tcher py me?' he pleaded. 'There's seven an' six owin' me.'

  'Yes,' I laughed, 'and it would be the last I'd see of you.'

  'Lord lumme, but it'll be the last I see of you if yer don't py me,'

he retorted.

  But a crowd of ragged onlookers had already gathered around the cab,

and I laughed again and walked back to the old clothes shop.

  Here the chief difficulty was in making the shopman understand

that I really and truly wanted old clothes. But after fruitless

attempts to press upon me new and impossible coats and trousers, he

began to bring to light heaps of old ones, looking mysterious the

while and hinting darkly. This he did with the palpable intention of

letting me know that he had 'piped my lay,' in order to bulldoze me,

through fear of exposure, into paying heavily for my purchases. A

man in trouble, or a high-class criminal from across the water, was

what he took my measure for- in either case, a person anxious to avoid

the police.

  But I disputed with him over the outrageous difference between

prices and values, till I quite disabused him of the notion, and he

settled down to drive a hard bargain with a hard customer. In the

end I selected a pair of stout though well-worn trousers, a frayed

jacket with one remaining button, a pair of brogans which had

plainly seen service where coal was shovelled, a thin leather belt,

and a very dirty cloth cap. My underclothing and socks, however,

were new and warm, but of the sort that any American waif, down in his

luck, could acquire in the ordinary course of events.

  'I must sy yer a sharp 'un,' he said, with counterfeit admiration,

as I handed over the ten shillings finally agreed upon for the outfit.

'Blimey, if you ain't ben up an' down Petticut Lane afore now. Yer

trouseys is wuth five bob to hany man, an' a docker'ud give two an'

six for the shoes, to sy nothin' of the coat an' cap an' new

stoker's singlet an' hother things.'

  'How much will you give me for them?' I demanded suddenly. 'I paid

you ten bob for the lot, and I'll sell them back to you, right now,

for eight. Come, it's a go!'

  But he grinned and shook his head, and though I had made a good

bargain, I was unpleasantly aware that he had made a better one.

  I found the cabby and a policeman with their heads together, but the

latter, after looking me over sharply and particularly scrutinizing

the bundle under my arm, turned away and left the cabby to wax

mutinous by himself. And not a step would he budge till I paid him the

seven shillings and sixpence owing him. Whereupon he was willing to

drive me to the ends of the earth, apologizing profusely for his

insistence, and explaining that one ran across queer customers in

London Town.

  But he drove me only to Highbury Vale, in North London, where my

luggage was waiting for me. Here, next day, I took off my shoes (not

without regret for their lightness and comfort), and my soft, gray

travelling suit, and, in fact, all my clothing; and proceeded to array

myself in the clothes of the other and unimaginable men, who must have

been indeed unfortunate to have had to part with such rags for the

pitiable sums obtainable from a dealer.

  Inside my stoker's singlet, in the armpit, I sewed a gold

sovereign (an emergency sum certainly of modest proportions); and

inside my stoker's singlet I put myself. And then I sat down and

moralized upon the fair years and fat, which had made my skin soft and

brought the nerves close to the surface; for the singlet was rough and

raspy as a hair shirt, and I am confident that the most rigorous of

ascetics suffer no more than did I in the ensuing twenty-four hours.

  The remainder of my costume was fairly easy to put on, though the

brogans, or brogues, were quite a problem. As stiff and hard as if

made of wood, it was only after a prolonged pounding of the uppers

with my fists that I was able to get my feet into them at all. Then,

with a few shillings, a knife, a handkerchief, and some brown papers

and flake tobacco stowed away in my pockets, I thumped down the stairs

and said good-by to my foreboding friends. As I passed out the door,

the 'help,' a comely middle-aged woman, could not conquer a grin

that twisted her lips and separated them till the throat, out of

involuntary sympathy, made the uncouth animal noises we are wont to

designate as 'laughter.'

  No sooner was I out on the streets than I was impressed by the

difference in status effected by my clothes. All servility vanished

from demeanor of the common people with whom I came in contact.

Presto! in the twinkling of an eye, so to say, I had become one of

them. My frayed and out-at-elbows jacket was the badge and

advertisement of my class, which was their class. It made me of like

kind, and in place of the fawning and too-respectful attention I had

hitherto received, I now shared with them a comradeship. The man in

corduroy and dirty neckerchief no longer addressed me as 'sir' or

'governor.' It was 'mate,' now- and a fine and hearty word, with a

tingle to it, and a warmth and gladness, which the other term does not

possess. Governor! It smacks of mastery, and power, and high

authority- the tribute of the man who is under to the man on top,

delivered in the hope that he will let up a bit and ease his weight.

Which is another way of saying that it is an appeal for alms.

  This brings me to a delight I experienced in my rags and tatters

which is denied the average American abroad. The European traveller

from the States, who is not a Croesus, speedily finds himself

reduced to a chronic state of self-conscious sordidness by the

hordes of cringing robbers who clutter his steps from dawn till

dark, and deplete his pocketbook in a way that puts compound

interest to the blush.

  In my rags and tatters I escaped the pestilence of tipping, and

encountered men on a basis of equality. Nay, before the day was out

I turned the tables, and said, most gratefully, 'Thank you, sir,' to a

gentleman whose horse I held, and who dropped a penny into my eager

palm.

  Other changes I discovered were wrought in my condition by my new

garb. In crossing crowded thoroughfares I found I had to be, if

anything, more lively in avoiding vehicles, and it was strikingly

impressed upon me that my life had cheapened in direct ratio with my

clothes. When before, I inquired the way of a policeman, I was usually

asked, 'Buss or 'ansom, sir?' But now the query became, 'Walk or

ride?' Also, at the railway stations it was the rule to be asked,

'First or second, sir?' Now I was asked nothing, a third-class

ticket being shoved out to me as a matter of course.

  But there was compensation for it all. For the first time I met

the English lower classes face to face, and knew them for what they

were. When loungers and workmen, on street corners and in public

houses, talked with me, they talked as one man to another, and they

talked as natural men should talk, without the least idea of getting

anything out of me for what they talked or the way they talked.

  And when at last I made into the East End, I was gratified to find

that the fear of the crowd no longer haunted me. I had become a part

of it. The vast and malodorous sea had welled up and over me, or I had

slipped gently into it, and there was nothing fearsome about it-

with the one exception of the stoker's singlet.

