




			CHAPTER SIXTEENTH.

	'Tis not her sense---for sure, in that
	    There's nothing more than common
	And all her wit is only chat,
	    Like any other woman.
					Song.

  The high-born Berengaria, daughter of Sanchez, King of
Navarre, and the Queen-Consort of the heroic Richard, was
accounted one of the most beautiful women of the period. Her
form was slight, though exquisitely moulded. She was graced
with a complexion not common in her country, a profusion of
fair hair, and features so extremely juvenile, as to make her
look several years younger than she really was, though in reality
she was not above one-and-twenty. Perhaps it was under the
consciousness of this extremely juvenile appearance, that she
affected, or at least practised, a little childish petulance, and
wilfulness of manner, not unbefitting, she might suppose, a
youthful bride, whose rank and age gave her a right to have
her fantasies indulged and attended to. She was by nature
perfectly good-humoured, and if her due share of admiration
and homage (in her opinion a very large one) was duly resigned
to her, no one could possess better temper, or a more friendly
disposition; but then, like all despots, the more power that
was voluntarily yielded to her, the more she desired to extend
her sway. Sometimes, even when all her ambition was gratified,
she chose to be a little out of health, and a little out of spirits;
and physicians had to toil their wits to invent names for imaginary
maladies, while her ladies racked their imagination for
new games, new headgear, and new court-scandal, to pass away
those unpleasant hours, during which their own situation was
scarce to be greatly envied. Their most frequent resource
for diverting this malady was some trick or piece of mischief,
practised upon each other; and the good Queen, in the buoyancy
of her reviving spirits, was, to speak truth, rather too
indifferent whether the frolics thus practised were entirely
befitting her own dignity, or whether the pain which those
suffered upon whom they were inflicted was not beyond the
proportion of pleasure which she herself derived from them.
She was confident in her husband's favour, in her high rank,
and in her supposed power to make good whatever such pranks
might cost others. In a word, she gamboled with the freedom
of a young lioness, who is unconscious of the weight of her own
paws when laid on those whom she sports with.

  The Queen Berengaria loved her husband passionately, but
she feared the loftiness and roughness of his character, and as
she felt herself not to be his match in intellect, was not much
pleased to see that he would often talk with Edith Plantagenet
in preference to herself, simply because he found more amusement
in her conversation, a more comprehensive understanding,
and a more noble cast of thoughts and sentiments, than his
beautiful consort exhibited. Berengaria did not hate Edith on
this account, far less meditate her any harm: for, allowing for
some selfishness, her character was, on the whole, innocent and
generous. But the ladies of her train, sharp-sighted in such
matters, had for some time discovered that a poignant jest at
the expense of the Lady Edith was a specific for relieving her
Grace of England's low spirits, and the discovery saved their
imagination much toil.

  There was something ungenerous in this, because the Lady
Edith was understood to be an orphan; and though she was
called Plantagenet, and the Fair Maid of Anjou, and admitted
by Richard to certain privileges only granted to the royal
family, and held her place in the circle accordingly, yet few
knew; and none acquainted with the Court of England ventured
to ask, in what exact degree of relationship she stood to C<oe>ur
de Lion. She had come with Eleanor, the celebrated Queen
Mother of England, and joined Richard at Messina, as one of
the ladies destined to attend on Berengaria, whose nuptials
then approached. Richard treated his kinswoman with much
respectful observance, and the Queen made her her most
constant attendant, and, even in despite of the petty jealousy
which we have observed, treated her, generally, with suitable
respect.

  The ladies of the household had, for a long time, no farther
advantage over Edith, than might be afforded by an opportunity
of censuring a less artfully disposed head attire, or an unbecoming
robe; for the lady was judged to be inferior in these
mysteries. The silent devotion of the Scottish Knight did not,
indeed, pass unnoticed; his liveries, his cognisance, his feats
of arms, his mottoes and devices, were nearly watched, and
occasionally made the subject of a passing jest. But then came
the pilgrimage of the Queen and her ladies to Engaddi, a
journey which the Queen had undertaken under a vow for the
recovery of her husband's health, and which she had been
encouraged to carry into effect by the Archbishop of Tyre for a
political purpose. It was then, and in the chapel at that holy
place, connected from above with a Carmelite nunnery, from
beneath with the cell of the anchorite, that one of the Queen's
attendants remarked that secret sign of intelligence which
Edith had made to her lover, and failed not instantly to communicate
it to her Majesty. The Queen returned from her
pilgrimage enriched with this admirable recipe against dulness
or ennui, and her train was at the same time augmented by a
present of two wretched dwarfs from the dethroned Queen of
Jerusalem, as deformed and as crazy (the excellence of that
unhappy species) as any Queen could have desired. One of
Berengaria's idle amusements had been to try the effect of the
sudden appearance of such ghastly and fantastic forms on the
nerves of the Knight when left alone in the chapel; but the
jest had been lost by the composure of the Scot, and the interference
of the anchorite. She had now tried another, of which
the consequences promised to be more serious.

  The ladies again met after Sir Kenneth had retired from the
tent; and the Queen, at first little moved by Edith's angry
expostulations, only replied to her by upbraiding her prudery,
and by indulging her wit at the expense of the garb, nation,
and, above all, the poverty, of the Knight of the Leopard, in
which she displayed a good deal of playful malice, mingled with
some humour, until Edith was compelled to carry her anxiety to
her separate apartment. But when, in the morning a female
whom Edith had intrusted to make inquiry, brought word that
the standard was missing, and its champion vanished, she burst
into the Queen's apartment, and implored her to rise and proceed
to the King's tent without delay, and use her powerful mediation
to prevent the evil consequences of her jest.

  The Queen, frightened in her turn, cast, as is usual, the
blame of her own folly on those around her, and endeavoured
to comfort Edith's grief, and appease her displeasure, by a
thousand inconsistent arguments. She was sure no harm had
chanced---the knight was sleeping, she fancied, after his night-watch.
What though, for fear of the King's displeasure, he had
deserted with the standard---it was but a piece of silk, and he
but a needy adventurer---or if he was put under warding for a
time, she would soon get the King to pardon him---it was but
waiting to let Richard's mood pass away.

  Thus she continued talking thick and fast, and heaping together
all sorts of inconsistencies, with the vain expectation of
persuading both Edith and herself that no harm could come of
a frolic, which in her heart she now bitterly repented. But
while Edith in vain strove to intercept this torrent of idle talk,
she caught the eye of one of the ladies who entered the Queen's
apartment. There was death in her look of affright and horror,
and Edith, at the first glance of her countenance, had sunk at
once on the earth, had not strong necessity, and her own elevation
of character, enabled her to maintain at least external
composure.

  ``Madam,'' she said to the Queen, ``lose not another word
in speaking, but save life---if, indeed,'' she added, her voice
choking as she said it, ``life may yet be saved.''

  ``It may---it may,'' answered the Lady Calista. ``I have
just heard that he has been brought before the King---it is not
yet over---but,'' she added, bursting into a vehement flood of
weeping, in which personal apprehensions had some share---``it
will soon---unless some course be taken.''

  ``I will vow a golden candlestick to the Holy Sepulchre---a
shrine of silver to our Lady of Engaddi---a pall, worth one
hundred bezants, to Saint Thomas of Orthez,'' said the Queen
in extremity.

  ``Up, up, madam!'' said Edith; ``call on the saints if you
list, but be your own best saint.''

  ``Indeed, madam,'' said the terrified attendant, ``the lady
Edith speaks truth. Up, madam, and let us to King Richard's
tent and beg the poor gentleman's life.''

  ``I will go---I will go instantly,'' said the Queen, rising and
trembling excessively; while her women, in as great confusion
as herself, were unable to render her those duties which were
indispensable to her levee. Calm, composed, only pale as death,
Edith ministered to the Queen with her own hand, and alone
supplied the deficiencies of her numerous attendants.

  ``How you wait, wenches!'' said the Queen, not able even
then to forget frivolous distinctions. ``Suffer ye the Lady
Edith to do the duties of your attendance?---Seest thou, Edith,
they can do nothing---I shall never be attired in time. We
will send for the Archbishop of Tyre, and employ him as a
mediator.''

  ``Oh, no, no!'' exclaimed Edith---``Go yourself, madam---
you have done the evil, do you confer the remedy.''

  ``I will go---I will go,'' said the Queen; ``but if Richard be
in his mood, I dare not speak to him---he will kill me!''

  ``Yet go, gracious madam,'' said the Lady Calista, who best
knew her mistress's temper; ``not a lion in his fury could
look upon such a face and form, and retain so much as an angry
thought-far less a love-true knight like the royal Richard, to
whom your slightest word would be a command.''

  ``Dost thou think so, Calista?'' said the Queen. ``Ah,
thou little knowest---yet I will go---But see you here---what
means this? You have bedizened me in green, a colour he
detests. Lo you! let me have a blue robe, and---search for the
ruby carcanet, which was part of the King of Cyprus's ransom
---it is either in the steel casket, or somewhere else.''

  ``This, and a man's life at stake!'' said Edith, indignantly;
``it passes human patience. Remain at your ease, madam, I
will go to King Richard---I am a party interested---I will
know if the honour of a poor maiden of his blood is to be so far
tampered with, that her name shall be abused to train a brave
gentleman from his duty, bring him within the compass of death
and infamy, and make, at the same time, the glory of England
a laughing-stock to the whole Christian army.''

  At this unexpected burst of passion, Berengaria listened with
an almost stupified look of fear and wonder. But as Edith
was about to leave the tent, she exclaimed, though faintly,
``Stop her---stop her.''

  ``You must, indeed, stop, noble Lady Edith,'' said Calista,
taking her arm gently; ``and you, royal madam, I am sure,
will go, and without farther dallying. If the lady Edith goes
alone to the King, he will be dreadfully incensed, nor will it be
one life that will stay his fury.''

  ``I will go---I will go,'' said the Queen, yielding to necessity;
and Edith reluctantly halted to wait her movements.
They were now as speedy as she could have desired. The
Queen hastily wrapped herself in a large loose mantle, which
covered all inaccuracies of the toilet. In this guise, attended
by Edith and her women, and preceded and followed by a few
officers and men-at-arms, she hastened to the tent of her lion-like
husband.
