




			CHAPTER ELEVENTH.

	One thing is certain in our Northern land,
	Allow that birth, or valour, wealth or wit,
	Give each precedence to their possessor,
	Envy, that follows on such eminence,
	As comes the lyme-hound on the roebuck's trace,
	Shall pull them down each one.
				Sir David Lindsay.

  Leopold, Grand Duke of Austria, was the first possessor of
that noble country to whom the princely rank belonged. He
had been raised to the ducal sway in the German empire, on
account of his near relationship to the Emperor, Henry the
Stern, and held under his government the finest provinces
which are watered by the Danube. His character has been
stained in history, on account of one action of violence and
perfidy, which arose out of these very transactions in the Holy
Land; and yet the shame of having made Richard a prisoner,
when he returned through his dominions, unattended, and in
disguise, was not one which flowed from Leopold's natural disposition.
He was rather a weak and a vain, than an ambitious
or tyrannical prince. His mental powers resembled the qualities
of his person. He was tall, strong, and handsome, with a complexion
in which red and white were strongly contrasted, and had
long flowing locks of fair hair. But there was an awkwardness
in his gait, which seemed as if his size was not animated by
energy sufficient to put in motion such a mass; and in the
same manner, wearing the richest dresses, it always seemed as
if they became him not. As a prince, he appeared too little
familiar with his own dignity, and being often at a loss how
to assert his authority when the occasion demanded it, he
frequently thought himself obliged to recover, by acts and expressions
of ill-timed violence, the ground which might have
been easily and gracefully maintained by a little more presence
of mind in the beginning of the controversy.

  Not only were these deficiencies visible to others, but the
Archduke himself could not but sometimes entertain a painful
consciousness that he was not altogether fit to maintain and
assert the high rank which he had acquired; and to this was
joined the strong, and sometimes the just suspicion, that others
esteemed him lightly accordingly.

  When he first joined the Crusade, with a most princely
attendance, Leopold had desired much to enjoy the friendship
and intimacy of Richard, and had made such advances towards
cultivating his regard, as the King of England ought, in policy,
to have received and answered. But the Archduke, though
not deficient in bravery, was so infinitely inferior to C<oe>ur de
Lion in that ardour of mind which wooed danger as a bride,
that the King very soon held him in a certain degree of contempt.
Richard, also, as a Norman Prince, a people with
whom temperance was habitual, despised the inclination of the
German for the pleasures of the table, and particularly his
liberal indulgence in the use of wine. For these and other
personal reasons, the King of England very soon looked upon
the Austrian Prince with feelings of contempt, which he was
at no pains to conceal or modify, and which, therefore, were
speedily remarked, and returned with deep hatred, by the
suspicious Leopold. The discord between them was fanned by
the secret and politic arts of Philip of France, one of the most
sagacious monarchs of the time, who, dreading the fiery and
overbearing character of Richard, considering him as his natural
rival, and feeling offended, moreover, at the dictatorial
manner in which he, a vassal of France for his continental
domains, conducted himself towards his liege lord, endeavoured
to strengthen his own party, and weaken that of Richard, by
uniting the Crusading princes of inferior degree, in resistance
to what he termed the usurping authority of the King of
England. Such was the state of politics and opinions entertained
by the Archduke of Austria, when Conrade of Montserrat
resolved upon employing his jealousy of England as the
means of dissolving or loosening at least, the league of the
Crusaders.

  The time which he chose for his visit was noon, and the
pretence, to present the Archduke with some choice Cyprus
wine which had lately fallen into his hands, and discuss its
comparative merits with those of Hungary and of the Rhine.
An intimation of his purpose was of course answered by a
courteous invitation to partake of the Archducal meal, and every
effort was used to render it fitting the splendour of a sovereign
prince. Yet, the refined taste of the Italian saw more cumbrous
profusion, than elegance or splendour, in the display of provisions
under which the board groaned.

  The Germans, though still possessing the martial and frank
character of their ancestors, who subdued the Roman empire,
had retained withal no slight tinge of their barbarism. The
practices and principles of chivalry were not carried to such a
nice pitch amongst them, as amongst the French and English
knights, nor were they strict observers of the prescribed rules
of society, which among those nations were supposed to express
the height of civilisation. Sitting at the table of the Archduke,
Conrade was at once stunned and amused, with the clang of
Teutonic sounds assaulting his ears on all sides, notwithstanding
the solemnity of a princely banquet. Their dress seemed equally
fantastic to him, many of the Austrian nobles retaining their
long beards, and almost all of them wearing short jerkins of
various colours, cut, and flourished, and fringed, in a manner
not common in Western Europe.

  Numbers of dependants, old and young, attended in the
pavilion, mingled at times in the conversation, received from
their masters the relics of the entertainment, and devoured them
as they stood behind the backs of the company. Jesters, dwarfs,
and minstrels, were there in unusual numbers, and more noisy
and intrusive than they were permitted to be in better regulated
society. As they were allowed to share freely in the wine, which
flowed round in large quantities, their licensed tumult was the
more excessive.

  All this while, and in the midst of a clamour and confusion,
which would better have become a German tavern during a fair,
than the tent of a sovereign prince, the Archduke was waited
upon with a minuteness of form and observance, which showed
how anxious he was to maintain rigidly the state and character
to which his elevation had entitled him. He was served on the
knee, and only by pages of noble blood, fed upon plate of silver,
and drank his Tokay and Rhenish wines from a cup of gold. His
ducal mantle was splendidly adorned with ermine, his coronet
might have equalled in value a royal crown, and his feet, eased
in velvet shoes (the length of which, peaks included, might be
two feet), rested upon a footstool of solid silver. But it served
partly to intimate the character of the man, that, although
desirous to show attention to the Marquis of Montserrat, whom
he had courteously placed at his right hand, he gave much more
of his attention to his _spruch-sprecher,_ that is, his man of conversation,
or _sayer of sayings,_ who stood behind the Duke's right
shoulder.

  This personage was well attired, in a coat and doublet of
black velvet, the last of which was decorated with various silver
and gold coins, stitched upon it, in memory of the munificent
princes who had conferred them, and bearing a short staff, to
which also bunches of silver coins were attached by rings, which
he jingled by way of attracting attention, when he was about
to say anything which he judged worthy of it. This person's
capacity in the household of the Archduke, was somewhat betwixt
that of a minstrel and a counsellor; he was by turns a flatterer,
a poet, and an orator; and those who desired to be well with
the Duke, generally studied to gain the good-will of the _spruch-sprecher._

  Lest too much of this officer's wisdom should become tiresome,
the Duke's other shoulder was occupied by his _hoff-narr,_
or court jester, called Jonas Schwanker, who made almost as
much noise with his fool's-cap, bells, and bauble, as did the
orator, or man of talk, with his jingling baton.

  These two personages threw out grave and comic nonsense
alternately, while their master, laughing or applauding them
himself, yet carefully watched the countenance of his noble
guest, to discern what impressions so accomplished a cavalier
received from this display of Austrian eloquence and wit. It
is hard to say whether the man of wisdom or the man of folly
contributed most to the amusement of the party, or stood highest
in the estimation of their princely master; but the sallies of
both seemed excellently well received. Sometimes they became
rivals for the conversation, and clanged their flappers in emulation
of each other, with a most alarming contention; but, in
general, they seemed on such good terms, and so accustomed to
support each other's play, that the _spruch-sprecher_ often condescended
to follow up the jester's witticisms with an explanation,
to render them more obvious to the capacity of the audience;
so that his wisdom became a sort of commentary on the buffoon's
folly. And sometimes, in requital, the _hoff-narr,_ with a pithy
jest, wound up the conclusion of the orator's tedious harangue.

  Whatever his real sentiments might be, Conrade took especial
care that his countenance should express nothing but satisfaction
with what he heard, and smiled or applauded as zealously, to
all appearance, as the Archduke himself, at the solemn folly of
the _spruch-sprecher,_ and the gibbering wit of the fool. In fact,
he watched carefully until the one or other should introduce
some topic, favourable to the purpose which was uppermost in
his mind.

  It was not long ere the King of England was brought on
the carpet by the jester, who had been accustomed to consider
Dickon of the Broom (which irreverent epithet he substituted
for Richard Plantagenet) as a subject of mirth, acceptable and
inexhaustible. The orator, indeed, was silent, and it was only
when applied to by Conrade, that he observed, ``The _genista,_ or
broom-plant, was an emblem of humility; and it would be well
when those who wore it would remember the warning.''

  The allusion to the illustrious badge of Plantagenet was thus
rendered sufficiently manifest, and Jonas Schwanker observed,
that they who humbled themselves had been exalted with a
vengeance.

  ``Honour unto whom honour is due,'' answered the Marquis
of Montserrat; ``we have all had some part in these marches
and battles, and methinks other princes might share a little in
the renown which Richard of England engrosses amongst minstrels
and _minne-singers._ Has no one of the Joyeuse science
here present a song in praise of the royal Archduke of Austria,
our princely entertainer?''

  Three minstrels emulously stepped forward with voice and
harp. Two were silenced with difficulty by the _spruch-sprecher,_
who seemed to act as master of the revels, and a hearing was
at length procured for the poet preferred, who sung, in high
German, stanzas which may be thus translated:---

	What brave chief shall head the forces,
	    Where the red-cross legions gather?
	Best of horsemen, best of horses,
 	    Highest head and fairest feather.

Here the orator, jingling his stag, interrupted the bard to intimate
to the party, what they might not have inferred from the
description, that their royal host was the party indicated, and a
full-crowned goblet went round to the acclamation---_Hoch lebe
der Herzog Leopold!_ Another stanza followed.

	Ask not Austria why, 'midst princes,
	    Still her banner rises highest;
	Ask as well the strong-wing'd eagle,
	    Why to Heaven he soars the nighest.

  ``The eagle,'' said the expounder of dark sayings, ``is the cognisance
of our noble lord the Archduke---of his royal Grace, I
would say---and the eagle flies the highest and nearest to the
sun of all the feathered creation.''

  ``The lion hath taken a spring above the eagle,'' said Conrade,
carelessly.

  The Archduke reddened, and fixed his eyes on the speaker,
while the _spruch-sprecher_ answered, after a minute's consideration,
``The Lord Marquis will pardon me---a lion cannot fly above an
eagle, because no lion hath got wings.''

  ``Except the Lion of Saint Mark,'' responded the jester.

  ``That is the Venetian's banner,'' said the Duke; ``but assuredly,
that amphibious race, half nobles, half merchants, will
not dare to place their rank in comparison with ours?''

  ``Nay, it was not of the Venetian lion that I spoke,'' said the
Marquis of Montserrat; ``but of the three lions passant of
England---formerly, it is said, they were leopards, but now they
are become lions at all points, and must take precedence of beast,
fish, or fowl, or woe worth the gainstander.''

  ``Mean you seriously, my lord?'' said the Austrian, now
considerably flushed with wine; ``think you that Richard of
England asserts any pre-eminence over the free sovereigns who
have been his voluntary allies in this Crusade?''

  ``I know not but from circumstances,'' answered Conrade;
``yonder hangs his banner alone in the midst of our camp, as
if he were king and generalissimo of our whole Christian
army.''

  ``And do you endure this so patiently, and speak of it so
coldly?'' said the Archduke.

  ``Nay, my lord,'' answered Conrade, ``it cannot concern the
poor Marquis of Montserrat to contend against an injury, patiently
submitted to by such potent princes as Philip of France and
Leopold of Austria. What dishonour you are pleased to submit
to cannot be a disgrace to me.''

  Leopold closed his fist, and struck on the table with violence.

  ``I have told Philip of this,'' he said; ``I have often told him
that it was our duty to protect the inferior princes against the
usurpation of this islander---but he answers me ever with cold
respects of their relations together as suzerain and vassal, and
that it were impolitic in him to make an open breach at this
time and period.''

  ``The world knows that Philip is wise,'' said Conrade, ``and
will judge his submission to be policy.---Yours, my lord, you
can yourself alone account for; but I doubt not you have deep
reasons for submitting to English domination.''

  ``_I_ submit!'' said Leopold, indignantly---``_I,_ the Archduke
of Austria, so important and vital a limb of the Holy Roman
empire---_I_ submit myself to this King of half an island---this
grandson of a Norman bastard!---No, by Heaven! The camp,
and all Christendom, shall see that I know how to right myself,
and whether I yield ground one inch to the English bandog.---
Up, my lieges and merry-men, up and follow me! We will---
and that without losing one instant---place the eagle of Austria,
where she shall float as high as ever floated the cognisance of
king or kaisar.''

  With that he started from his seat, and, amidst the tumultuous
cheering of his guests and followers, made for the door
of the pavilion, and seized his own banner, which stood pitched
before it.

  ``Nay, my lord,'' said Conrade, affecting to interfere, ``it will
blemish your wisdom to make an affray in the camp at this hour,
and perhaps it is better to submit to the usurpation of England
a little longer than to''------

  ``Not an hour---not a moment longer,'' vociferated the Duke
and, with the banner in his hand, and followed by his shouting
guests and attendants, marched hastily to the central mount,
from which the banner of England floated, and laid his hand on
the standard-spear, as if to pluck it from the ground.

  ``My master, my dear master!'' said Jonas Schwanker,
throwing his arms about the Duke---``take heed---lions have
teeth''------

  ``And eagles have claws,'' said the Duke, not relinquishing
his hold on the banner-staff, yet hesitating to pull it from the
ground.

  The speaker of sentences, notwithstanding such was his occupation,
had nevertheless some intervals of sound sense. He
clashed his staff loudly, and Leopold, as if by habit, turned his
head towards his man of counsel.

  ``The eagle is king among the fowls of the air,'' said the
_spruch-sprecher,_ ``as is the lion among the beasts of the field---
each has his dominion, separated as wide as England and Germany---
do thou, noble eagle, no dishonour to the princely lion,
but, let your banners remain floating in peace side by side.''

  Leopold withdrew his hand from the banner-spear, and looked
round for Conrade of Montserrat, but he saw him not; for the,
Marquis, so soon as he saw the mischief afoot, had withdrawn
himself from the crowd, taking care, in the first place, to express
before several neutral persons his regret, that the Archduke
should have chosen the hours after dinner to avenge any wrong
of which he might think he had a right to complain. Not seeing
his guest, to whom he wished more particularly to have addressed
himself, the Archduke said aloud, that, having no wish
to breed dissension in the army of the Cross, he did but vindicate
his own privileges and right to stand upon an equality with the
King of England, without desiring, as he might have done, to
advance his banner, which he derived from Emperors, his progenitors,
above that of a mere descendant of the Counts of Anjou;
and, in the meantime, he commanded a cask of wine to be brought
hither and pierced, for regaling the bystanders, whop with tuck
of drum and sound of music, quaffed many a carouse round the
Austrian standard.

  This disorderly scene was not acted without a degree of noise,
which alarmed the whole camp.

  The critical hour had arrived, at which the physician, according
to the rules of his art, had predicted that his royal patient
might be awakened with safety, and the sponge had been applied
for that purpose; and the leech had not made many observations
ere he assured the Baron of Gilsland that the fever had entirely
left his sovereign, and that such was the happy strength of his
constitution, it would not be even necessary, as in most ewes, to
give a second dose of the powerful medicine. Richard himself
seemed to be of the same opinion, for, sitting up and rubbing
his eyes, he demanded of De Vaux what present sum of money
was in the royal coffers.

  The baron could not exactly inform him of the amount.

  ``It matters not,'' said Richard; ``be it greater or smaller,
bestow it all on this learned leech, who hath, I trust, given me
back again to the service of the Crusade. If it be less than a
thousand byzants, let him have jewels to make it up.''

  ``I sell not the wisdom with which Allah has endowed me,''
answered the Arabian physician; ``and be it known to you,
great Prince, that the divine medicine, of which you have partaken,
would lose its effects in my unworthy hands, did I exchange
its virtues either for gold or diamonds.''

  ``The physician refuseth a gratuity!'' said De Vaux to himself.
``This is more extraordinary than his being an hundred
years old.''

  ``Thomas de Vaux,'' said Richard, ``thou knowest no courage
but what belongs to the sword, no bounty and virtue but what
are used in chivalry---I tell thee that this Moor, in his independence,
might set an example to them who account themselves
the flower of knighthood.''

  ``It is reward enough for me,'' said the Moor, folding his
arms on his bosom, and maintaining an attitude at once respectful
and dignified, ``that so great a King as the Melech Ric<*>

* Richard was thus called by the Eastern nations.

should thus speak of his servant.---But now, let me pray you
again to compose yourself on your couch; for though I think
there needs no farther repetition of the divine draught, yet injury
might ensue from any too early exertion, ere your strength be
entirely restored.''

  ``I must obey thee, Hakim,'' said the King; ``yet, believe
me, my bosom feels so free from the wasting fire, which for so
many days hath scorched it, that I care not how soon I expose
it to a brave man's lance.---But hark! what mean these shouts,
and that distant music, in the camp? Go, Thomas de Vaux,
and make inquiry.''

  ``It is the Archduke Leopold,'' said De Vaux, returning after
a minute's absence, ``who makes with his pot companions some
procession through the camp.''

  ``The drunken fool!'' exclaimed King Richard, ``can he not
keep his brutal inebriety within the veil of his pavilion, that
he must needs show his shame to all Christendom?---What say
you, Sir Marquis?'' he added, addressing himself to Conrade of
Montserrat, who at that moment entered the tent.

  ``Thus much, honoured Prince,'' answered the Marquis, ``that
I delight to see your Majesty so well, and so far recovered; and
that is a long speech for any one to make who has partaken of
the Duke of Austria's hospitality''

  ``What! you have been dining with the Teutonic wineskin,''
said the monarch; ``and what frolic has he found out to cause
all this disturbance? Truly, Sir Conrade, I have still held you
so good a reveller, that I wonder at your quitting the game.''

  De Vaux, who had got a little behind the King, now exerted
himself, by look and sign, to make the Marquis understand that
he should say nothing to Richard of what was passing without.
But Conrade understood not, or heeded not, the prohibition.

  ``What the Archduke does,'' he said, ``is of little consequence
to any one, least of all to himself, since he probably knows not
what he is acting---yet, to say truth, it is a gambol I should
not like to share in, since he is pulling down the banner of
England from Saint George's Mount in the centre of the camp
yonder, and displaying his own in its stead.''

  ``=What= say'st thou?'' said the King, in a tone which might
have waked the dead.

  ``Nay,'' said the Marquis, ``let it not chafe your Highness,
that a fool should act according to his folly''------

  ``Speak not to me,'' said Richard, springing from his couch,
and casting on his clothes with a despatch which seemed marvellous---
``speak not to me, Lord Marquis!---De Multon, I
command thee speak not a word to me---he that breathes but a
syllable is no friend to Richard Plantagenet.---Hakim, be silent,
I charge thee!''

  All this while the King was hastily clothing himself, and,
with the last word, snatched his sword from the pillar of the
tent, and without any other weapon, or calling any attendance,
he rushed out of the tent. Conrade, holding up his hands, as
if in astonishment, seemed willing to enter into conversation
with De Vaux, but Sir Thomas pushed rudely past him, and
calling to one of the royal equerries, said hastily,---``Fly to
Lord Salisbury's quarters, and let him get his men together,
and follow me instantly to Saint George's Mount. Tell him
the King's fever has left his blood, and settled in his brain.''

  Imperfectly heard, and still more imperfectly comprehended,
by the startled attendant whom De Vaux addressed thus hastily,
the equerry and his fellow-servants of the royal chamber rushed
hastily into the tents of the neighbouring nobility, and quickly
spread an alarm, as general as the cause seemed vague, through
the whole British forces. The English soldiers, waked in alarm
from that noon-day rest which the heat of the climate had taught
them to enjoy as a luxury, hastily asked each other the cause of
the tumult, and, without waiting an answer, supplied, by the
force of their own fancy, the want of information. Some said
the Saracens were in the camp, some that the King's life was
attempted, some that he had died of the fever the preceding
night, many that he was assassinated by the Duke of Austria.
The nobles and officers, at an equal loss with the common men
to ascertain the real cause of the disorder, laboured only to get
their followers under arms and under authority, lest their rashness
should occasion some great misfortune to the Crusading
army. The English trumpets sounded loud, shrill, and continuously.
The alarm-cry of ``Bows and bills---bows and bills!''
was heard from quarter to quarter, again and again shouted, and
again and again answered by the presence of the ready warriors,
and their national invocation, ``Saint George for Merry England!''

  The alarm went through the nearest quarter of the camp,
and men of all the various nations assembled, where, perhaps,
every people in Christendom had their representatives, flew to
arms, and drew together under circumstances of general confusion,
of which they knew neither the cause nor the object.
It was, however, lucky, amid a scene so threatening, that the
Earl of Salisbury, while he hurried after De Vaux's summons,
with a few only of the readiest English men-at-arms, directed
the rest of the English host to be drawn up and kept under
arms, to advance to Richard's succour if necessity should require,
but in fit array, and under due command, and not with the
tumultuary haste which their own alarm, and zeal for the King's
safety, might have dictated.

  In the meanwhile, without regarding for one instant the
shouts, the cries, the tumult, which began to thicken around
him, Richard, with his dress in the last disorder, and his
sheathed blade under his arm, pursued his way with the utmost
speed, followed only by De Vaux, and one or two household
servants, to Saint George's Mount.

  He outsped even the alarm which his impetuosity only had
excited, and passed the quarter of his own gallant troops of
Normandy, Poitou, Gascony, and Anjou, before the disturbance
had reached them, although the noise accompanying the German
revel had induced many of the soldiery to get on foot to listen.
The handful of Scots were also quartered in the vicinity, nor
had they been disturbed by the uproar. But the King's person,
and his haste, were both remarked by the Knight of the Leopard,
who, aware that danger must be afoot, and hastening to share
in it, snatched his shield and sword, and united himself to De
Vaux, who, with some difficulty, kept with his impatient and
fiery master. De Vaux answered a look of curiosity, which the
Scottish knight directed towards him, with a shrug of his broad
shoulders, and they continued, side by side, to pursue Richard's
steps.

  The King was soon at the foot of Saint George's Mount, the
sides as well as platform of which were now surrounded and
crowded, partly by those belonging to the Duke of Austria's
retinue, who were celebrating, with shouts of jubilee, the act
which they considered as an assertion of national honour; partly
by bystanders of different nations, whom dislike to the English,
or mere curiosity, had assembled together, to witness the end of
these extraordinary proceedings. Through this disorderly troop
Richard burst his way, like a goodly ship under full sail, which
cleaves her forcible passage through the rolling billows, and heeds
not that they unite after her passage, and roar upon her stem.

  The summit of the eminence was a small level space, on
which were pitched the rival banners, surrounded still by the
Archduke's friends and retinue. In the midst of the circle was
Leopold himself, still contemplating with self-satisfaction the
deed he had done, and still listening to the shouts of applause
which his partisans bestowed with no sparing breath. While
he was in this state of self-gratulation, Richard burst into the
circle, attended, indeed, only by two men, but in his own head-long
energies an irresistible host.

  ``Who has dared,'' he said, laying his hands upon the Austrian
standard, and speaking in a voice like the sound which precedes
an earthquake; ``who has dared to place this paltry rag beside
the banner of England?''

  The Archduke wanted not personal courage, and it was impossible
he could hear this question without reply. Yet, so
much was he troubled and surprised by the unexpected arrival
of Richard, and affected by the general awe inspired by his
ardent and unyielding character, that the demand was twice
repeated, in a tone which seemed to challenge heaven and earth,
ere the Archduke replied, with such firmness as he could command,
``It was I, Leopold of Austria.''

  ``Then shall Leopold of Austria,'' replied Richard, ``presently
see the rate at which his banner and his pretensions are held by
Richard of England.''

  So saying, he pulled up the standard-spear, splintered it to
pieces, threw the banner itself on the ground, and placed his
foot upon it.

  ``Thus,'' said he, ``I trample on the banner of Austria---Is
there a knight among your Teutonic chivalry, dare impeach my
deed?''

  There was a momentary silence; but there are no braver men
than the Germans.

  ``I,'' and ``I,'' and ``I,'' was heard from several knights of
the Duke's followers; and he himself added his voice to those
which accepted the King of England's defiance.

  ``Why do we dally thus?'' said the Earl Wallenrode, a
gigantic warrior from the frontiers of Hungary: ``Brethren,
and noble gentlemen, this man's foot is on the honour of your
country---Let us rescue it from violation, and down with the
pride of England!''

  So saying, he drew his sword, and struck at the King a blow
which might have proved fatal, had not the Scot intercepted
and caught it upon his shield.

  ``I have sworn,'' said King Richard---and his voice was
heard above all the tumult, which now waxed wild and loud---
``never to strike one whose shoulder bears the cross; therefore
live, Wallenrode---but live to remember Richard of England.''

  As he spoke, he grasped the tall Hungarian round the waist,
and, unmatched in wrestling, as in other military exercises,
hurled him backwards with such violence, that the mass flew
as if discharged from a military engine, not only through the
ring of spectators who witnessed the extraordinary scene, but
over the edge of the mount itself, down the steep side of which
Wallenrode rolled headlong, until, pitching at length upon his
shoulder, he dislocated the bone, and lay like one dead. This
almost supernatural display of strength did not encourage either
the Duke or any of his followers to renew a personal contest so
inauspiciously commenced. Those who stood farthest back did,
indeed, clash their swords, and cry out, ``Cut the island mastiff
to pieces!'' but those who were nearer veiled, perhaps, their
personal fears under an affected regard for order, and cried, for
the most part, ``Peace! peace! the peace of the Cross---the
peace of Holy Church and our Father the Pope!''

  These various cries of the assailants, contradicting each other,
showed their irresolution; while Richard, his foot still on the
archducal banner, glared round him, with an eye that seemed
to seek an enemy, and from which the angry nobles shrunk
appalled, as from the threatened grasp of a lion. De Vaux and
the Knight of the Leopard kept their places beside him; and
though the swords which they held were still sheathed, it was
plain that they were prompt to protect Richard's person to the
very last, and their size and remarkable strength plainly showed
the defence would be a desperate one.

  Salisbury and his attendants were also now drawing near,
with bills and partisans brandished, and bows already bended.
At this moment, King Philip of France, attended by one or
two of his nobles, came on the platform to inquire the cause of
the disturbance, and made gestures of surprise at finding the
King of England raised from his sick-bed, and confronting their
common ally the Duke of Austria in such a menacing and insulting
posture. Richard himself blushed at being discovered
by Philip, whose sagacity he respected as much as he disliked
his person, in an attitude neither becoming his character as a
monarch, nor as a Crusader; and it was observed that he withdrew
his foot, as if accidentally, from the dishonoured banner,
and exchanged his look of violent emotion for one of affected
composure and indifference. Leopold also struggled to attain
some degree of calmness, mortified as he was by having been
seen by Philip in the act of passively submitting to the insults
of the fiery King of England.

  Possessed of many of those royal qualities for which he was
termed by his subjects the August, Philip might be termed the
Ulysses, as Richard was indisputably the Achilles, of the
Crusade. The King of France was sagacious, wise, deliberate
in council, steady and calm in action, seeing clearly, and steadily
pursuing, the measures most for the interest of his kingdom---
dignified and royal in his deportment, brave in person, but a
politician rather than a warrior. The Crusade would have been
no choice of his own, but the spirit was contagious, and the
expedition was enforced upon him by the church, and by the
unanimous wish of his nobility. In any other situation, or in
a milder age, his character might have stood higher than that
of the adventurous C<oe>ur de Lion. But in the Crusade, itself
an undertaking wholly irrational, sound reason was the quality,
of all others, least estimated, and the chivalric valour which
both the age and the enterprise demanded, was considered as
debased, if mingled with the least touch of discretion. So that
the merit of Philip, compared with that of his haughty rival,
showed like the clear but minute flame of a lamp, placed near
the glare of a huge blazing torch, which, not possessing half the
utility, makes ten times more impression on the eye. Philip
felt his inferiority in public opinion with the pain natural to a
high-spirited prince; and it cannot be wondered at if he took
such opportunities as offered for placing his own character in
more advantageous contrast with that of his rival. The present
seemed one of those occasions in which prudence and calmness
might reasonably expect to triumph over obstinacy and impetuous
violence.

  ``What means this unseemly broil betwixt the sworn brethren
of the Cross---the royal Majesty of England and the princely
Duke Leopold? How is it possible that those who are the
chiefs and pillars of this holy expedition''------

  ``A truce with thy remonstrance, France,'' said Richard, enraged
inwardly at finding himself placed on a sort of equality
with Leopold, yet not knowing how to resent it---``this duke,
or prince, or pillar, if you will, hath been insolent, and I have
chastised him---that is all. Here is a coil, forsooth, because of
spurning a hound!''

  ``Majesty of France,'' said the Duke, ``I appeal to you and
every sovereign prince against the foul indignity which I have
sustained. This King of England hath pulled down my banner
---torn and trampled on it.''

  ``Because he had the audacity to plant it beside mine,'' said
Richard.

  ``My rank as thine equal entitled me,'' replied the Duke, emboldened
by the presence of Philip.

  ``Assert such equality for thy person,'' said King Richard,
``and, by Saint George, I will treat thy person as I did thy
broidered kerchief there, fit but for the meanest use to which
kerchief may be put.''

  ``Nay, but patience, brother of England,'' said Philip, ``and
I will presently show Austria that he is wrong in this matter---
Do not think, noble Duke,'' he continued, ``that, in permitting
the standard of England to occupy the highest point in our
camp, we, the independent sovereigns of the Crusade, acknowledge
any inferiority to the royal Richard. It were inconsistent
to think so; since even the oriflamme itself---the great banner
of France, to which the royal Richard himself, in respect of his
French possessions, is but a vassal---holds for the present an
inferior place to the Lions of England. But as sworn brethren
of the Cross, military pilgrims, who, laying aside the pomp and
pride of this world, are hewing with our swords the way to the
Holy Sepulchre, I myself, and the other princes, have renounced
to King Richard, from respect to his high renown and great
feats of arms, that precedence, which elsewhere, and upon other
motives, would not have been yielded. I am satisfied, that
when your royal grace of Austria shall have considered this, you
will express sorrow for having placed your banner on this spot,
and that the royal Majesty of England will then give satisfaction
for the insult he has offered.''

  The _spruch-sprecher_ and the jester had both retired to a safe
distance when matters seemed coming to blows, but returned
when words, their own commodity, seemed again about to become
the order of the day.

  The man of proverbs was so delighted with Philip's politic
speech, that he clashed his baton at the conclusion by way of
emphasis, and forgot the presence in which he was, so far as to
say aloud, that he himself had never said a wiser thing in his life.

  ``It may be so,'' whispered Jonas Schwanker, ``but we shall
be whipped if you speak so loud.''

  The Duke answered sullenly, that he would refer his quarrel
to the General Council of the Crusade---a motion which Philip
highly applauded, as qualified to take away a scandal most
harmful to Christendom.

  Richard, retaining the same careless attitude, listened to
Philip until his oratory seemed exhausted, and then said aloud,
``I am drowsy---this fever hangs about me still. Brother of
France, thou art acquainted with my humour, and that I have
at all times but few words to spare---know, therefore, at once,
I will submit a matter touching the honour of England neither
to Prince, Pope, nor Council. Here stands my banner---whatsoever
pennon shall be reared within three butts' length of it
---ay, were it the oriflamme, of which you were, I think, but
now speaking, shall be treated as that dishonoured rag; nor will
I yield other satisfaction than that which these poor limbs can
render in the lists to any bold challenge---ay, were it against
five champions instead of one.''

  ``Now,'' said the jester, whispering his companion, ``that is
as complete a piece of folly, as if I myself had said it---but
yet, I think, there may be in this matter a greater fool than
Richard yet.''

  ``And who may that be?'' asked the man of wisdom.

  ``Philip,'' said the jester, ``or our own Royal Duke, should
either accept the challenge---But oh, most sage _spruch-sprecher,_
what excellent kings would thou and I have made, since those
on whose heads these crowns have fallen, can play the proverb-monger
and the fool as completely as ourselves!''

  While these worthies plied their offices apart, Philip answered
calmly to the almost injurious defiance of Richard,---``I came
not hither to awaken fresh quarrels, contrary to the oath we
have sworn, and the holy cause in which we have engaged. I
part from my brother of England as brothers should part, and
the only strife between the Lions of England and the Lilies of
France shall be, which shall be carried deepest into the ranks
of the infidels.''

  ``It is a bargain, my royal brother,'' said Richard, stretching
out his hand with all the frankness which belonged to his rash
but generous disposition; ``and soon may we have the opportunity
to try this gallant and fraternal wager!''

  ``Let this noble Duke also partake in the friendship of this
happy moment,'' said Philip; and the Duke approached half-sullenly,
half-willing to enter into some accommodation.

  ``I think not of fools, nor of their folly,'' said Richard, carelessly;
and the Archduke, turning his back on him, withdrew
from the ground.

  Richard looked after him as he retired.

  ``There is a sort of glow-worm courage,'' he said, ``that
shows only by night. I must not leave this banner unguarded
in darkness---by daylight the look of the Lions will alone
defend it. Here, Thomas of Gilsland, I give thee the charge
of the standard---watch over the honour of England.''

  ``Her safety is yet more dear to me,'' said De Vaux, ``and
the life of Richard is the safety of England---I must have your
Highness back to your tent, and that without further tarriance.''

  ``Thou art a rough and peremptory nurse, De Vaux,'' said
the King, smiling; and then added, addressing Sir Kenneth,
``Valiant Scot, I owe thee a boon, and I will pay it richly.
There stands the banner of England! Watch it as a novice
does his armour on the night before he is dubbed---Stir not
from it three spears' length, and defend it with thy body
against injury or insult---Sound thy bugle, if thou art assailed
by more than three at once. Dost thou undertake the charge?''

  ``Willingly,'' said Kenneth; ``and will discharge it upon
penalty of my head. I will but arm me, and return hither
instantly.''

  The Kings of France and England then took formal leave
of each other, hiding, under an appearance of courtesy, the
grounds of complaint which either had against the other,---
Richard against Philip, for what he deemed an officious interference
betwixt him and Austria, and Philip against C<oe>ur de
Lion, for the disrespectful manner in which his mediation had
been received. Those whom this disturbance had assembled,
now drew off in different directions, leaving the contested
mount in the same solitude which had subsisted till interrupted
by the Austrian bravado. Men judged of the events of the day
according to their partialities; and while the English charged
the Austrian with having afforded the first ground of quarrel,
those of other nations concurred in casting the greater blame
upon the insular haughtiness and assuming character of Richard.

  ``Thou seest,'' said the Marquis of Montserrat to the Grand
Master of the Templars, ``that subtle courses are more effective
than violence. I have unloosed the bonds which held together
this bunch of sceptres and lances---thou wilt see them shortly
fall asunder.''

  ``I would have called thy plan a good one,'' said the Templar,
``had there been but one man of courage among yonder cold-blooded
Austrians, to sever the bonds of which you speak, with
his sword. A knot that is unloosed may again be fastened,
but not so the cord which has been cut to pieces.''
