




			CHAPTER THIRD.


  The warriors arose from their place of brief rest and simple
refreshment, and courteously aided each other while they carefully
replaced and adjusted the harness, from which they had
relieved for the time their trusty steeds. Each seemed familiar
with an employment, which, at that time, was a part of necessary,
and, indeed, of indispensable duty. Each also seemed to
possess, as far as the difference between the animal and rational
species admitted, the confidence and affection of the horse, which
was the constant companion of his travels and his warfare.
With the Saracen, this familiar intimacy was a part of his early
habits; for, in the tents of the Eastern military tribes, the horse
of the soldier ranks next to, and almost equal in importance
with, his wife and his family; and, with the European warrior,
circumstances, and indeed necessity, rendered his war-horse
scarcely less than his brother-in-arms. The steeds, therefore,
suffered themselves quietly to be taken from their food and
liberty, and neighed and snuffled fondly around their masters,
while they were adjusting their accoutrements for farther
travel and additional toil. And each warrior, as he prosecuted
his own task, or assisted with courtesy his companion, looked
with observant curiosity at the equipments of his fellow-traveller,
and noted particularly what struck him as peculiar in the
fashion in which he arranged his riding accoutrements.

  Ere they remounted to resume their journey, the Christian
knight again moistened his lips, and dipt his hands in the living
fountain, and said to his Pagan associate of the journey---``I
would I knew the name of this delicious fountain, that I might
hold it in my grateful remembrance; for never did water slake
more deliciously a more oppressive thirst than I have this day
experienced.''

  ``It is called in the Arabic language,'' answered the Saracen,
``by a name which signifies the Diamond of the Desert.''

  ``And well is it so named,'' replied the Christian. ``My native
valley hath a thousand springs, but not to one of them shall I
attach hereafter such precious recollection as to this solitary
fount, which bestows its liquid treasures where they are not
only delightful, but nearly indispensable.''

  ``You say truth,'' said the Saracen; ``for the curse is still on
yonder sea of death, and neither man nor beast drinks of its
waves, nor of the river which feeds without filling it, until this
inhospitable desert be passed.''

  They mounted, and pursued their journey across the sandy
waste. The ardour of noon was now past, and a light breeze
somewhat alleviated the terrors of the desert, though not without
bearing on its wings an impalpable dust, which the Saracen
little heeded, though his heavily-armed companion felt it as
such an annoyance, that he hung his iron casque at his saddle-bow,
and substituted the light riding-cap, termed in the language
of the time a _mortier,_ from its resemblance in shape to an
ordinary mortar. They rode together for some time in silence,
the Saracen performing the part of director and guide of the
journey, which he did by observing minute marks and bearings
of the distant rocks, to a ridge of which they were gradually
approaching. For a little time he seemed absorbed in the task,
as a pilot when navigating a vessel through a difficult channel;
but they had not proceeded half-a-league, when he seemed secure
of his route, and disposed, with more frankness than was usual
to his nation, to enter into conversation.

  ``You have asked the name,'' he said, ``of a mute fountain,
which hath the semblance, but not the reality, of a living thing.
Let me be pardoned to ask the name of the companion with
whom I have this day encountered, both in danger and in repose,
and which I cannot fancy unknown, even here among the deserts
of Palestine?''

  ``It is not yet worth publishing,'' said the Christian. ``Know,
however, that among the soldiers of the Cross I am called Kenneth
---Kenneth of the Couching Leopard; at home I have other
titles, but they would sound harsh in an Eastern ear. Brave
Saracen, let me ask which of the tribes of Arabia claims your
descent, and by what name you are known?''

  ``Sir Kenneth,'' said the Moslem, ``I joy that your name is
such as my lips can easily utter. For me, I am no Arab, yet
derive my descent from a line neither less wild nor less warlike.
Know, Sir Knight of the Leopard, that I am Sheerkohf,
the Lion of the Mountain, and that Kurdistan, from which I
derive my descent, holds no family more noble than that of
Seljook.''

  ``I have heard,'' answered the Christian, ``that your great
Soldan claims his blood from the same source?''

  ``Thanks to the Prophet that hath so far honoured our
mountains, as to send from their bosom him whose word is
victory,'' answered the Paynim. ``I am but as a worm before
the King of Egypt and Syria, and yet in my own land something
my name may avail.---Stranger, with how many men
didst thou come on this warfare?''

  ``By my faith,'' said Sir Kenneth, ``with aid of friends and
kinsmen, I was hardly pinched to furnish forth ten well-appointed
lances, with maybe some fifty more men, archers and
varlets included. Some have deserted my unlucky pennon---
some have fallen in battle---several have died of disease---
and one trusty armour-bearer, for whose life I am now doing
my pilgrimage, lies on the bed of sickness.''

  ``Christian,'' said Sheerkohf, ``here I have five arrows in my
quiver, each feathered from the wing of an eagle. When I
send one of them to my tents, a thousand warriors mount on
horseback---when I send another, an equal force will arise---for
the five I can command five thousand men; and if I send my
bow, ten thousand mounted riders will shake the desert. And
with thy fifty followers thou hast come to invade a land in
which I am one of the meanest!''

  ``Now, by the rood, Saracen,'' retorted the western warrior,
``thou shouldst know, ere thou vauntest thyself, that one steel
glove can crush a whole handful of hornets.''

  ``Ay, but it must first enclose them within its grasp,'' said
the Saracen, with a smile which might have endangered their
new alliance, had he not changed the subject by adding, ``And
is bravery so much esteemed amongst the Christian princes,
that thou, thus void of means and of men, canst offer, as thou
didst of late, to be my protector and security in the camp of thy
brethren?''

  ``Know, Saracen,'' said the Christian, ``since such is thy
style, that the name of a knight, and the blood of a gentleman,
entitle him to place himself on the same rank with sovereigns
even of the first degree, in so far as regards all but regal
authority and dominion. Were Richard of England himself to
wound the honour of a knight as poor as I am, he could not,
by the law of chivalry, deny him the combat.''

  ``Methinks I should like to look upon so strange a scene,''
said the Emir, ``in which a leathern belt and a pair of spurs
put the poorest on a level with the most powerful.''

  ``You must add free blood and a fearless heart,'' said the
Christian; ``then, perhaps, you will not have spoken untruly of
the dignity of knighthood.''

  ``And mix you as boldly amongst the females of your chiefs
and leaders?'' asked the Saracen.

  ``God forbid,'' said the Knight of the Leopard, ``that the
poorest Knight in Christendom should not be free, in all honourable
service, to devote his hand and sword, the fame of his actions,
and the fixed devotion of his heart, to the fairest princess who
ever wore coronet on her brow!''

  ``But a little while since,'' said the Saracen, ``and you
described love as the highest treasure of the heart---thine hath
undoubtedly been highly and nobly bestowed?''

  ``Stranger,'' answered the Christian, blushing deeply as he
spoke, ``we tell not rashly where it is we have bestowed our
choicest treasures---it is enough for thee to know, that, as thou
sayest, my love is highly and nobly bestowed---most highly---
most nobly; but if thou wouldst hear of love and broken lances,
venture thyself, as thou sayest, to the Camp of the Crusaders,
and thou wilt find exercise for thine ears, and, if thou wilt, for
thy hands too.''

  The Eastern warrior, raising himself in his stirrups, and
shaking aloft his lance, replied, ``Hardly, I fear, shall I find
one with a crossed shoulder, who will exchange with me the
cast of the jerrid.''

  ``I will not promise for that,'' replied the Knight, ``though
there be in the camp certain Spaniards, who have right good
skill in your Eastern game of hurling the javelin.''

  ``Dogs and sons of dogs!'' ejaculated the Saracen; ``what
have these Spaniards to do to come hither to combat the true
believers, who, in their own land, are their lords and task-masters?
with them I would mix in no warlike pastime.''

  ``Let not the knights of Leon or Asturias hear you speak
thus of them,'' said the Knight of the Leopard; ``but,'' added
he, smiling at the recollection of the morning's combat, ``if,
instead of a reed, you were inclined to stand the cut of a battle-axe,
there are enough of western warriors who would gratify
your longing.''

  ``By the beard of my father, sir,'' said the Saracen, with an
approach to laughter, ``the game is too rough for mere sport---
I will never shun them in battle, but my head'' (pressing his
hand to his brow) ``will not, for a while, permit me to seek
them in sport.''

  ``I would you saw the axe of King Richard,'' answered the
western warrior, ``to which that which hangs at my saddlebow
weighs but as a feather.''

  ``We hear much of that island sovereign,'' said the Saracen,
``art thou one of his subjects?''

  ``One of his followers I am, for this expedition,'' answered the
Knight, ``and honoured in the service; but not born his subject,
although a native of the island in which he reigns.''

  ``How mean you?'' said the Eastern soldier; ``have you
then two kings in one poor island?''

  ``As thou sayest,'' said the Scot, for such was Sir Kenneth
by birth,---``It is even so; and yet, although the inhabitants
of the two extremities of that island are engaged in frequent
war, the country can, as thou seest, furnish forth such a body
of men-at-arms, as may go far to shake the unholy hold which
your master hath laid on the cities of Zion.''

  ``By the beard of Saladin, Nazarene, but that it is a thoughtless
and boyish folly, I could laugh at the simplicity of your
great Sultan, who comes hither to make conquests of deserts and
rocks, and dispute the possession of them with those who have
tenfold numbers at command, while he leaves a part of his
narrow islet, in which he was born a sovereign, to the dominion
of another sceptre than his. Surely, Sir Kenneth, you and the
other good men of your country should have submitted yourself
to the dominion of this King Richard, ere you left your native
land, divided against itself, to set forth on this expedition?''

  Hasty and fierce was Kenneth's answer. ``No, by the bright
light of Heaven! If the King of England had not set forth to
the Crusade till he was sovereign of Scotland, the crescent might,
for me and all true-hearted Scots, glimmer for ever on the walls
of Zion.''

  Thus far he had proceeded, when, suddenly recollecting himself,
he muttered, ``_Mea culpa! mea culpa!_ what have I, a
soldier of the Cross, to do with recollection of war betwixt
Christian nations?''

  The rapid expression of feeling, corrected by the dictates of
duty, did not escape the Moslem, who, if he did not entirely
understand all which it conveyed, saw enough to convince him
with the assurance, that Christians, as well as Moslemah, had
private feelings of personal pique, and national quarrels, which
were not entirely reconcilable. But the Saracens were a race,
polished, perhaps, to the utmost extent which their religion
permitted, and particularly capable of entertaining high ideas
of courtesy and politeness; and such sentiments prevented his
taking any notice of the inconsistency of Sir Kenneth's feelings,
in the opposite characters of a Scot and a Crusader.

  Meanwhile, as they advanced, the scene began to change
around them. They were now turning to the eastward, and
had reached the range of steep and barren hills, which binds in
that quarter the naked plain, and varies the surface of the
country, without changing its sterile character. Sharp rocky
eminences began to arise around them, and, in a short time,
deep declivities, and ascents, both formidable in height, and
difficult from the narrowness of the path, offered to the travellers
obstacles of a different kind from those with which they
had recently contended. Dark cavern's and chasms amongst the
rocks, those grottoes so often alluded to in Scripture, yawned
fearfully on either side as they proceeded, and the Scottish
knight was informed by the Emir, that these were often the
refuge of beasts of prey, or of men still more ferocious, who,
driven to desperation by the constant war, and the oppression
exercised by the soldiery, as well of the Cross as of the Crescent,
had become robbers, and spared neither rank nor religion,
neither sex nor age, in their depredations.

  The Scottish knight listened with indifference to the accounts
of ravages committed by wild beasts or wicked men, secure as
he felt himself in his own valour and personal strength; but he
was struck with mysterious dread, when he recollected that he
was now in the awful wilderness of the forty days' fast, and the
scene of the actual personal temptation, wherewith the Evil
Principle was permitted to assail the Son of Man. He withdrew
his attention gradually from the light and worldly conversation
of the infidel warrior beside him, and, however acceptable
his gay and gallant bravery would have rendered him as a companion
elsewhere, Sir Kenneth felt as if, in those wildernesses---
the waste and dry places, in which the foul spirits were wont to
wander when expelled the mortals whose forms they possessed
---a barefooted friar would have been a better associate than the
gay but unbelieving Paynim.

  These feelings embarrassed him; the rather that the Saracen's
spirits appeared to rise with the journey, and because the farther
he penetrated into the gloomy recesses of the mountains, the
lighter became his conversation, and when he found that unanswered,
the louder grew his song. Sir Kenneth knew enough
of the Eastern languages, to be assured that he chanted sonnets
of love, containing all the glowing praises of beauty, in which
the Oriental poets are so fond of luxuriating, and which, therefore,
were peculiarly unfitted for a serious or devotional strain
of thought, the feeling best becoming the Wilderness of the
Temptation. With inconsistency enough, the Saracen also sung
lays in praise of wine, the liquid ruby of the Persian poets, and
his gaiety at length became so unsuitable to the Christian
knight's contrary train of sentiments, as, but for the promise of
amity which they had exchanged, would most likely have made
Sir Kenneth take measures to change his note. As it was, the
Crusader felt as if he had by his side some gay licentious fiend,
who endeavoured to ensnare his soul, and endanger his immortal
salvation, by inspiring loose thoughts of earthly pleasure, and
thus polluting his devotion, at a time when his faith as a
Christian, and his vow as a pilgrim, called on him for a serious
and penitential state of mind. He was thus greatly perplexed,
and undecided how to act; and it was in a tone of hasty displeasure,
that, at length breaking silence, he interrupted the lay
of the celebrated Rudpiki, in which he prefers the mole on his
mistress's bosom to all the wealth of Bokhara and Samarcand.

  ``Saracen,'' said the Crusader, sternly, ``blinded as thou art,
and plunged amidst the errors of a false law, thou shouldst yet
comprehend that there are some places more holy than others,
and that there are some scenes also, in which the Evil One hath
more than ordinary power over sinful mortals. I will not tell
thee for what awful reason this place---these rocks---these
caverns with their gloomy arches, leading as it were to the
central abyss---are held an especial haunt of Satan and his
angels. It is enough, that I have been long warned to beware
of this place by wise and holy men, to whom the qualities of
the unholy region are well known. Wherefore, Saracen, forbear
thy foolish and ill-timed levity, and turn thy thoughts to
things more suited to the spot; although, alas for thee! thy
best prayers are but as blasphemy and sin.''

  The Saracen listened with some surprise, and then replied,
with good-humour and gaiety, only so far repressed as courtesy
required, ``Good Sir Kenneth, methinks you deal unequally by
your companion, or else ceremony is but indifferently taught
amongst your western tribes. I took no offence when I saw
you gorge hog's flesh and drink wine, and permitted you to enjoy
a treat which you called your Christian liberty, only pitying
in my heart your foul pastimes---Wherefore, then, shouldst thou
take scandal, because I cheer, to the best of my power, a gloomy
road with a cheerful verse?---What saith the poet,---`Song is
like the dews of Heaven on the bosom of the desert; it cools
the path of the traveller.' ''

  ``Friend Saracen,'' said the Christian, ``I blame not the love
of minstrelsy and of the _gaie science;_ albeit we yield unto it
even too much room in our thoughts when they should be bent
on better things. But prayers and holy psalms are better
fitting than lays of love, or of wine-cups, when men walk in
this Valley of the Shadow of Death, full of fiends and demons,
whom the prayers of holy men have driven forth from the
haunts of humanity to wander amidst scenes as accursed as
themselves.''

  ``Speak not thus of the Genii, Christian,'' answered the
Saracen, ``for know thou speakest to one whose line and
nation drew their origin from the immortal race, which your
sect fear and blaspheme.''

  ``I well thought,'' answered the Crusader, ``that your blinded
race had their descent from the foul fiend, without whose aid
you would never have been able to maintain this blessed land
of Palestine against so many valiant soldiers of God. I speak
not thus of thee in particular, Saracen, but generally of thy
people and religion. Strange is it to me, however, not that
you should have the descent from the Evil One, but that you
should boast of it.''

  ``From whom should the bravest boast of descending, saving
from him that is bravest?'' said the Saracen; ``from whom
should the proudest trace their line so well as from the Dark
Spirit, which would rather fall headlong by force, than bend the
knee by his will? Eblis may be hated, stranger, but he must
be feared; and such as Eblis are his descendants of Kurdistan!''

  Tales of magic and of necromancy were the learning of the
period, and Sir Kenneth heard his companion's confession of
diabolical descent without any disbelief, and without much
wonder; yet not without a secret shudder at finding himself
in this fearful place, in the company of one who avouched
himself to belong to such a lineage. Naturally unsusceptible,
however, of fear, he crossed himself, and stoutly demanded of
the Saracen an account of the pedigree which he had boasted.
The latter readily complied.

  ``Know, brave stranger,'' he said, ``that when the cruel
Zohauk, one of the descendants of Giamschid, held the throne
of Persia, he formed a league with the Powers of Darkness,
amidst the secret vaults of Istakhar, vaults which the hands of
the elementary spirits had hewn out of the living rock long
before Adam himself had an existence. Here he fed, with
daily oblations of human blood, two devouring serpents, which
had become, according to the poets, a part of himself, and to
sustain whom he levied a tax of daily human sacrifices, till the
exhausted patience of his subjects caused some to raise up the
scimitar of resistance like the valiant Blacksmith, and the
victorious Feridoun, by whom the tyrant was at length dethroned,
and imprisoned for ever in the dismal caverns of the
mountain Damavend. But ere that deliverance had taken
place, and whilst the power of the bloodthirsty tyrant was at
its height, the band of ravening slaves, whom he had sent forth
to purvey victims for his daily sacrifice, brought to the vaults
of the palace of Istakhar seven sisters so beautiful, that they
seemed seven houris. These seven maidens were the daughters
of a sage, who had no treasures save these beauties and his own
wisdom. The last was not sufficient to foresee this misfortune,
the former seemed ineffectual to prevent it. The eldest exceeded
not her twentieth year, the youngest had scarce attained her
thirteenth; and so like were they to each other, that they could
not have been distinguished but for the difference of height,
in which they gradually rose in easy gradation above each other,
like the ascent which leads to the gates of Paradise. So lovely
were these seven sisters when they stood in the darksome vault,
disrobed of all clothing saving a cymar of white silk, that their
charms moved the hearts of those who were not mortal.
Thunder muttered, the earth shook, the wall of the vault was
rent, and at the chasm entered one dressed like a hunter, with
bow and shafts, and followed by six others, his brethren. They
were tall men, and though dark, yet comely to behold, but
their eyes had more the glare of those of the dead, than the
light which lives under the eyelids of the living. `Zeineb,'
said the leader of the band---and as he spoke he took the eldest
sister by the hand, and his voice was soft, low, and melancholy
---`I am Cothrob, king of the subterranean world, and supreme
chief of Ginnistan. I and my brethren are of those, who,
created out of the pure elementary fire, disdained, even at the
command of Omnipotence, to do homage to a clod of earth,
because it was called Man. Thou mayst have heard of us
as cruel, unrelenting, and persecuting. It is false. We are
by nature kind and generous; only vengeful when insulted, only
cruel when affronted. We are true to those who trust us; and we
have heard the invocations of thy father, the sage Mithrasp, who
wisely worships not alone the Origin of Good, but that which
is called the source of Evil. You and your sisters are on the
eve of death; but let each give to us one hair from your fair
tresses in token of fealty, and we will carry you many miles
from hence to a place of safety, where you may bid defiance to
Zohauk and his ministers.' The fear of instant death, saith
the poet, is like the rod of the prophet Haroun, which devoured
all other rods when transformed into snakes before the King of
Pharaoh; and the daughters of the Persian sage were less apt
than others to be afraid of the addresses of a spirit. They gave
the tribute which Cothrob demanded, and in an instant the
sisters were transported to an enchanted castle on the mountains
of Tugrut, in Kurdistan, and were never again seen by
mortal eye. But in process of time seven youths, distinguished
in the war and in the chase, appeared in the environs of the
castle of the demons. They were darker, taller, fiercer, and
more resolute, than any of the scattered inhabitants of the
valleys of Kurdistan; and they took to themselves wives, and
became fathers of the seven tribes of the Kurdmans, whose
valour is known throughout the universe.''

  The Christian Knight heard with wonder the wild tale, of
which Kurdistan still possesses the traces, and after a moment's
thought, replied,---``Verily, Sir Knight, you have spoken well---
your genealogy may be dreaded and hated, but it cannot be
contemned. Neither do I any longer wonder at your obstinacy
in a false faith; since doubtless it is part of the fiendish
disposition which hath descended from your ancestors, those
infernal huntsmen, as you have described them, to love falsehood
rather than truth; and I no longer marvel that your
spirits become high and exalted, and vent themselves in verse
and in tunes, when you approach to the places encumbered by
the haunting of evil spirits, which must excite in you that
joyous feeling which others experience when approaching the
land of their human ancestry.''

  ``By my father's beard, I think thou hast the right,'' said
the Saracen, rather amused than offended by the freedom with
which the Christian had uttered his reflections; ``for, though
the Prophet (blessed be his name!) hath sown amongst us the
seed of a better faith than our ancestors learned in the ghostly
halls of Tugrut, yet we are not willing, like other Moslemah,
to pass hasty doom on the lofty and powerful elementary spirits
from whom we claim our origin. These Genii, according to
our belief and hope, are not altogether reprobate, but are still
in the way of probation, and may hereafter be punished or
rewarded. Leave we this to the mollahs and the imaums.
Enough that with us the reverence for these spirits is not altogether
effaced by what we have learned from the Koran, and
that many of us still sing, in memorial of our fathers' more
ancient faith, such verses as these.''

  So saying, he proceeded to chant verses, very ancient in the
language and structure, which some have thought derive their
source from the worshippers of Arimanes, the Evil Principle.

		AHRIMAN

	Dark Ahriman, whom Irak still
	Holds origin of woe and ill!
	    When, bending at thy shrine,
	We view the world with troubled eye,
	Where see we 'neath the extended sky,
	    An empire matching thine?

	If the Benigner Power can yield
	A fountain in the desert field,
	    Where weary pilgrims drink;
	Thine are the waves that lash the rock,
	Thine the tornado's deadly shock,
	    Where countless navies sink!

	Or if He bid the soil dispense
	Balsams to cheer the sinking sense,
	    How few can they deliver
	From lingering pains, or pang intense,
	Red Fever, spotted Pestilence,
	    The arrows of thy quiver!

	Chief in Man's bosom sits thy sway,
	And frequent, while in words we pray
	    Before another throne,
	Whate'er of specious form be there,
	The secret meaning of the prayer
	    Is, Ahriman, thine own.

	Say, hast thou feeling, sense, and form,
	Thunder thy voice, thy garments storm,
	    As Eastern Magi say;
	With sentient soul of hate and wrath,
	And wings to sweep thy deadly path,
	    And fangs to tear thy prey?

	Or art thou mix'd in Nature's source,
	An ever-operating force,
	    Converting good to ill;
	An evil principle innate,
	Contending with our better fate,
	    And oh! victorious still?

	Howe'er it be, dispute is vain,
	On all without thou hold'st thy reign,
	    Nor less on all within;
	Each mortal passion's fierce career,
	Love, hate, ambition, joy, and fear,
	    Thou goadest into sin.

	Whene'er a sunny gleam appears,
	To brighten up our vale of tears,
	    Thou art not distant far;
	'Mid such brief solace of our lives,
	Thou whett'st our very banquet-knives
	    To tools of death and war.

	Thus, from the moment of our birth,
	Long as we linger on the earth,
	    Thou rul'st the fate of men;
	Thine are the pangs of life's last hour,
	And---who dare answer?---is thy power,
	    Dark Spirit! ended =Then?=<*>

*   The worthy and learned clergyman, by whom this species of hymn has been
* translated, desires, that, for fear of misconception, we should warn the reader to
* recollect that it is composed by a heathen, to whom the real causes of moral and
* physical evil are unknown, and who views their predominance in the system of
* the universe as all must view that appalling fact, who have not the benefit of the
* Christian Revelation. On our own part, we beg to add, that we understand the
* style of the translator is more paraphrastic than can be approved by those who are
* acquainted with the singularly curious original. The translator seems to have
* despaired of rendering into English verse the flights of Oriental poetry; and possibly,
* like many learned and ingenious men, finding it impossible to discover the
* sense of the original, he may have tacitly substituted his own.
*
*   The gentle and candid reader may believe this worthy and learned clergyman or
* not, as shall be most pleasing to himself.


  These verses may perhaps have been the riot unnatural effusion
of some half-enlightened philosopher, who, in the fabled
deity, Arimanes, saw but the prevalence of moral and physical
evil; but in the ears of Sir Kenneth of the Leopard, they had
a different effect, and, sung as they were by one who had just
boasted himself a descendant of demons, sounded very like an
address of worship to the Arch-fiend himself. He weighed
within himself, whether, on hearing such blasphemy in the very
desert where Satan had stood rebuked for demanding homage,
taking an abrupt leave of the Saracen was sufficient to testify
his abhorrence; or whether he was not rather constrained by
his vow as a Crusader, to defy the infidel to combat on the spot,
and leave him food for the beasts of the wilderness, when his
attention was suddenly caught by an unexpected apparition.

  The light was now verging low, yet served the knight still to
discern that they two were no longer alone in the forest, but were
closely watched by a figure of great height and very thin, which
skipped over rocks and bushes with so much agility, as, added
to the wild and hirsute appearance of the individual, reminded
him of the fauns and silvans, whose images he had seen in the
ancient temples of Rome. As the single-hearted Scotsman had
never for a moment doubted these gods of the ancient Gentiles
to be actually devils, so he now hesitated not to believe that
the blasphemous hymn of the Saracen had raised up an infernal
spirit.

  ``But what recks it!'' said stout Sir Kenneth to himself;
``down with the fiend and his worshippers!''

  He did not, however, think it necessary to give the same
warning of defiance to two enemies, as he would unquestionably
have afforded to one. His hand was upon his mace, and perhaps
the unwary Saracen would have been paid for his Persian poetry
by having his brains dashed out on the spot, without any reason
assigned for it; but the Scottish knight was spared from committing
what would have been a sore blot in his shield of arms.
The apparition, on which his eyes had been fixed for some time,
had at first appeared to dog their path by concealing itself behind
rocks and shrubs, using those advantages of the ground with
great address, and surmounting its irregularities with surprising
agility. At length, just as the Saracen paused in his song, the
figure, which was that of a tall man clothed in goat-skins, sprung
into the midst of the path, and seized a rein of the Saracen's
bridle in either hand, confronting thus and bearing back the
noble horse, which, unable to endure the manner in which this
sudden assailant pressed the long-armed bit, and the severe curb,
which, according to the Eastern fashion, was a solid ring of iron,
reared upright, and finally fell backwards on his master, who,
however, avoided the peril of the fall, by lightly throwing himself
to one side.

  The assailant then shifted his grasp from the bridle of the
horse to the throat of the rider, flung himself above the struggling
Saracen, and, despite of his youth and activity, kept him
undermost, wreathing his long arms above those of his prisoner,
who called out angrily, and yet, half-laughing at the same time
---``Hamako---fool---unloose me---this passes thy privilege---
unloose me, or I will use my dagger.''

  ``Thy dagger!---infidel dog!'' said the figure in the goat-skins;
``hold it in thy gripe if thou canst!'' and in an instant
he wrenched the Saracen's weapon out of its owner's hand, and
brandished it over his head.

  ``Help, Nazarene!'' cried Sheerkohf, now seriously alarmed,
``help, or the Hamako will slay me.''

  ``Slay thee!'' replied the dweller of the desert; ``and well
hast thou merited death, for singing thy blasphemous hymns,
not only to the praise of thy false prophet, who is the foul fiend's
harbinger, but to the Author of Evil himself.''

  The Christian Knight had hitherto looked on as one stupified,
so strangely had this rencontre contradicted, in its progress and
event, all that he had previously conjectured. He felt, however,
at length, that it touched his honour to interfere in behalf of his
discomfited companion; and therefore addressed himself to the
victorious figure in the goat-skins.

  ``Whosoe'er thou art,'' he said, ``and whether of good or of
evil, know that I am sworn for the time to be true companion
to the Saracen whom thou holdest under thee; therefore, I
pray thee to let him arise, else I will do battle with thee in his
behalf.''

  ``And a proper quarrel it were,'' answered the Hamako, ``for
a Crusader to do battle in---for the sake of an unbaptized dog
to combat one of his own holy faith! Art thou come forth to
the wilderness to fight for the Crescent against the Cross? A
goodly soldier of God art thou to listen to those who sing the
praises of Satan!''

  Yet while he spoke thus, he arose himself, and, suffering the
Saracen to arise also, returned him his cangiar, or poniard.

  ``Thou seest to what a point of peril thy presumption hath
brought thee,'' continued he of the goat-skins, now addressing
Sheerkohf, ``and by what weak means thy practised skill and
boasted agility can be foiled, when such is Heaven's pleasure.
Wherefore, beware, O Ilderim! for know that, were there not
a twinkle in the star of thy nativity, which promises for thee
something that is good and gracious in Heaven's good time, we
two had not parted till I had torn asunder the throat which so
lately thrilled forth blasphemies.''

  ``Hamako,'' said the Saracen, without any appearance of
resenting the violent language, and yet more violent assault, to
which he had been subjected, ``I pray thee, good Hamako, to
beware how thou dost again urge thy privilege over far; for
though, as a good Moslem, I respect those whom Heaven hath
deprived of ordinary reason, in order to endow them with the
spirit of prophecy, yet I like not other men's hands on the bridle
of my horse, neither upon my own person. Speak, therefore,
what thou wilt, secure of any resentment from me; but gather
so much sense as to apprehend, that if thou shalt again proffer
me any violence, I will strike thy shagged head from thy meagre
shoulders.---And to thee, friend Kenneth,'' he added, as he
remounted his steed, ``I must needs say, that, in a companion
through the desert, I love friendly deeds better than fair words.
Of the last thou hast given me enough; but it had been better to
have aided me more speedily in my struggle with this Hamako,
who had well-nigh taken my life in his frenzy.''

  ``By my faith,'' said the Knight, ``I did somewhat fail---was
somewhat tardy in rendering thee instant help; but the strangeness
of the assailant, the suddenness of the scene---it was as if
thy wild and wicked lay had raised the devil among us---and
such was my confusion, that two or three minutes elapsed ere I
could take to my weapon.''

  ``Thou art but a cold and considerate friend,'' said the
Saracen; ``and, had the Hamako been one grain more frantic,
thy companion had been slain by thy side, to thy eternal dishonour,
without thy stirring a finger in his aid, although thou
satest by, mounted and in arms.''

  ``By my word, Saracen,'' said the Christian, ``if thou wilt
have it in plain terms, I thought that strange figure was the
devil; and being of thy lineage, I knew not what family secret
you might be communicating to each other, as you lay lovingly
rolling together on the sand.''

  ``Thy gibe is no answer, brother Kenneth,'' said the Saracen;
``for know, that had my assailant been in very deed the Prince
of Darkness, thou wert bound not the less to enter into combat
with him in thy comrade's behalf. Know, also, that whatever
there may be of foul or of fiendish about the Hamako, belongs
more to your lineage than to mine, this Hamako being, in
truth, the anchorite whom thou art come hither to visit.''

  ``This?'' said Sir Kenneth, looking at the athletic yet wasted
figure before him---``this!---thou mockest, Saracen---this cannot
be the venerable Theodorick!''

  ``Ask himself, if thou wilt not believe me,'' answered Sheerkohf;
and ere the words had left his mouth, the hermit gave
evidence in his own behalf.

  ``I am Theodorick of Engaddi,'' he said---``I am the walker
of the desert---I am friend of the cross, and flail of all infidels,
heretics, and devil-worshippers. Avoid ye, avoid ye!---Down
with Mahound, Termagaunt, and all their adherents!''---So
saying, he pulled from under his shaggy garment a sort of flail,
or jointed club, bound with iron, which he brandished round his
head with singular dexterity.

  ``Thou see'st thy saint,'' said the Saracen, laughing, for the
first time, at the unmitigated astonishment with which Sir
Kenneth looked on the wild gestures, and heard the wayward
muttering of Theodorick, who, after swinging his flail in every
direction, apparently quite reckless whether it encountered the
head of either of his companions, finally showed his own strength
and the soundness of the weapon, by striking into fragments a
large stone which lay near him.

  ``This is a madman,'' said Sir Kenneth.

  ``Not the worse saint,'' returned the Moslem, speaking
according to the well-known Eastern belief, that madmen are
under the influence of immediate inspiration. ``Know, Christian,
that when one eye is extinguished, the other becomes
more keen---when one hand is cut off, the other becomes
more powerful; so, when our reason in human things is disturbed
or destroyed, our view heavenward becomes more acute
and perfect.''

  Here the voice of the Saracen was drowned in that of the
hermit, who began to hollo aloud in a wild chanting tone,---
``I am Theodorick of Engaddi---I am the torch-brand of the
desert---I am the flail of the infidels! The lion and the leopard
shall be my comrades, and draw nigh to my cell for
shelter; neither shall the goat be afraid of their fangs---I am
the torch and the lantern---Kyrie Eleison!''

  He closed his song by a short race, and ended that again by
three forward bounds, which would have done him great credit
in a gymnastic academy, but became his character of hermit so
indifferently, that the Scottish knight was altogether confounded
and bewildered.

  The Saracen seemed to understand him better. ``You see,''
he said, ``that he expects us to follow him to his cell, which,
indeed, is our only place of refuge for the night. You are the
leopard, from the portrait on your shield---I am the lion, as
my name imports---and, by the goat, alluding to his garb of
goat-skins, he means himself. We must keep him in sight,
however, for he is as fleet as a dromedary.''

  In fact, the task was a difficult one, for though the reverend
guide stopped from time to time, and waved his hand, as if to
encourage them to come on, yet, well acquainted with all the
winding dells and passes of the desert, and gifted with uncommon
activity, which, perhaps, an unsettled state of mind kept
in constant exercise, he led the knights through chasms, and
along footpaths, where even the light-armed Saracen, with his
well-trained barb, was in considerable risk, and where the iron-sheathed
European, and his over-burdened horse, found themselves
in such imminent peril, as the rider would gladly have
exchanged for the dangers of a general action. Glad he was
when, at length, after this wild race, he beheld the holy man
who had led it standing in front of a cavern, with a large torch
in his hand, composed of a piece of wood dipped in bitumen,
which cast a broad and flickering light, and emitted a strong
sulphurous smell.

  Undeterred by the stifling vapour, the knight threw himself
from his horse and entered the cavern, which afforded small
appearance of accommodation. The cell was divided into two
parts, in the outward of which were an altar of stone, and a
crucifix made of reeds: This served the anchorite for his chapel.
On one side of this outward cave the Christian knight, though
not without scruple, arising from religious reverence to the
objects around, fastened up his horse, and arranged him for the
night, in imitation of the Saracen, who gave him to understand
that such was the custom of the place. The hermit, meanwhile,
was busied putting his inner apartment in order to receive his
guests, and there they soon joined him. At the bottom of the
outer cave, a small aperture closed with a door of rough plank
led into the sleeping apartment of the hermit, which was more
commodious. The floor had been brought to a rough level by
the labour of the inhabitant, and then strewed with white sand,
which he daily sprinkled with water from a small fountain
which bubbled out of the rock in one corner, affording, in that
stifling climate, refreshment alike to the ear and the taste.
Mattresses, wrought of twisted flags, lay by the side of the cell;
the sides, like the floor, had been roughly brought to shape, and
several herbs and flowers were hung around them. Two waxen
torches, which the hermit lighted, gave a cheerful air to the place,
which was rendered agreeable by its fragrance and coolness.

  There were implements of labour in one corner of the apartment,
in another was a niche for a rude statue of the Virgin.
A table and two chairs showed that they must be the handiwork
of the anchorite, being different in their form from Oriental
accommodations. The former was covered, not only with reeds
and pulse, but also with dried flesh, which Theodorick assiduously
placed in such arrangement as should invite the appetite
of his guests. This appearance of courtesy, though mute, and
expressed by gesture only, seemed to Sir Kenneth something
entirely irreconcilable with his former wild and violent demeanour.
The movements of the hermit were now become composed,
and apparently it was only a sense of religious humiliation which
prevented his features, emaciated as they were by his austere
mode of life, from being majestic and noble. He trod his cell,
as one who seemed born to rule over men, but who had abdicated
his empire to become the servant of Heaven. Still, it
must be allowed that his gigantic size, the length of his unshaven
locks and beard, and the fire of a deep-set and wild eye, were
rather attributes of a soldier than of a recluse.

  Even the Saracen seemed to regard the anchorite with some
veneration, while he was thus employed, and he whispered
in a low tone to Sir Kenneth, ``The Hamako is now in his
better mind, but he will not speak until we have eaten---such
is his vow.''

  It was in silence, accordingly, that Theodorick motioned to
the Scot to take his place on one of the low chairs, while
Sheerkohf placed himself, after the custom of his nation, upon
a cushion of mats. The hermit then held up both hands, as if
blessing the refreshment which he had placed before his guests,
and they proceeded to eat in silence as profound as his own.
To the Saracen this gravity was natural, and the Christian
imitated his taciturnity, while he employed his thoughts on the
singularity of his own situation, and the contrast betwixt the
wild, furious gesticulations, loud cries, and fierce actions of
Theodorick, when they first met him, and the demure, solemn,
decorous assiduity with which he now performed the duties of
hospitality.

  When their meal was ended, the hermit, who had not himself
eaten a morsel, removed the fragments from the table, and
placing before the Saracen a pitcher of sherbet, assigned to the
Scot a flask of wine.

  ``Drink,'' he said, ``my children,''---they were the first words
he had spoken,---``the gifts of God are to be enjoyed, when the
Giver is remembered.''

  Having said this he retired to the outward cell, probably for
performance of his devotions, and left his guests together in
the inner apartment, when Sir Kenneth endeavoured, by various
questions, to draw from Sheerkohf what that Emir know
concerning his host. He was interested by more than mere
curiosity in these inquiries. Difficult as it was to reconcile the
outrageous demeanour of the recluse at his first appearance, to
his present humble and placid behaviour, it seemed yet more
impossible to think it consistent with the high consideration in
which, according to what Sir Kenneth had learned, this hermit
was held by the most enlightened divines of the Christian
world. Theodorick, the Hermit of Engaddi, had, in that
character, been the correspondent of popes and councils; to
whom his letters, full of eloquent fervour, had described the
miseries imposed by the unbelievers upon the Latin Christians
in the Holy Land, in colours scarce inferior to those employed
at the Council of Clermont by the Hermit Peter, when he
preached the first Crusade. To find, in a person so reverend,
and so much revered, the frantic gestures of a mad fakir, induced
the Christian knight to pause ere he could resolve to
communicate to him certain important matters, which he had
in charge from some of the leaders of the Crusade.

  It had been a main object of Sir Kenneth's pilgrimage, attempted
by a route so unusual, to make such communications;
but what he had that night seen induced him to pause and
reflect ere he proceeded to the execution of his commission.
From the Emir he could not extract much information, but the
general tenor was as follows:---That, as he had heard, the hermit
had been once a brave and valiant soldier, wise in council,
and fortunate in battle, which last he could easily believe from
the great strength and agility which he had often seen him display;
---that he had appeared at Jerusalem in the character, not
of a pilgrim, but in that of one who had devoted himself to
dwell for the remainder of his life in the Holy Land. Shortly
afterwards he fixed his residence amid the scenes of desolation
where they now found him, respected by the Latins for his
austere devotion, and by the Turks and Arabs on account of
the symptoms of insanity which he displayed, and which they
ascribed to inspiration. It was from them he had the name
of Hamako, which expresses such a character in the Turkish
language. Sheerkohf himself scorned at a loss how to rank
their host, He had been, he said, a wise man, and could often
for many hours together speak lessons of virtue or wisdom,
without the slightest appearance of inaccuracy. At other times
he was wild and violent, but never before had he seen him so
mischievously disposed as he had that day appeared to be. His
rage was chiefly provoked by any affront to his religion; and
here was a story of some wandering Arabs, who had insulted
his worship and defaced his altar, and whom he had on that
account attacked and slain with the short flail which he carried
roving tribes to respect his dwelling and his chapel. His fame
had spread so far, that Saladin had issued particular orders
that he should be spared and protected. He himself, and other
Moslem lords of rank, had visited the cell more than once,
partly from curiosity, partly that they expected from a man so
learned as the Christian Hamako, some insight into the secrets
of futurity. ``He had,'' continued the Saracen, ``a rashid, or
observatory, of great height, contrived to view the heavenly
bodies, and particularly the planetary system; by whose movements
and influences, as both Christian and Moslem believed,
the course of human events was regulated, and might be
predicted.''

  This was the substance of the Emir Sheerkohf's information,
and it left Sir Kenneth in doubt whether the character of insanity
arose from the occasional excessive fervour of the hermit's
zeal, or whether it was not altogether fictitious, and assumed
for the sake of the immunities which it afforded. Yet it seemed
that the infidels had carried their complaisance towards him to
an uncommon length, considering the fanaticism of the followers
of Mohammed, in the midst of whom he was living, though the
professed enemy of their faith. He thought, also, there was
more intimacy of acquaintance betwixt the hermit and the Saracen,
than the words of the latter had induced him to anticipate;
and it had not escaped him that the former had called the latter
by a name different from that which he himself had assumed.
All these considerations authorised caution, if not suspicion.
He determined to observe his host closely, and not to be over
hasty in communicating with him on the important charge intrusted
to him.

  ``Beware, Saracen,'' he said; ``methinks our host's imagination
wanders as well on the subject of names as upon other
matters. Thy name is Sheerkohf, and he called thee but now
by another.''

  ``My name, when in the tent of my father,'' replied the Kurdman,
``was Ilderim, and by this I am still distinguished by many.
In the field, and to soldiers, I am known as the Lion of the
Mountain, being the name my good sword hath won for me.---
But hush, the Hamako comes---it is to warn us to rest---I know
his custom---none must watch him at his vigils.''

  The anchorite accordingly entered, and folding his arms on
his bosom as he stood before them, said with a solemn voice---
``Blessed be His name, who hath appointed the quiet night to
follow the busy day, and the calm sleep to refresh the wearied
limbs and to compose the troubled spirit!''

  Both warriors replied ``Amen!'' and, arising from the table,
prepared to betake themselves to the couches, which their host
indicated by waving his hand, as, making a reference to each,
he again withdrew from the apartment.

  The Knight of the Leopard then disarmed himself of his
heavy panoply, his Saracen companion kindly assisting him to
undo his buckler and clasps, until he remained in the close
dress of chamois leather, which knights and men-at-arms used
to wear under their harness. The Saracen, if he had admired
the strength of his adversary when sheathed in steel, was now
no less struck with the accuracy of proportion displayed in his
nervous and well-compacted figure. The knight, on the other
hand, as, in exchange of courtesy, he assisted the Saracen to
disrobe himself of his upper garments, that he might sleep with
more convenience, was, on his side, at a loss to conceive how
such slender proportions and slimness of figure could be reconciled
with the vigour he had displayed in personal contest.

  Each warrior prayed ere he addressed himself to his place of
rest. The Moslem turned towards his _kebla,_ the point to which
the prayer of each follower of the Prophet was to be addressed,
and murmured his heathen orisons, while the Christian, withdrawing
from the contamination of the infidel's neighbourhood,
placed his huge cross-handled sword upright, and kneeling before
it as the sign of salvation, told his rosary with a devotion which
was enhanced by the recollection of the scenes through which he
had passed, and the dangers from which he had been rescued in.
the course of the day. Both warriors, worn by toil and travel,
were soon fast asleep, each on his separate pallet.
