




			CHAPTER NINETEENTH.

	Must we then sheathe our still victorious sword;
	Turn back our forward step, which ever trod
	O'er foemen's necks the onward path of glory;
	Unclasp the mail, which with a solemn vow,
	In God's own house, we hung upon our shoulders;
	That vow, as unaccomplish'd as the promise
	Which village nurses make to still their children,
	And after think no more of?------
				The Crusade, _a Tragedy._

  The Archbishop of Tyre was an emissary well chosen to communicate
to Richard tidings, which from another voice the lion-hearted
King would not have brooked to hear, without the most
unbounded explosions of resentment. Even this sagacious and
reverend prelate found difficulty in inducing him to listen to
news, which destroyed all his hopes of gaining back the Holy
Sepulchre by force of arms, and acquiring the renown which the
universal all-hail of Christendom was ready to confer upon him,
as the Champion of the Cross.

  But, by the Archbishop's report, it appeared that Saladin
was assembling all the force of his hundred tribes, and that the
monarchs of Europe, already disgusted from various motives with
the expedition, which had proved so hazardous, and was daily
growing more so, had resolved to abandon their purpose. In
this they were countenanced by the example of Philip of France,
who, with many protestations of regard, and assurances that he
would first see his brother of England in safety, declared his
intention to return to Europe. His great vassal, the Earl of
Champagne, had adopted the same resolution; and it could not
excite surprise, that Leopold of Austria, affronted as he had been
by Richard, was glad to embrace an opportunity of deserting a
cause, in which his haughty opponent was to be considered as
chief. Others announced the same purpose; so that it was
plain that the King of England was to be left, if he chose to
remain, supported only by such volunteers as might, under such
depressing circumstances, join themselves to the English army;
and by the doubtful aid of Conrade of Montserrat, and the military
orders of the Temple, and of Saint John, who, though they were
sworn to wage battle against the Saracens, were at least equally
jealous of any European monarch achieving the conquest of
Palestine, where, with short-sighted and selfish policy, they proposed
to establish independent dominions of their own.

  It needed not many arguments to show Richard the truth of
his situation; and, indeed, after his first burst of passion, he
sat him calmly down, and with gloomy looks, head depressed,
and arms folded on his bosom, listened to the Archbishop's
reasoning on the impossibility of his carrying on the Crusade
when deserted by his companions. Nay, he forbore interruption,
even when the prelate ventured, in measured terms, to hint that
Richard's own impetuosity had been one main cause of disgusting
the princes with the expedition.

  ``_Confiteor,_'' answered Richard, with a dejected look, and
something of a melancholy smile; ``I confess, reverend father,
that I ought on some accounts to sing _culpa mea._ But is it
not hard that my frailties of temper should be visited with such
a penance, that, for a burst or two of natural passion, I should
be doomed to see fade before me ungathered such a rich harvest
of glory to God, and honour to chivalry?---But it shall not
fade.---By the soul of the Conqueror, I will plant the Cross on
the towers of Jerusalem, or it shall be planted over Richard's
grave!''

  ``Thou may'st do it,'' said the prelate, ``yet not another drop
of Christian blood be shed in the quarrel.''

  ``Ah, you speak of compromise, Lord Prelate---but the blood
of the infidel hounds must also cease to flow,'' said Richard.

  ``There will be glory enough,'' replied the Archbishop, ``in
having extorted from Saladin, by force of arms, and by the respect
inspired by your fame, such conditions, as at once restore the
Holy Sepulchre, open the Holy Laud to pilgrims, secure their
safety by strong fortresses, and, stronger than all, assure the
safety of the Holy City, by conferring on Richard the title of
King Guardian of Jerusalem.''

  ``How!'' said Richard, his eyes sparkling with unusual light,
``I---I---I the King Guardian of the Holy City! Victory itself,
but that it is victory, could not gain more---scarce so much,
when won with unwilling and disunited forces.---But Saladin
still proposes to retain his interest in the Holy Land?''

  ``As a joint sovereign, the sworn ally,'' replied the Prelate,
``of the mighty Richard---his relative---if it may be permitted
by marriage.''

  ``By marriage!'' said Richard, surprised, yet less so than the
Prelate had expected. ``Ha!---Ay---Edith Plantagenet. Did
I dream this?---or did some one tell me? My head is still
weak from this fever, and has been agitated.---Was it the Scot,
or the Hakim, or yonder holy hermit, that hinted such a wild
bargain?''

  ``The hermit of Engaddi, most likely,'' said the Archbishop;
``for he hath toiled much in this matter; and since the discontent
of the princes has become apparent, and a separation of
their forces unavoidable, he hath had many consultations, both
with Christian and Pagan, for arranging such a pacification, as
may give to Christendom, at least in part, the objects of this
holy warfare.''

  ``My kinswoman to an infidel---Ha!'' exclaimed Richard, as
his eyes began to sparkle.

  The Prelate hastened to avert his wrath.

  ``The Pope's consent must doubtless be first attained, and
the holy hermit, who is well known at Rome, will treat with the
Holy Father.''

  ``How?---without our consent first given?'' said the King.

  ``Surely no,'' said the Bishop, in a quiet and insinuating tone
of voice; ``only with and under your special sanction.''

  ``My sanction to marry my kinswoman to an infidel?'' said
Richard; yet he spoke rather in a tone of doubt than as distinctly
reprobating the measure proposed. ``Could I have dreamed of
such a composition when I leaped upon the Syrian shore from
the prow of my galley, even as a lion springs on his prey!---And
now---But proceed---I will hear with patience.''

  Equally delighted and surprised to find his task so much easier
than he had apprehended, the Archbishop hastened to pour forth
before Richard the instances of such alliances in Spain---not without
countenance from the Holy See---the incalculable advantages
which all Christendom would derive from the union of Richard
and Saladin, by a bond so sacred; and, above all, he spoke with
great vehemence and unction on the probability that Saladin
would, in cue of the proposed alliance, exchange his false faith
for the true one.

  ``Hath the Soldan shown any disposition to become Christian?''
said Richard; ``if so, the king lives not on earth to
whom I would grant the hand of a kinswoman, ay, or sister,
sooner than to my noble Saladin---ay, though the one came to
lay crown and sceptre at her feet, and the other had nothing to
offer but his good sword and better heart!''

  ``Saladin hath heard our Christian teachers,'' said the Bishop,
somewhat evasively,---``my unworthy self---and others---and as
he listens with patience, and replies with calmness, it can hardly
be but that he be snatched as a brand from the burning. _Magna
est veritas et pr<ae>valebit!_ Moreover, the hermit of Engaddi, few
of whose words have fallen fruitless to the ground, is possessed
fully with the belief that there is a calling of the Saracens and
the other heathen approaching, to which this marriage shall be
matter of induction. He readeth the course of the stars; and
dwelling, with maceration of the flesh, in those divine places
which the saints have trodden of old, the spirit of Elijah the
Tishbite, the founder of his blessed order, hath been with him
as it was with the prophet Elisha, the son of Shaphat, when he
spread his mantle over him.''

  King Richard listened to the Prelate's reasoning, with a
downcast brow and a troubled look.

  ``I cannot tell,'' he said, ``how it is with me; but methinks
these cold counsels of the Princes of Christendom have infected
me too with a lethargy of spirit. The time hath been, that,
had a layman proposed such alliance to me, I had struck him
to the earth---if a churchman, I had spit at him as a renegade
and priest of Baal---yet now this counsel sounds not so strange
in mine ear; for why should I not seek for brotherhood and
alliance with a Saracen, brave, just, generous,---who loves and
honours a worthy foe, as if he were a friend---whilst the Princes
of Christendom shrink from the side of their allies, and forsake
the cause of Heaven and good knighthood?---But I will possess
my patience, and will not think of them. Only one attempt
will I make to keep this gallant brotherhood together, if it be
possible; and if I fail, Lord Archbishop, we will speak together
of thy counsel, which, as now, I neither accept nor altogether
reject. Wend we to the Council, my lord---the hour calls us.
Thou say'st Richard is hasty and proud---thou shalt see him
humble himself like the lowly broom-plant, from which he derives
his surname.''

  With the assistance of those of his privy chamber, the King
then hastily robed himself in a doublet and mantle of a dark
and uniform colour; and without any mark of regal dignity,
excepting a ring of gold upon his head, he hastened with the
Archbishop of Tyre to attend the Council, which waited but his
presence to commence its sitting.

  The pavilion of the Council was an ample tent, having before
it the large Banner of the Cross displayed, and another, on
which was portrayed a female kneeling, with dishevelled hair
and disordered dress, meant to represent the desolate and distressed
Church of Jerusalem, and bearing the motto, _Afflict<ae>
spons<ae> ne obliviscaris._ Warders, carefully selected, kept every
one at a distance from the neighbourhood of this tent, lest the
debates, which were sometimes of a loud and stormy character,
should reach other ears than those they were designed for.
Here, therefore, the Princes of the Crusade were assembled,
awaiting Richard's arrival; and even the brief delay which was
thus interposed was turned to his disadvantage by his enemies;
various instances being circulated of his pride, and undue assumption
of superiority, of which even the necessity of the present
short pause was quoted as an instance. Men strove to fortify
each other in their evil opinion of the King of England, and
vindicated the offence which each had taken, by putting the
most severe construction upon circumstances the most trifling;
and all this, perhaps, because they were conscious of an instinctive
reverence for the heroic monarch, which it would require
more than ordinary efforts to overcome.

  They had settled, accordingly, that they should receive him
on his entrance with slight notice, and no more respect than
was exactly necessary to keep within the bounds of cold ceremonial.
But when they beheld that noble form, that princely
countenance, somewhat pale from his late illness---the eye which
had been called by minstrels the bright star of battle and victory
---when his feats, almost surpassing human strength and valour,
rushed on their recollection, the Council of Princes simultaneously
arose---even the jealous King of France, and the sullen and
offended Duke of Austria, arose with one consent, and the
assembled princes burst forth with one voice in the acclamation,

  ``God save King Richard of England!---Long life to the valiant
Lion's heart!''

  With a countenance frank and open as the summer sun when
it rises, Richard distributed his thanks around, and congratulated
himself on being once more among his royal brethren of
the Crusades.

  ``Some brief words he desired to say,'' such was his address
to the assembly, ``though on a subject so unworthy as himself,
even at the risk of delaying for a few minutes their consultations
for the weal of Christendom, and the advancement of their holy
enterprise.''

  The assembled princes resumed their seats, and there was a
profound silence.

  ``This day,'' continued the King of England, ``is a high festival
of the Church; and well becomes it Christian men, at such a
tide, to reconcile themselves with their brethren, and confess
their faults to each other. Noble princes, and fathers of this
holy expedition, Richard is a soldier---his hand is ever readier
than his tongue---and his tongue is but too much used to the
rough language of his trade. But do not, for Plantagenet's hasty
speeches and ill-considered actions, forsake the noble cause of the
redemption of Palestine---do not throw away earthly renown and
eternal salvation, to be won here if ever they can be won by man,
because the act of a soldier may have been hasty, and his speech
as hard as the iron which he has worn from childhood. Is
Richard in default to any of you, Richard will make compensation
both by word and action.---Noble brother of France, have
I been so unlucky as to offend you?''

  ``The Majesty of France has no atonement to seek from that
of England,'' answered Philip with kingly dignity, accepting,
at the same time, the offered hand of Richard; ``and whatever
opinion I may adopt concerning the prosecution of this enterprise,
will depend on reasons arising out of the state of my own
kingdom, certainly on no jealousy or disgust at my royal and
valorous brother.''

  ``Austria,'' said Richard, walking up to the Archduke, with
a mixture of frankness and dignity, while Leopold arose from
his seat, as if involuntarily, and with the action of an automaton,
whose motions depended upon some external impulse,---
``Austria thinks he hath reason to be offended with England;
England, that he hath cause to complain of Austria. Let them
exchange forgiveness, that the peace of Europe, and the concord
of this host may remain unbroken. We are now joint supporters
of a more glorious banner than ever blazed before an earthly
prince,---even the Banner of Salvation: let not, therefore, strife
be betwixt us, for the symbol of our more worldly dignities; but
let Leopold restore the pennon of England, if he has it in his
power, and Richard will say, though from no motive save his
love for Holy Church, that he repents him of the hasty mood in
which he did insult the standard of Austria.''

  The Archduke stood still, sullen and discontented, with his
eyes fixed on the floor, and his countenance lowering with
smothered displeasure, which awe, mingled with awkwardness,
prevented his giving vent to in words.

  The Patriarch of Jerusalem hastened to break the embarrassing
silence, and to bear witness for the Archduke of Austria,
that he had exculpated himself, by a solemn oath, from all
knowledge, direct or indirect, of the aggression done to the
Banner of England.

  ``Then we have done the noble Archduke the greater wrong,''
said Richard; ``and craving his pardon for imputing to him
an outrage so cowardly, we extend our hand to him in token
of renewed peace and amity.---But how is this? Austria refuses
our uncovered hand, as he formerly refused our mailed glove!
What! are we neither to be his mate in peace, nor his antagonist
in war? Well, let it be so. We will take the slight
esteem in which he holds us, as a penance for aught which we
may have done against him in heat of blood, and will therefore
hold the account between us cleared.''

  So saying, he turned from the Archduke with an air rather
of dignity than scorn, leaving the Austrian apparently as much
relieved by the removal of his eye, as is a sullen and truant
schoolboy when the glance of his severe pedagogue is withdrawn.

  ``Noble Earl of Champagne---Princely Marquis of Montserrat---
Valiant Grand Master of the Templars---I am here a
penitent in the confessional---Do any of you bring a charge, or
claim amends from me?''

  ``I know not on what we could ground any,'' said the smooth-tongued
Conrade, ``unless it were that the King of England
carries off from his poor brothers of the war all the fame which
they might have hoped to gain in the expedition.''

  ``My charge, if I am called to make one,'' said the Master of
the Templars, ``is graver and deeper than that of the Marquis
of Montserrat. It may be thought ill to beseem a military monk
such as I to raise his voice where so many noble princes remain
silent; but it concerns our whole host, and not least this noble
King of England, that he should hear from some one to his face
those charges, which there are enow to bring against him in his
absence. We laud and honour the courage and high achievements
of the King of England, but we feel aggrieved that he
should, on all occasions, seize and maintain a precedence and
superiority over us, which it becomes not independent princes to
submit to. Much we might yield of our free will to his bravery,
his zeal, his wealth, and his power; but he who snatches all, as
matter of right, and leaves nothing to grant out of courtesy and
favour, degrades us from allies into retainers and vassals, and
sullies, in the eyes of our soldiers and subjects, the lustre of our
authority, which is no longer independently exercised. Since
the royal Richard has asked the truth from us, he must neither
be surprised nor angry when he hears one, to whom worldly
pomp is prohibited, and secular authority is nothing, saving so
far as it advances the prosperity of God's Temple, and the prostration
of the lion, which goeth about seeking whom he may
devour---when he hears, I say, such a one as I tell him the truth
in reply to his question; which truth, even while I speak it, is,
I know, confirmed by the heart of every one who hears me,
however respect may stifle their voices.''

  Richard coloured very highly while the Grand Master was
making this direct and unvarnished attack upon his conduct, and
the murmur of assent which followed it showed plainly, that
almost all who were present acquiesced in the justice of the
accusation. Incensed, and at the same time mortified, he yet
foresaw that to give way to his headlong resentment, would be
to give the cold and waxy accuser the advantage over him which
it was the Templar's principal object to obtain. He therefore,
with a strong effort, remained silent till he had repeated a pater-noster,
being the course which his confessor had enjoined him
to pursue, when anger was likely to obtain dominion over him.
The King then spoke with composure, though not without an
embittered tone, especially at the outset.

  ``And is it even so? And are our brethren at such pains to
note the infirmities of our natural temper, and the rough precipitance
of our zeal, which may sometimes have urged us to issue
commands when there was little time to hold council? I could
not have thought that offences, casual and unpremeditated like
mine, could find such deep root in the hearts of my allies in this
most holy cause; that for my sake they should withdraw their
hand from the plough when the furrow was near the end; for
my sake turn aside from the direct path to Jerusalem, which
their swords have opened. I vainly thought that my small
services might have outweighed my rash errors---that if it were
remembered that I pressed to the van in an assault, it would
not be forgotten that I was ever the last in the retreat---that if
I elevated my banner upon conquered fields of battle, it was all
the advantage that I sought, while others were dividing the spoil.
I may have called the conquered city by my name, but it was
to others that I yielded the dominion. If I have been head-strong
in urging bold counsels, I have not, methinks, spared my
own blood or my people's in carrying them into as bold execution
-or if I have, in the hurry of march or battle, assumed a command
over the soldiers of others, such have been ever treated as
my own, when my wealth purchased the provisions and medicines
which their own sovereigns could not procure.---But it shames
me to remind you of what all but myself seem to have forgotten,
---Let us rather look forward to our future measures; and believe
me, brethren,'' he continued, his face kindling with eagerness,
``you shall not find the pride, or the wrath, or the ambition of
Richard, a stumbling-block of offence in the path to which
religion and glory summon you, as with the trumpet of an
archangel. Oh, no, no! never would I survive the thought,
that my frailties and infirmities had been the means to sever
this goodly fellowship of assembled princes. I would cut off
my left hand with my right, could my doing so attest my
sincerity. I will yield up, voluntarily, all right to command in
the host even mine own liege subjects. They shall be led by
such sovereigns as you may nominate, and their King, ever but
too apt to exchange the leader's baton for the adventurer's lance,
will serve under the banner of Beau-Seant among the Templars
---ay, or under that of Austria, if Austria will name a brave
man to lead his forces. Or, if ye are yourselves a-weary of this
war, and feel your armour chafe your tender bodies, leave but
with Richard some ten or fifteen thousand of your soldiers to
work out the accomplishment of your vow; and when Zion is
won,'' he exclaimed, waving his hand aloft, as if displaying the
standard of the Cross over Jerusalem---``when Zion is won, we
will write upon her gates, =not= the name of Richard Plantagenet,
but of those generous princes who intrusted him with the means
of conquest!''

  The rough eloquence and determined expression of the military
monarch, at once roused the drooping spirits of the Crusaders,
reanimated their devotion, and, fixing their attention on the
principal object of the expedition, made most of them who were
present blush for having been moved by such petty subjects of
complaint as had before engrossed them. Eye caught fire from
eye, voice lent courage to voice. They resumed, as with one
accord, the war-cry with which the sermon of Peter the Hermit
was echoed back, and shouted aloud, ``Lead us on, gallant Lion's
heart---none so worthy to lead where brave men follow. Lead
us on---to Jerusalem---to Jerusalem! It is the will of God---
it is the will of God! Blessed is he who shall lend an arm to
its fulfilment!''

  The shout, so suddenly and generally raised, was heard beyond
the ring of sentinels who guarded the pavilion of Council and
spread among the soldiers of the host, who, inactive, and dispirited
by disease and climate, had begun, like their leaders, to droop
in resolution; but the reappearance of Richard in renewed vigour,
and the well-known shout which echoed from the assembly of
the princes, at once rekindled their enthusiasm, and thousands
and tens of thousands answered with the same shout of ``Zion,
Zion!---War, war!---instant battle with the infidels! It is the
will of God---it is the will of God!''

  The acclamations from without increased in their turn the
enthusiasm which prevailed within the pavilion. Those who
did not actually catch the flame, were afraid, at least for the
time, to seem colder than others. There was no more speech
except of a proud advance towards Jerusalem upon the expiry
of the truce, and the measures to be taken in the meantime for
supplying and recruiting the army. The council broke up, all
apparently filled with the same enthusiastic purpose,---which,
however, soon faded in the bosom of most, and never had an
existence in that of others.

  Of the latter class were the Marquis Conrade and the Grand
Master of the Templars, who retired together to their quarters
ill at ease, and malcontent with the events of the day.

  ``I ever told it to thee,'' said the latter, with the cold sardonic
expression peculiar to him, ``that Richard would burst through
the flimsy wiles you spread for him, as would a lion through a
spider's web. Thou seest he has but to speak, and his breath
agitates these fickle fools as easily as the whirlwind catcheth
scattered straws, and sweeps them together, or disperses them
at its pleasure.''

  ``When the blast has passed away,'' said Conrade, ``the
straws, which it made dance to its pipe, will settle to earth
again.''

  ``But know'st thou not besides,'' said the Templar, ``that it
seems, if this new purpose of conquest shall be abandoned and
pass away, and each mighty prince shall again, be left to such
guidance as his own scanty brain can supply, Richard may yet
probably become King of Jerusalem by compact, and establish
those terms of treaty with the Soldan, which thou thyself
thought'st him so likely to spurn at?''

  ``Now, by Mahound and Termagaunt, for Christian oaths
are out of fashion,'' said Conrade, ``say'st thou the proud King
of England would unite his blood with a heathen Soldan?---
My policy threw in that ingredient to make the whole treaty an
abomination to him.---As bad for us that he become our master
by an agreement, as by victory.''

  ``Thy policy hath ill calculated Richard's digestion,'' answered
the Templar; ``I know his mind by a whisper from the Archbishop.
---And then thy master-stroke respecting yonder banner,
it has passed off with no more respect than two cubits of embroidered
silk merited. Marquis Conrade, thy wit begins to
halt---I will trust thy fine-spun measures no longer, but will
try my own. Know'st thou not the people whom the Saracens
call Charegites?''

  ``Surely,'' answered the Marquis; ``they are desperate and
besotted enthusiasts, who devote their lives to the advancement
of religion---somewhat like Templars---only they are never known
to pause in the race of their calling.''

  ``Jest not,'' answered the scowling Monk; ``know, that one
of these men has set down, in his bloody vow, the name of the
Island Emperor yonder, to be hewn down as the chief enemy of
the Moslem faith.''

  ``A most judicious paynim,'' said Conrade. ``May Mahomet
send him his paradise for a reward!''

  ``He was taken in the camp by one of our squires, and, in
private examination, frankly avowed his fixed and determined
purpose to me,'' said the Grand Master.

  ``Now the Heavens pardon them who prevented the purpose
of this most judicious Charegite!'' answered Conrade.

  ``He is my prisoner,'' added the Templar, ``and secluded from
speech with others, as thou may'st suppose---but prisons have
been broken''------

  ``Chains left unlocked, and captives have escaped,'' answered
the Marquis. ``It is an ancient saying,---no sure dungeon but
the grave.''

  ``When loose he resumes his quest,'' continued the military
priest; ``for it is the nature of this sort of bloodhound never to
quit the slot of the prey he has once scented.''

  ``Say no more of it,'' said the Marquis; ``I see thy policy---
it is dreadful, but the emergency is imminent.''

  ``I only told thee of it,'' said the Templar, ``that thou may'st
keep thyself on thy guard, for the uproar will be dreadful, and
there is no knowing on whom the English may vent their rage
---Ay, and there is another risk---my page knows the counsels
of this Charegite,'' he continued; ``and, moreover, he is a
peevish, self-willed fool, whom I would I were rid of, as he
thwarts me by presuming to see with his own eyes, not mine.
But our holy Order gives me power to put a remedy to such
inconvenience. Or stay---the Saracen may find a good dagger in
his cell, and I warrant you he uses it as he breaks forth, which
will be of a surety so soon as the page enters with his food.''

  ``It will give the affair a colour,'' said Conrade; ``and
yet''------

  ``_Yet_ and _but,_'' said the Templar, ``are words for fools---
wise men neither hesitate nor retract---they resolve and they
execute.''
