




			CHAPTER FIFTH.

		Their necromantic forms in vain
		Haunt us on the tented plain;
		We bid these spectre shapes avaunt,
		Ashtaroth and Termagaunt.
					Warton.


  The most profound silence, the deepest darkness, continued to
brood for more than an hour over the chapel in which we left
the Knight of the Leopard still kneeling, alternately expressing
thanks to Heaven, and gratitude to his lady, for the boon which
had been vouchsafed to him. His own safety, his own destiny,
for which he was at all times little anxious, had not now the
weight of a grain of dust in his reflections. He was in the
neighbourhood of Lady Edith, he had received tokens of her
grace, he was in a place hallowed by relics of the most awful
sanctity. A Christian soldier, a devoted lover, could fear nothing,
think of nothing, but his duty to Heaven, and his devoir to his
lady.

  At the lapse of the space of time which we have noticed, a
shrill whistle, like that with which a falconer calls his hawk,
was heard to ring sharply through the vaulted chapel. It was
a sound ill suited to the place, and reminded Sir Kenneth how
necessary it was he should be upon his guard. He started from
his knee, and laid his hand upon his poniard. A creaking sound,
as of a screw or pulleys, succeeded, and a light streaming upwards,
as from an opening in the floor, showed that a trap-door had
been raised or depressed. In less than a minute, a long skinny
arm, partly naked, partly clothed in a sleeve of red samite, arose
out of the aperture, holding a lamp as high as it could stretch
upwards, and the figure to which the arm belonged ascended
step by step to the level of the chapel floor. The form and face
of the being who thus presented himself, were those of a frightful
dwarf, with a large head, a cap fantastically adorned with three
peacock-feathers, a dress of red samite, the richness of which
rendered his ugliness more conspicuous, distinguished by gold
bracelets and armlets, and a white silk sash, in which he wore
a gold-hilted dagger. This singular figure had in his left hand
a kind of broom. So soon as he had stepped from the aperture
through which he arose, he stood still, and, as if to show himself
more distinctly, moved the lamp which he held slowly over his
face and person, successively illuminating his wild and fantastic
features, and his misshapen, but nervous limbs. Though disproportioned
in person, the dwarf was not so distorted as to argue
any want of strength or activity. While Sir Kenneth gazed on
this disagreeable object, the popular creed occurred to his remembrance,
concerning gnomes, or earthly spirits, which make their
abode in the caverns of the earth; and so much did this figure
correspond with ideas he had formed of their appearance, that
he looked on it with disgust, mingled not indeed with fear, but
that sort of awe which the presence of a supernatural creature
may infuse into the most steady bosom.

  The dwarf again whistled, and summoned from beneath a
companion. This second figure ascended in the same manner
as the first; but it was a female arm, in this second instance,
which upheld the lamp from the subterranean vault out of which
these presentments arose, and it was a female form, much
resembling the first in shape and proportions, which slowly
emerged from the floor. Her dress was also of red samite,
fantastically cut and flounced, as if she had been dressed for
some exhibition of mimes or jugglers; and with the same minuteness
which her predecessor had exhibited, she passed the lamp
over her face and person, which seemed to rival the male in
ugliness. But with all this most unfavourable exterior, there
was one trait in the features of both which argued alertness and
intelligence in the most uncommon degree. This arose from the
brilliancy of their eyes, which, deep set beneath black and shaggy
brows, gleamed with a lustre which, like that in the eye of the
toad, seemed to make some amends for the extreme ugliness of
countenance and person.

  Sir Kenneth remained as if spell-bound, while this unlovely
pair, moving round the chapel close to each other, appeared to
perform the duty of sweeping it, like menials; but, as they used
only one hand, the floor was not much benefited by the exercise,
which they plied with such oddity of gestures and manner, as
befitted their bizarre and fantastic appearance. When they
approached near to the knight, in the course of their occupation,
they ceased to use their brooms, and placing themselves side by
side, directly opposite to Sir Kenneth, they again slowly shifted
the lights which they held, so as to allow him distinctly to survey
features which were not rendered more agreeable by being
brought nearer, and to observe the extreme quickness and keenness
with which their black and glittering eyes flashed back the
light of the lamps. They then turned the gleam of both lights
upon the knight, and having accurately surveyed him, turned
their faces to each other, and set up a loud yelling laugh, which
resounded in his ears. The sound was so ghastly, that Sir
Kenneth started at hearing it, and hastily demanded, in the
name of God, who they were who profaned that holy place with
such antic gestures and elritch exclamations.

  ``I am the dwarf Nectabanus,'' said the abortion-seeming male,
in a voice corresponding to his figure, and resembling that of the
night-crow more than any sound which is heard by daylight.

  ``And I am Guenevra, his lady and his love,'' replied the
female, in tones which, being shriller, were yet wilder than those
of her companion.

  ``Wherefore are you here?'' again demanded the knight,
scarcely yet assured that it was human beings which he saw
before him.

  ``I am,'' replied the male dwarf, with much assumed gravity
and dignity, ``the twelfth Imaum---I am Mahommed Mohadi,
the guide and the conductor of the faithful. An hundred horses
stand ready saddled for me and my train at the Holy City, and
as many at the City of Refuge. I am he who shall bear witness,
and this is one of my houris.''

  ``Thou liest!'' answered the female, interrupting her companion,
in tones yet shriller than his own; ``I am none of thy
houris, and thou art no such infidel trash as the Mahommed of
whom thou speakest. May my curse rest upon his coffin!---I
tell thee, thou ass of Issachar, thou art King Arthur of Britain,
whom the fairies stole away from the field of Avalon; and I am
Dame Guenevra, famed for her beauty.''

  ``But in truth, noble sir,'' said the male, ``we are distressed
princes, dwelling under the wing of King Guy of Jerusalem,
until he was driven out from his own nest by the foul infidels---
Heaven's bolts consume them!''

  ``Hush,'' said a voice from the side upon which the knight had
entered---``Hush, fools, and begone; your ministry is ended.''

  The dwarfs had no sooner heard the command, than, gibbering
in discordant whispers to each other, they blew out their lights
at once, and left the knight in utter darkness, which, when the
pattering of their retiring feet had died away, was soon accompanied
by its fittest companion, total silence.

  The knight felt the departure of these unfortunate creatures a
relief. He could not, from their language, manners, and appearance,
doubt that they belonged to the degraded class of beings,
whom deformity of person and weakness of intellect recommended
to the painful situation of appendages to great families, where
their personal appearance and imbecility were food for merriment
to the household. Superior in no respect to the ideas and
manners of his time, the Scottish knight might, at another
period, have been much amused by the mummery of these poor
effigies of humanity; but now, their appearance, gesticulations,
and language, broke the train of deep and solemn feeling with
which he was impressed, and he rejoiced in the disappearance of
the unhappy objects.

  A few minutes after they had retired, the door at which he
had entered opened slowly, and, remaining ajar, discovered a
faint light arising from a lantern placed upon the threshold.
Its doubtful and wavering gleam showed a dark form reclined
beside the entrance, but without its precincts, which, on approaching
it more nearly, he recognised to be the hermit, couching in
the same humble posture in which he had at first laid himself
down, and which, doubtless, he had retained during the whole
time of his guest's continuing in the chapel.

  ``All is over,'' said the hermit, as he heard the knight approaching---
``and the most wretched of earthly sinners, with
him, who should think himself most honoured and most happy
among the race of humanity, must retire from this place. Take
the light, and guide me down the descent, for I may not uncover
my eyes until I am far from this hallowed spot.''

  The Scottish knight obeyed in silence, for a solemn and yet
ecstatic sense of what he had seen had silenced even the eager
workings of curiosity. He led the way with considerable accuracy
through the various secret passages and stairs by which
they had ascended, until at length they found themselves in the
outward cell of the hermit's cavern.

  ``The condemned criminal is restored to his dungeon, reprieved
from one miserable day to another, until his awful judge shall
at length appoint the well-deserved sentence to be carried into
execution.''

  As the hermit spoke these words, he laid aside the veil with
which his eyes had been bound, and looked at it with a suppressed
and hollow sigh. No sooner had he restored it to the
crypt from which he had caused the Scot to bring it, than he
said hastily and sternly to his companion---``Begone, begone,
---to rest, to rest. You may sleep---you can sleep---I neither
can nor may.''

  Respecting the profound agitation with which this was spoken,
the knight retired into the inner cell; but, casting back his eye
as he left the exterior grotto, he beheld the anchorite stripping
his shoulders with frantic haste of their shaggy mantle, and ere
he could shut the frail door which separated the two compartments
of the cavern, he heard the clang of the scourge, and the
groans of the penitent under his self-inflicted penance. A cold
shudder came over the knight as he reflected what could be the
foulness of the sin what the depth of the remorse, which, apparently,
such severe penance could neither cleanse nor assuage. He
told his beads devoutly, and flung himself on his rude couch, after
a glance at the still sleeping Moslem, and, wearied by the various
scenes of the day and the night, soon slept as sound as infancy.
Upon his awaking in the morning, he held certain conferences
with the hermit upon matters of importance, and the result of
their intercourse induced him to remain for two days longer in
the grotto. He was regular, as became a pilgrim, in his devotional
exercises, but was not again admitted to the chapel in
which he had seen such wonders.
