


		CHAPTER TWENTY-EIGHTH.

	Heard ye the din of battle bray,
	Lance to lance, and horse to horse?
					Gray.

  It had been agreed, on account of the heat of the climate, that
the judicial combat, which was the cause of the present assemblage
of various nations at the Diamond of the Desert, should
take place at one hour after sunrise. The wide lists, which
had been constructed under the inspection of the Knight of the
Leopard, enclosed a space of hard sand, which was one hundred
and twenty yards long by forty in width. They extended in
length from north to south, so as to give both parties the equal
advantage of the rising sun. Saladin's royal seat was erected
on the western side of the enclosure, just in the centre, where the
combatants were expected to meet in mid encounter. Opposed
to this was a gallery with closed casements, so contrived, that
the ladies, for whose accommodation it was erected, might see
the fight without being themselves exposed to view. At either
extremity of the lists was a barrier, which could be opened or
shut at pleasure. Thrones had been also erected, but the Archduke,
perceiving that his was lower than King Richard's, refused
to occupy it; and C<oe>ur de Lion, who would have submitted to
much ere any formality should have interfered with the combat,
readily agreed that the sponsors, as they were called, should remain
on horseback during the fight. At one extremity of the
lists were placed the followers of Richard, and opposed to them
were those who accompanied the defender, Conrade. Around
the throne destined for the Soldan were ranged his splendid
Georgian Guards, and the rest of the enclosure was occupied by
Christian and Mohammedan spectators.

  Long before daybreak, the lists were surrounded by even a
larger number of Saracens than Richard had seen on the preceding
evening. When the first ray of the sun's glorious orb
arose above the desert, the sonorous call, ``To prayer, to prayer!''
was poured forth by the Soldan himself, and answered by
others, whose rank and zeal entitled them to act as muezzins.
It was a striking spectacle to see them all sink to earth, for the
purpose of repeating their devotions, with their faces turned to
Mecca. But when they arose from the ground, the sun's rays,
now strengthening fast, seemed to confirm the Lord of Gilsland's
conjecture of the night before. They were flashed back
from many a spear-head, for the pointless lances of the preceding
day were certainly no longer such. De Vaux pointed it
out to his master, who answered with impatience, that he had
perfect confidence in the good faith of the Soldan; but if De
Vaux was afraid of his bulky body, he might retire.

  Soon after this the noise of timbrels was heard, at the sound
of which the whole Saracen cavaliers threw themselves from
their horses, and prostrated themselves, as if for a second
morning prayer. This was to give an opportunity to the Queen,
with Edith and her attendants, to pass from the pavilion to
the gallery intended for them. Fifty guards of Saladin's seraglio
escorted them, with naked sabres, whose orders were, to cut to
pieces whomsoever, were he prince or peasant, should venture
to gaze on the ladies as they passed, or even presume to raise
his head until the cessation of the music should make all men
aware that they were lodged in their gallery, not to be gazed on
by the curious eye.

  This superstitious observance of Oriental reverence to the
fair sex called forth from Queen Berengaria some criticisms
very unfavourable to Saladin and his country. But their den,
as the royal fair called it, being securely closed and guarded by
their sable attendants, she was under the necessity of contenting
herself with seeing, and laying aside for the present the still
more exquisite pleasure of being seen.

  Meantime the sponsors of both champions went, as was their
duty, to see that they were duly armed, and prepared for combat.
The Archduke of Austria was in no hurry to perform this
part of the ceremony, having had rather an unusually severe
debauch upon wine of Schiraz the preceding evening. But the
Grand Master of the Temple, more deeply concerned in the
event of the combat, was early before the tent of Conrade of
Montserrat. To his great surprise, the attendants refused him
admittance.

  ``Do you not know me, ye knaves?'' said the Grand Master
in great anger.

  ``We do, most valiant and reverend,'' answered Conrade's
squire; ``but even _you_ may not at present enter---the Marquis
is about to confess himself.''

  ``Confess himself!'' exclaimed the Templar, in a tone where
alarm mingled with surprise and scorn---``and to whom I pray
thee?''

  ``My master bid me be secret,'' said the squire; on which
the Grand Master pushed past him, and entered the tent almost
by force.

  The Marquis of Montserrat was kneeling at the feet of the
Hermit of Engaddi, and in the act of beginning his confession.

  ``What means this, Marquis?'' said the Grand Master, ``up,
for shame---or, if you must needs confess, am not I here?''

  ``I have confessed to you too often already,'' replied Conrade,
with a pale cheek and a faltering voice. ``For God's sake,
Grand Master, begone, and let me unfold my conscience to this
holy man.''

  ``In what is he holier than I am?'' said the Grand Master.
``Hermit, prophet, madman---say, if thou darest, in what
thou excellest me?''

  ``Bold and bad man,'' replied the Hermit, ``know that I am
like the latticed window, and the divine light passes through to
avail others, though, alas! it helpeth not me. Thou art like
the iron stanchions, which neither receive light themselves, nor
communicate it to any one.''

  ``Prate not to me, but depart from this tent,'' said the Grand
Master; ``the Marquis shall not confess this morning, unless it
be to me, for I part not from his side.''

  ``Is this _your_ pleasure?'' said the Hermit to Conrade; ``for
think not I will obey that proud man, if you continue to desire
my assistance.''

  ``Alas!'' said Conrade irresolutely, ``what would you have
me say?---Farewell for a while---we will speak anon.''

  ``Oh, procrastination!'' exclaimed the Hermit, ``thou art a
soul-murderer!---Unhappy man, farewell---not for a while, but
until we both shall meet---no matter where.---And for thee,'' he
added, turning to the Grand Master, ``=tremble!=''

  ``Tremble!'' replied the Templar contemptuously, ``I cannot,
if I would.''

  The Hermit heard not his answer, having left the tent.
``Come! to this gear hastily,'' said the Grand Master, ``since
thou wilt needs go through the foolery. Hark thee---I think I
know most of thy frailties by heart, so we may omit the detail,
which may be somewhat a long one, and begin with the absolution.
What signifies counting the spots of dirt that we are
about to wash from our hands?''

  ``Knowing what thou art thyself,'' said Conrade, ``it is blasphemous
to speak of pardoning another.''

  ``That is not according to the canon, Lord Marquis,'' said the
Templar---``thou art more scrupulous than orthodox. The absolution
of the wicked priest is as effectual as if he were himself
a saint---otherwise God help the poor penitent! What wounded
man inquires whether the surgeon that tents his gashes have
clean hands or no?---Come, shall we to this toy?''

  ``No,'' said Conrade, ``I will rather die unconfessed than
mock the sacrament.''

  ``Come, noble Marquis,'' said the Templar, ``rouse up your
courage, and speak not thus. In an hour's time thou shalt
stand victorious in the lists, or confess thee in thy helmet, like
a valiant knight.''

  ``Alas, Grand Master!'' answered Conrade, ``all augurs ill
for this affair. The strange discovery by the instinct of a dog
---the revival of this Scottish knight, who comes into the lists
like a spectre---all betokens evil.''

  ``Pshaw!'' said the Templar, ``I have seen thee bend thy
lance boldly against him in sport, and with equal chance of
success---think thou art but in a tournament, and who bears
him better in the tilt-yard than thou?---Come, squires and
armourers, your master must be accoutred for the field.''

  The attendants entered accordingly, and began to arm the
Marquis.

  ``What morning is without?'' said Conrade.

  ``The sun rises dimly,'' answered a squire.

  ``Thou seest, Grand Master,'' said Conrade, ``nought smiles
on us.''

  ``Thou wilt fight the more coolly, my son,'' answered the
Templar; ``thank Heaven that hath tempered the sun
Palestine to suit thy occasion.''

  Thus jested the Grand Master; but his jests had lost their
influence on the harassed mind of the Marquis, and, notwithstanding
his attempts to seem gay, his gloom communicated itself
to the Templar.

  ``This craven,'' he thought, ``will lose the day in pure faintness
and cowardice of heart, which he calls tender conscience.
I, whom visions and auguries shake not---who am firm in my
purpose as the living rock---I should have fought the combat
myself---Would to God the Scot may strike him dead on the
spot---it were next best to his winning the victory. But, come
what will, he must have no other confessor than myself---our
sins are too much in common, and he might confess my share
with his own.''

  While these thoughts passed through his mind, he continued
to assist the Marquis in arming, but it was in silence.

  The hour at length arrived, the trumpets sounded, the knights
rode into the lists armed at all points, and mounted like men
who were to do battle for a kingdom's honour. They wore their
vizors up, and riding around the lists three times, showed themselves
to the spectators. Both were goodly persons, and both
had noble countenances. But there was an air of manly confidence
on the brow of the Scot---a radiancy of hope, which
amounted even to cheerfulness, while, although pride and effort
had recalled much of Conrade's natural courage, there lowered
still on his brow a cloud of ominous despondence. Even his
steed seemed to tread less lightly and blithely to the trumpet-sound
than the noble Arab which was bestrode by Sir Kenneth;
and the _spruch-sprecher_ shook his head while he observed, that
while the challenger rode around the lists in the course of the
sun---that is, from right to left---the defender made the same
circuit _widdersins_---that is, from left to right---which is in most
countries held ominous.

  A temporary altar was erected just beneath the gallery occupied
by the Queen, and beside it stood the Hermit in the dress of his
order, as a Carmelite friar. Other churchmen were also present.
To this altar the challenger and defender were successively
brought forward, conducted by their respective sponsors. Dismounting
before it, each knight avouched the justice of his cause
by a solemn oath on the Evangelists, and prayed that his success
might be according to the truth or falsehood of what he then
swore. They also made oath, that they came to do battle in
knightly guise, and with the usual weapons, disclaiming the use
of spells, charms, or magical devices, to incline victory to their
side. The challenger pronounced his vow with a firm and manly
voice, and a bold and cheerful countenance. When the ceremony
was finished, the Scottish Knight looked at the gallery, and bent
his head to the earth, as if in honour of those invisible beauties
which were enclosed within; then, loaded with armour as he
was, sprung to the saddle without the use of the stirrup, and
made his courser carry him in a succession of caracoles to his
station at the eastern extremity of the lists. Conrade also presented
himself before the altar with boldness enough; but his
voice, as he took the oath, sounded hollow, as if drowned in his
helmet. The lips with which he appealed to Heaven to adjudge
victory to the just quarrel, grew white as they uttered the impious
mockery. As he turned to remount his horse, the Grand
Master approached him closer, as if to rectify something about
the sitting of his gorget, and whispered,---``Coward and fool!---
recall thy senses, and do me this battle bravely, else, by Heaven,
shouldst thou escape him, thou escapest not _me!_''

  The savage tone in which this was whispered, perhaps completed
the confusion of the Marquis's nerves, for he stumbled as
he made to horse; and though he recovered his feet, sprung to
the saddle with his usual agility, and displayed his address in
horsemanship as he assumed his position opposite to the challenger's,
yet the accident did not escape those who were on the
watch for omens, which might predict the fate of the day.
The priests, after a solemn prayer that God would show the
rightful quarrel, departed from the lists. The trumpets of the
challenger then rung a flourish, and a herald-at-arms proclaimed
at the eastern end of the lists,---``Here stands a good knight,
Sir Kenneth of Scotland, champion for the royal King Richard
of England, who accuseth Conrade, Marquis of Montserrat, of
foul treason and dishonour done to the said King.''

  When the words Kenneth of Scotland announced the name
and character of the champion, hitherto scarce generally known,
a loud and cheerful acclaim burst from the followers of King
Richard, and hardly, notwithstanding repeated commands of
silence, suffered the reply of the defendant to be heard. He, of
course, avouched his innocence, and offered his body for battle.
The esquires of the combatants now approached, and delivered
to each his shield and lance, assisting to hang the former around.
his neck, that his two hands might remain free, one for the
management of the bridle, the other to direct the lance.

  The shield of the Scot displayed his old bearing, the leopard,
but with the addition of a collar and broken chain, in allusion
to his late captivity. The shield of the Marquis bore, in reference
to his title, a serrated and rocky mountain. Each shook
his lance aloft, as if to ascertain the weight and toughness of
the unwieldy weapon, and then laid it in the rest. The sponsors,
heralds, and squires, now retired to the barriers, and the combatants
sat opposite to each other, face to face, with couched
lance and closed vizor, the human form so completely enclosed,
that they looked more like statues of molten iron, than beings
of flesh and blood. The silence of suspense was now general---
men breathed thicker, and their very souls seemed seated in
their eyes, while not a sound was to be heard save the snorting
and pawing of the good steeds, who, sensible of what was about
to happen, were impatient to dash into career. They stood thus
for perhaps three minutes, when, at a signal given by the Soldan,
an hundred instruments rent the air with their brazen clamours,
and each champion striking his horse with the spurs, and slacking
the rein, the horses started into full gallop, and the knights
met in mid space with a shock like a thunderbolt. The victory
was not in doubt---no, not one moment. Conrade, indeed, showed
himself a practised warrior; for he struck his antagonist knightly
in the midst of his shield, bearing his lance so straight and true,
that it shivered into splinters from the steel spear---head up to
the very gauntlet. The horse of Sir Kenneth recoiled two or
three yards and fell on his haunches, but the rider easily raised
him with hand and rein. But for Conrade there was no recovery.
Sir Kenneth's lance had pierced through the shield,
through a plated corselet of Milan steel, through a _secret,_ or
coat of linked mail, worn beneath the corselet, had wounded
him deep in the bosom, and borne him from his saddle, leaving
the truncheon of the lance fixed in his wound. The sponsors,
heralds, and Saladin himself, descending from his throne, crowded
around the wounded man; while Sir Kenneth, who had drawn
his sword ere yet he discovered his antagonist was totally helpless,
now commanded him to avow his guilt. The helmet was
hastily unclosed, and the wounded man, gazing wildly on the
sides, replied,---``What would you more?---God hath decided
justly---I am guilty---but there are worse traitors in the camp
than I.---In pity to my soul, let me have a confessor!''

  He revived as he uttered these words.

  ``The talisman---the powerful remedy, royal brother,'' said
King Richard to Saladin.

  ``The traitor,'' answered the Soldan, ``is more fit to be dragged
from the lists to the gallows by the heels, than to profit by its
virtues:---and some such fate is in his look,'' he added, after
gazing fixedly upon the wounded man; ``for though his wound
may be cured, yet Azrael's seal is on the wretch's brow.''

  ``Nevertheless,'' said Richard, ``I pray you do for him what
you may, that he may at least have time for confession---Slay
not soul and body! To him one half-hour of time may be
worth more, by ten thousand fold, than the life of the oldest
patriarch.''

  ``My royal brother's wish shall be obeyed,'' said Saladin.---
``Slaves, bear this wounded man to our tent.''

  ``Do not so,'' said the Templar, who had hitherto stood
gloomily looking on in silence.---``The royal Duke of Austria
and myself will not permit this unhappy Christian Prince to be
delivered over to the Saracens, that they may try their spells
upon him. We are his sponsors, and demand that he be assigned
to our care.''

  ``That is, you refuse the certain means offered to recover
him?'' said Richard.

  ``Not so,'' said the Grand Master, recollecting himself.---``if
the Soldan useth lawful medicines, he may attend the patient
in my tent.''

  ``Do so, I pray thee, good brother,'' said Richard to Saladin,
``though the permission be ungraciously yielded.---But now to
a more glorious work---Sound, trumpets---shout England---in
honour of England's champion!''

  Drum, clarion, trumpet, and cymbal, rung forth at once, and
the deep and regular shout, which for ages has been the English
acclamation, sounded amidst the shrill and irregular yells of the
Arabs, like the diapason of the organ amid the howling of a
storm. There was silence at length.

  ``Brave Knight of the Leopard,'' resumed C<oe>ur de Lion,
``thou hast shown that the Ethiopian _may_ change his skin and
the Leopard his spots, though clerks quote Scripture for the
impossibility. Yet I have more to say to you when I have
conducted you to the presence of the ladies, the best judges,
and best rewarders, of deeds of chivalry.''

  The Knight of the Leopard bowed assent.

  ``And thou, princely Saladin, wilt also attend them. I promise
thee our Queen will not think herself welcome, if she lacks
the opportunity to thank her royal host for her most princely
reception.''

  Saladin bent his head gracefully, but declined the invitation.
``I must attend the wounded man,'' he said. ``The leech
leaves not his patient more than the champion the lists, even
if he be summoned to a bower like those of Paradise. And
farther, royal Richard, know that the blood of the East flows
not so temperately in the presence of beauty, as that of your
land. What saith the Book itself?---Her eye is as the edge of
the sword of the Prophet, who shall look upon it? He that
would not be burnt avoideth to tread on hot embers---wise men
spread not the flax before a bickering torch---He, saith the
sage, who hath forfeited a treasure, doth not wisely to turn
back his head to gaze at it.''

  Richard, it may be believed, respected the motives of delicacy
which flowed from manners so different from his own, and
urged his request no farther.

  ``At noon,'' said the Soldan, as he departed, ``I trust ye will
all accept a collation under the black camel-skin tent of a chief
of Curdistan.''

  The same invitation was circulated among the Christians,
comprehending all those of sufficient importance to be admitted
to sit at a feast made for princes.

  ``Hark!'' said Richard, ``the timbrels announce that our
Queen and her attendants are leaving their gallery---and see,
the turbans sink on the ground, as if struck down by a destroying
angel. All lie prostrate, as if the glance of an Arab's eye
could sully the lustre of a lady's cheek! Come, we will to the
pavilion, and lead our conqueror thither in triumph.---How I
pity that noble Soldan, who knows but of love as it is known
to those of inferior nature!''

  Blondel tuned his harp to its boldest measure, to welcome
the introduction of the victor into the pavilion of Queen Berengaria.
He entered, supported on either side by his sponsors,
Richard and William Longsword, and knelt gracefully down
before the Queen, though more than half the homage was
silently rendered to Edith, who sat on her right hand.

  ``Unarm him, my mistresses,'' said the King, whose delight
was in the execution of such chivalrous usages---``Let Beauty
honour Chivalry! Undo his spurs, Berengaria; Queen though
thou be, thou owest him what marks of favour thou canst give.
---Unlace his helmet, Edith---by this hand, thou shalt, wert
thou the proudest Plantagenet of the line, and he the poorest
knight on earth!''

  Both ladies obeyed the royal commands,---Berengaria with
bustling assiduity, as anxious to gratify her husband's humour,
and Edith blushing and growing pale alternately, as slowly and
awkwardly she undid, with Longsword's assistance, the fastenings
which secured the helmet to the gorget.

  ``And what expect you from beneath this iron shell?'' said
Richard, as the removal of the casque gave to view the noble
countenance of Sir Kenneth, his face glowing with recent
exertion, and not less so with present emotion. ``What think
ye of him, gallants and beauties?'' said Richard. ``Doth he
resemble an Ethiopian slave, or doth he present the face of an
obscure and nameless adventurer? No, by my good sword!---
Here terminate his various disguises. He hath knelt down
before you, unknown save by his worth---he arises, equally
distinguished by birth and fortune. The adventurous knight,
Kenneth, arises David, Earl of Huntingdon, Prince Royal of
Scotland!''

  There was a general exclamation of surprise, and Edith
dropped from her hand the helmet which she had just received.

  ``Yes, my masters,'' said the King, ``it is even so. Ye know
how Scotland deceived us when she proposed to send this
valiant Earl, with a bold company of her best and noblest, to
aid our arms in this conquest of Palestine, but failed to comply
with her engagements. This noble youth, under whom the
Scottish Crusaders were to have been arrayed, thought foul
scorn that his arm should be withheld from the holy warfare, and
joined us at Sicily with a small train of devoted and faithful
attendants, which was augmented by many of his countrymen
to whom the rank of their leader was unknown. The confidants
of the Royal Prince had all, saving one old follower,
fallen by death, when his secret, but too well kept, had nearly
occasioned my cutting off, in a Scottish adventurer, one of the
noblest hopes of Europe.---Why did you not mention your
rank, noble Huntingdon, when endangered by my hasty and
passionate sentence?---Was it that you thought Richard capable
of abusing the advantage I possessed over the heir of a King
whom I have so often found hostile?''

  ``I did you not that injustice, royal Richard,'' answered the
Earl of Huntingdon; ``but my pride brooked not that I should
avow myself Prince of Scotland in order to save my life, endangered
for default of loyalty. And, moreover, I had made
my vow to preserve my rank unknown till the Crusade should
be accomplished; nor did I mention it save _in articulo mortis,_
and under the seal of confession, to yonder reverend hermit.''

  ``It was the knowledge of that secret, then, which made the
good man so urgent with me to recall my severe sentence?''
said Richard. ``Well did he say, that, had this good knight
fallen by my mandate, I should have wished the deed undone
though it had cost me a limb---A limb!---I should have wished
it undone had it cost me my life---since the world would have
said that Richard had abused the condition in which the heir
of Scotland had placed himself, by his confidence in his
generosity.''

  ``Yet may we know of your grace by what strange and
happy chance this riddle was at length read?'' said the Queen
Berengaria.

  ``Letters were brought to us from England,'' said the King,
``in which we learnt, among other unpleasant news, that the
King of Scotland had seized upon three of our nobles, when on
a pilgrimage to Saint Ninian, and alleged as a cause, that his
heir, being supposed to be fighting in the ranks of the Teutonic
Knights, against the heathen of Borussia, was, in fact, in our
camp and in our power; and, therefore, William proposed to
hold these nobles as hostages for his safety. This gave me the
first light on the real rank of the Knight of the Leopard, and
my suspicions were confirmed by De Vaux, who, on his return
from Ascalon, brought back with him the Earl of Huntingdon's
sole attendant, a thick-skulled slave, who had gone thirty miles
to unfold to De Vaux a secret he should have told to me.''

  ``Old Strauchan must be excused,'' said the Lord of Gilsland.
``He knew from experience that my heart is somewhat softer
than if I wrote myself Plantagenet.''

  ``Thy heart soft? thou commodity of old iron---and Cumberland
flint that thou art!'' exclaimed the King.---``It is we
Plantagenets who boast soft and feeling hearts, Edith,'' turning
to his cousin, with an expression which called the blood into
her cheek---``Give me thy hand, my fair cousin, and, Prince
of Scotland, thine.''

  ``Forbear, my lord,'' said Edith, hanging back, and endeavouring
to hide her confusion, under an attempt to rally her
royal kinsman's credulity. ``Remember you not that my hand
was to be the signal of converting to the Christian faith the
Saracen and Arab, Saladin and all his turbaned host?''

  ``Ay, but the wind of prophecy hath chopped about, and sits
now in another corner,'' replied Richard.

  ``Mock not, lest your bonds be made strong,'' said the Hermit,
stepping forward. ``The heavenly host write nothing but truth
in their brilliant records---it is man's eyes which are too weak
to read their characters aright. Know that when Saladin and
Kenneth of Scotland slept in my grotto, I read in the stars, that
there rested under my roof a prince, the natural foe of Richard,
with whom the fate of Edith Plantagenet was to be united.
Could I doubt that this must be the Soldan, whose rank was
well known to me, as he often visited my cell to converse on
the revolutions of the heavenly bodies?---Again the lights of the
firmament proclaimed that this Prince, the husband of Edith
Plantagenet, should be a Christian; and I---weak and wild
interpreter!---argued thence the conversion of the noble Saladin,
whose good qualities seemed often to incline him towards the
better faith. The sense of my weakness hath humbled me to
the dust, but in the dust I have found comfort! I have not
read aright the fate of others---who can assure me but that I
may have miscalculated mine own? God will not have us break
into his council-house or spy out his hidden mysteries. We
must wait his time with watching and prayer---with fear and
with hope. I came hither the stern seer---the proud prophet
---skilled, as I thought, to instruct princes, and gifted even with
supernatural powers, but burdened with a weight which I deemed
no shoulders but mine could have borne. But my bands have
been broken! I go hence humble in mine ignorance, penitent
---and not hopeless.''

  With these words he withdrew from the assembly; and it is
recorded, that, from that period, his frenzy fits seldom occurred,
and his penances were of a milder character, and accompanied
with better hopes of the future. So much is there of self-opinion,
even in insanity, that the conviction of his having entertained
and expressed an unfounded prediction with so much vehemence,
seemed to operate like loss of blood on the human frame, to
modify and lower the fever of the brain.

  It is needless to follow into farther particulars the conferences
at the royal tent, or to inquire whether David, Earl of Huntingdon,
was as mute in the presence of Edith Plantagenet, as
when he was bound to act under the character of an obscure.
and nameless adventurer. It may be well believed that he
there expressed, with suitable earnestness, the passion to which
he had so often before found it difficult to give words.

  The hour of noon now approached, and Saladin waited to
receive the Princes of Christendom in a tent, which, but for its
large size, differed little from that of the ordinary shelter of the
common Curdman, or Arab; yet, beneath its ample and sable
covering, was prepared a banquet after the most gorgeous
fashion of the East, extended upon carpets of the richest stuffs,
with cushions laid for the guests. But we cannot stop to
describe the cloth of gold and silver---the superb embroidery in
Arabesque---the shawls of Cashmere---and the muslins of India,
which were here unfolded in all their splendour; far less to tell
the different sweetmeats, ragouts edged with rice coloured in
various manners, with all the other niceties of Eastern cookery.
Lambs roasted whole, and game and poultry dressed in pilaus,
were piled in vessels of gold, and silver, and porcelain, and intermixed
with large mazers of sherbet cooled in snow and ice
from the caverns of Mount Lebanon. A magnificent pile of
cushions at the head of the banquet, seemed prepared for the
master of the feast, and such dignitaries as he might call to
share that place of distinction, while from the roof of the tent
in all quarters, but over this scat of eminence in particular,
waved many a banner and pennon, the trophies of battles won,
and kingdoms overthrown. But amongst and above them all,
a long lance displayed a shroud, the banner of Death, with this
impressive inscription---``=Saladin, King of Kings---Saladin,
Victor of Victors---Saladin must die.='' Amid these preparations,
the laves who had arranged the refreshments stood
with drooped heads and folded arms, mute and motionless as
monumental statuary, or as automata, which waited the touch
of the artist to put them in motion.

  Expecting the approach of his princely guests, the Soldan,
imbued, as most were, with the superstitions of his time, paused
over a horoscope and corresponding scroll, which had been sent
to him by the Hermit of Engaddi when he departed from the
camp.

  ``Strange and mysterious science,'' he muttered to himself,
which, pretending to draw the curtain of futurity, misleads
those whom it seems to guide, and darkens the scene which it
pretends to illuminate! Who would not have said that I was
that enemy most dangerous to Richard, whose enmity was to be
ended by marriage with his kinswoman? Yet it now appears
that a union betwixt this gallant Earl and the lady will bring
about friendship betwixt Richard and Scotland, an enemy more
dangerous than I, as a wild cat in a chamber is more to be
dreaded than a lion in a distant desert---But then,'' he continued
to mutter to himself, ``the combination intimates that
this husband was to be Christian.---Christian?'' he repeated,
after a pause,---``That gave the insane fanatic stargazer hopes
that I might renounce my faith! but me, the faithful follower
of our Prophet---me it should have undeceived. Lie there,
mysterious scroll,'' he added, thrusting it under the pile of
cushions; ``strange are thy bodements and fatal, since, even
when true in themselves, they work upon those who attempt to
decipher their meaning all the effects of falsehood.---How now,
what means this intrusion?''

  He spoke to the dwarf Nectabanus, who rushed into the tent
fearfully agitated, with each strange and disproportioned feature
wrenched by horror into still more extravagant ugliness,---his
mouth open, his eyes staring, his hands, with their shrivelled
and deformed fingers, widely expanded.

  ``What now?'' said the Soldan, sternly.

  ``_Accipe hoc!_'' groaned out the dwarf.

  ``Ha! say'st thou?'' answered Saladin.

  ``_Accipe hoc!_'' replied the panic-struck creature, unconscious,
perhaps, that he repeated the same words as before.

  ``Hence! I am in no vein for foolery,'' said the Emperor.

  ``Nor am I farther fool,'' said the dwarf, ``than to make my
folly help out my wits to earn my bread, poor helpless wretch!
---Hear, hear me, great Soldan!''

  ``Nay, if thou hast actual wrong to complain of,'' said Saladin,
``fool or wise, thou art entitled to the ear of a King.---Retire
hither with me;'' and he led him into the inner tent.

  Whatever their conference related to, it was soon broken off
various Christian princes, whom Saladin welcomed to his tent
with a royal courtesy well becoming their rank and his own;
but chiefly he saluted the young Earl of Huntingdon, and
generously congratulated him upon prospects, which seemed to
have interfered with and overclouded those which he had himself
entertained.

  ``But think not,'' said the Soldan, ``thou noble youth, that
the Prince of Scotland is more welcome to Saladin, than was
Kenneth to the solitary Ilderim when they met in the desert,
or the distressed Ethiop to the Hakim Adonbec. A brave
and generous disposition like thine hath a value independent of
condition and birth, as the cool draught which I here proffer
thee, is as delicious from an earthen vessel as from a goblet of
gold.''

  The Earl of Huntingdon made a suitable reply, gratefully
acknowledging the various important services he had received
from the generous Soldan; but when he had pledged Saladin
in the bowl of sherbet, which the Soldan had proffered to him,
he could not help remarking with a smile, ``The brave cavalier,
Ilderim, knew not of the formation of ice, but the munificent
Soldan cools his sherbet with snow.''

  ``Wouldst thou have an Arab or a Curdman as wise as a
Hakim?'' said the Soldan. ``He who does on a disguise must
make the sentiments of his heart and the learning of his head
accord with the dress which he assumes. I desired to see how
a brave and single-hearted cavalier of Frangistan would conduct
himself in debate with such a chief as I then seemed; and I
questioned the truth of a well-known fact, to know by what
arguments thou wouldst support thy assertion.''

  While they were speaking, the Archduke of Austria, who stood
a little apart, was struck with the mention of iced sherbet, and
took with pleasure and some bluntness the deep goblet, as the
Earl of Huntingdon was about to replace it.

  ``Most delicious!'' he exclaimed, after a deep draught, which
the heat of the weather, and the feverishness following the
debauch of the preceding day, had rendered doubly acceptable.
He sighed as he handed the cup to the Grand Master of the
Templars. Saladin made a sign to the dwarf, who advanced
and pronounced, with a harsh voice, the words, _Accipe hoc!_
The Templar started, like a steed who sees a lion under a bush,
beside the pathway; yet instantly recovered, and to hide,
perhaps, his confusion, raised the goblet to his lips---but those
lips never touched that goblet's rim. The sabre of Saladin left
its sheath as lightning leaves the cloud. It was waved in the
air,---and the head of the Grand Master rolled to the extremity
of the tent, while the trunk remained for a second standing,
with the goblet still clenched in its grasp, then fell, the liquor
mingling with the blood that spurted from the veins.<*>

Note B. Death of the Grand Master.


  There was a general exclamation of treason, and Austria, nearest
to whom Saladin stood with the bloody sabre in his hand,
started back as if apprehensive that his turn was to come next.
Richard and others laid hand on their swords.

  ``Fear nothing, noble Austria,'' said Saladin, as composedly
as if nothing had happened, ``nor you, royal England, be wroth
at what you have seen. Not for his manifold treasons;---not
for the attempt which, as may be vouched by his own squire,
he instigated against King Richard's life;---not that he pursued
the Prince of Scotland and myself in the desert, reducing us to
save our lives by the speed of our horses; ---not that he had stirred
up the Maronites to attack us upon this very occasion, had I
not brought up unexpectedly so many Arabs as rendered the
scheme abortive;---not for any or all of these crimes does he now
lie there, although each were deserving such a doom;---but because,
scarce half-an-hour ere he polluted our presence, as the
simoom empoisons the atmosphere, he poniarded his comrade and
accomplice, Conrade of Montserrat, lest he should confess the
infamous plots in which they had both been engaged.''

  ``How! Conrade murdered?---And by the Grand Master, his
sponsor and most intimate friend!'' exclaimed Richard. ``Noble
Soldan, I would not doubt thee---yet this must be proved---
otherwise''------

  ``There stands the evidence,'' said Saladin, pointing to the
terrified dwarf. ``Allah, who sends the fire-fly to illuminate
the night-season, can discover secret crimes by the most contemptible
means.''

  The Soldan proceeded to tell the dwarf's story, which amounted
to this.---In his foolish curiosity, or as he partly confessed, with
some thoughts of pilfering, Nectabanus had strayed into the tent
of Conrade, which had been deserted by his attendants, some of
whom had left the encampment to carry the news of his defeat
to his brother, and others were availing themselves of the means
which Saladin had supplied for revelling. The wounded man
slept under the influence of Saladin's wonderful talisman, so that
the dwarf had opportunity to pry about at pleasure, until he
was frightened into concealment by the sound of a heavy step.
He skulked behind a curtain, yet could see the motions, and hear
the words of the Grand Master, who entered, and carefully secured
the covering of the pavilion behind him. His victim started
from sleep, and it would appear that he instantly suspected the
purpose of his old associate, for it was in a tone of alarm that
he demanded wherefore he disturbed him.

  ``I come to confess and absolve thee,'' answered the Grand
Master.

  Of their farther speech the terrified dwarf remembered little,
save that Conrade implored the Grand Master not to break a
wounded reed, and that the Templar struck him to the heart
with a Turkish dagger, with the words _Accipe hoc_---words which
long afterwards haunted the terrified imagination of the concealed
witness.

  ``I verified the tale,'' said Saladin, ``by causing the body to
be examined; and I made this unhappy being, whom Allah hath
made the discoverer of the crime, repeat in your own presence
the words which the murderer spoke, and you yourselves saw the
effect which they produced upon his conscience!''

  The Soldan paused, and the King of England broke silence:---
``If this be true, as I doubt not, we have witnessed a great
act of justice, though it bore a different aspect. But wherefore
in this presence? wherefore with thine own hand?''

  ``I had designed otherwise,'' said Saladin, ``but had I not
hastened his doom, it had been altogether averted, since, if I had
permitted him to taste of my cup, as he was about to do, how
could I, without incurring the brand of inhospitality, have done
him to death as he deserved? Had he murdered my father, and
afterwards partaken of my food and my bowl, not a hair of his
head could have been injured by me. But enough of him---let
his carcass and his memory be removed from amongst us.''

  The body was carried away, and the marks of the slaughter
obliterated or concealed with such ready dexterity, as showed
that the case was not altogether so uncommon as to paralyse the
assistants and officers of Saladin's household.

  But the Christian princes felt that the scene which they had
beheld weighed heavily on their spirits, and although, at the
courteous invitation of the Soldan, they assumed their seats at
the banquet, yet it was with the silence of doubt and amazement.
The spirits of Richard alone surmounted all cause for suspicion
or embarrassment. Yet he, too, seemed to ruminate on some
proposition, as if he were desirous of making it in the most insinuating
and acceptable manner which was possible. At length he
drank off a large bowl of wine, and addressing the Soldan, desired
to know whether it was not true that he had honoured the
Earl of Huntingdon with a personal encounter.

  Saladin answered with a smile, that he had proved his horse
and his weapons with the heir of Scotland, as cavaliers are wont
to do with each other when they meet in the desert---and modestly
added, that though the combat was not entirely decisive, he had
not, on his part, much reason to pride himself on the event. The
Scot, on the other hand, disclaimed the attributed superiority,
and wished to assign it to the Soldan.

  ``Enough of honour thou hast had in the encounter,'' said
Richard, ``and I envy thee more for that, than for the smiles
of Edith Plantagenet, though one of them might reward a bloody
day's work---But what say you, noble princes; is it fitting that
such a royal ring of chivalry should break up without something
being done for future times to speak of? What is the overthrow
and death of a traitor, to such a fair garland of honour as is here
assembled, and which ought not to part without witnessing something
more worthy of their regard? How say you, princely Soldan
---What if we two should now, and before this fair company,
decide the long-contended question for this land of Palestine, and
end at once these tedious wars? Yonder are the lists ready, nor
can Paynimrie ever hope a better champion than thou. I, unless
worthier offers, will lay down my gauntlet in behalf of Christendom,
and, in all love and honour, we will do mortal battle
for the possession of Jerusalem.''

  There was a deep pause for the Soldan's answer. His cheek
and brow coloured highly, and it was the opinion of many present,
that he hesitated whether he should accept the challenge.
At length he said, ``Fighting for the Holy City against those
whom we regard as idolaters, and worshippers of stocks and
stones, and graven images, I might confide that Allah would
strengthen my arm; or if I fell beneath the sword of the Melech
Ric, I could not pass to Paradise by a more glorious death. But
Allah has already given Jerusalem to the true believers, and it
were a tempting the God of the Prophet to peril, upon my own
personal strength and skill, that which I hold securely by the
superiority of my forces.''

  ``If not for Jerusalem, then,'' said Richard, in the tone of
one who would entreat a favour of an intimate friend, ``yet for
the love of honour, let us run at least three courses with grinded
lances.''

  ``Even this,'' said Saladin, half smiling at C<oe>ur do Lion's
affectionate earnestness for the combat, ``even this may I not
lawfully do. The master places the shepherd over the flock, not
for the shepherd's own sake, but for the sake of the sheep. Had
I a son to hold the sceptre when I fell, I might have had the
liberty, as I have the will, to brave this bold encounter; but
your own Scripture sayeth, that when the herdsman is smitten,
the sheep are scattered.''

  ``Thou hast had all the fortune,'' said Richard, turning to the
Earl of Huntingdon with a sigh. ``I would have given the
best year in my life for that one half-hour beside the Diamond
of the Desert!''

  The chivalrous extravagance of Richard awakened the spirits
of the assembly, and when at length they arose to depart, Saladin
advanced and took C<oe>ur de Lion by the hand.

  ``Noble King of England,'' he said, ``we now part, never to
meet again. That your league is dissolved, no more to be
reunited, and that your native forces are far too few to enable
you to prosecute your enterprise, is as well known to me as to
yourself. I may not yield you up that Jerusalem which you so
much desire to hold. It is to us, as to you, a Holy City.
But whatever other terms Richard demands of Saladin, shall
be as willingly yielded as yonder fountain yields its waters.
Ay, and the same shall be as frankly afforded by Saladin,
if Richard stood in the desert with but two archers in his
train!''

			*

  The next day saw Richard's return to his own camp, and in
a short space afterwards, the young Earl of Huntingdon was
espoused by Edith Plantagenet. The Soldan sent, as a nuptial
present on this occasion, the celebrated =Talisman;= but though
many cures were wrought by means of it in Europe, none
equalled in success and celebrity those which the Soldan
achieved. It is still in existence, having been bequeathed by
the Earl of Huntingdon to a brave knight of Scotland, Sir
Simon of the Lee, in whose ancient and highly honoured
family it is still preserved; and although charmed stones have
been dismissed from the modern Pharmacop<oe>ia, its virtues
are still applied to for stopping blood, and in cases of canine
madness.

  Our story closes here, as the terms on which Richard relinquished
his conquests are to be found in every history of the
period.

