




			CHAPTER SECOND.


  Times of danger have always, and in a peculiar degree, their
seasons of good-will and of security; and this was particularly
so in the ancient feudal ages, in which, as the manners of the
period had assigned war to be the chief and most worthy occupation
of mankind, the intervals of peace, or rather of truce, were
highly relished by those warriors to whom they were seldom
granted, and endeared by the very circumstances which rendered
them transitory. It is not worth while preserving any permanent
enmity against a foe, whom a champion has fought with to-day,
and may again stand in bloody opposition to on the next morning.
The time and situation afforded so much room for the ebullition
of violent passions, that men, unless when peculiarly opposed to
each other, or provoked by the recollection of private and individual
wrongs, cheerfully enjoyed in each other's society the
brief intervals of pacific intercourse which a warlike life admitted.

  The distinction of religions, nay, the fanatical zeal which animated
the followers of the Cross and of the Crescent against
each other, was much softened by a feeling so natural to generous
combatants, and especially cherished by the spirit of chivalry.
This last strong impulse had extended itself gradually from the
Christians to their mortal enemies, the Saracens, both of Spain
and of Palestine. The latter were indeed no longer the fanatical
savages, who had burst from the centre of Arabian deserts, with
the sabre in one hand, and the Koran in the other, to inflict
death or the faith of Mahommed, or at the best, slavery and
tribute, upon all who dared to oppose the belief of the prophet
of Mecca. These alternatives indeed had been offered to the
unwarlike Greeks and Syrians; but in contending with the
western Christians, animated by a zeal as fiery as their own, and
possessed of as unconquerable courage, address, and success in
arms, the Saracens gradually caught a part of their manners, and
especially of those chivalrous observances, which were so well
calculated to charm the minds of a proud and conquering people.
They had their tournaments and games of chivalry; they had
even their knights, or some rank analogous; and above all, the
Saracens observed their plighted faith with an accuracy which
might sometimes put to shame those who owned a better religion.
Their truces, whether national or betwixt individuals,
were faithfully observed; and thus it was, that war, in itself
perhaps the greatest of evils, yet gave occasion for display of good
faith, generosity, clemency, and even kindly affections, which
less frequently occur in more tranquil periods, where the passions
of men, experiencing wrongs, or entertaining quarrels which
cannot be brought to instant decision, are apt to smoulder for a
length of time in the bosoms of those who are so unhappy as to
be their prey.

  It was under the influence of these milder feelings, which
soften the horrors of warfare, that the Christian and Saracen,
who had so lately done their best for each other's mutual destruction,
rode at a slow pace towards the fountain of palm-trees, to
which the Knight of the Couchant Leopard had been tending,
when interrupted in mid-passage by his fleet and dangerous adversary.
Each was wrapt for some time in his own reflections,
and took breath after an encounter which had threatened to be
fatal to one or both; and their good horses seemed no less to
enjoy the interval of repose. That of the Saracen, however,
though he had been forced into much the more violent and extended
sphere of motion, appeared to have suffered less from
fatigue than the charger of the European knight. The sweat
hung still clammy on the limbs of the last when those of the
noble Arab were completely dried by the interval of tranquil exercise,
all saving the foam-flakes which were still visible on his
bridle and housings. The loose soil on which he trod so much
augmented the distress of the Christian's horse, heavily loaded
by his own armour and the weight of his rider, that the latter
jumped from his saddle, and led his charger along the deep dust
of the loamy soil, which was burnt in the sun into a substance
more impalpable than the finest sand, and thus gave the faithful
horse refreshment at the expense of his own additional toil; for,
iron-sheathed as he was, he sunk over the mailed shoes at every
step which he placed on a surface so light and unresisting.

  ``You are right,'' said the Saracen; and it was the first word
that either had spoken since their truce was concluded,---``your
strong horse deserves your care; but what do you in the desert
with an animal, which sinks over the fetlock at every step, as
if he would plant each foot deep as the root of a date-tree?''

  ``Thou speakest rightly, Saracen,'' said the Christian knight,
not delighted at the tone with which the infidel criticised his
favourite horse,---``rightly, according to thy knowledge and observation.
But my good horse hath ere now borne me, in mine
own land, over as wide a lake as thou seest yonder spread out
behind us, yet not wet one hair above his hoot.''

  The Saracen looked at him with as much surprise as his
manners permitted him to testify, which was only expressed by
a slight approach to a disdainful smile, that hardly curled
perceptibly the broad thick mustache which enveloped his
upper lip.

  ``It is justly spoken,'' he said, instantly composing himself to
his usual serene gravity,---``list to a Frank, and hear a fable.''

  ``Thou art not courteous, misbeliever,'' replied the Crusader,
``to doubt the word of a dubbed knight; and were it not that
thou speakest in ignorance, and not in malice, our truce had its
ending ere it is well begun. Thinkest thou I tell thee an untruth
when I say, that I, one of five hundred horsemen, armed
in complete mail, have ridden---ay, and ridden for miles, upon
water as solid as the crystal, and ten times less brittle!''

  ``What wouldst thou tell me?'' answered the Moslem;
``yonder inland sea thou dost point at is peculiar in this, that
by the special curse of God, it suffereth nothing to sink in its
waves, but wafts them away, and casts them on its margin;
but neither the Dead Sea, nor any of the seven oceans which
environ the earth, will endure on their surface the pressure of
a horse's foot, more than the Red Sea endured to sustain the
advance of Pharaoh and his host.''

  ``You speak truth after your knowledge, Saracen,'' said the
Christian knight; ``and yet, trust me, I fable not, according
to mine. Heat, in this climate, converts the soil into something
almost as unstable as water; and in my land cold often converts
the water itself into a substance as hard as rock. Let us speak
of this no longer; for the thoughts of the calm, clear, blue refulgence
of a winter's lake, glimmering to stars and moonbeam,
aggravate the horrors of this fiery desert, where, methinks, the
very air which we breathe is like the vapour of a fiery furnace
seven times heated.''

  The Saracen looked on him with some attention, as if to
discover in what sense he was to understand words, which, to
him, must have appeared either to contain something of mystery,
or of imposition. At length he seemed determined in what
manner to receive the language of his new companion.

  ``You are,'' he said, ``of a nation that loves to laugh, and
you make sport with yourselves, and with others, by telling what
is impossible, and reporting what never chanced. Thou art one
of the knights of France, who hold it for glee and pastime to
_gab,_<*> as they term it, of exploits that are beyond human power.

*   _Gaber._ This French word signified a sort of sport much used among
* the French chivalry, which consisted in vying with each other in making
* the most romantic gasconades. The verb and the meaning are retained in
* Scotch.

I were wrong to challenge, for the time, the privilege of thy
speech, since boasting is more natural to thee than truth.''

  ``I am not of their land, neither of their fashion,'' said the
Knight, ``which is, as thou well sayest, to _gab_ of that which
they dare not undertake, or undertaking cannot perfect. But
in this I have imitated their folly, brave Saracen, that in talking
to thee of what thou canst not comprehend, I have, even in speaking
most simple truth, fully incurred the character of a braggart
in thine eyes; so, I pray you, let my words pass.''

  They had now arrived at the knot of palm-trees, and the
fountain which welled out from beneath their shade in sparkling
profusion.

  We have spoken of a moment of truce in the midst of war;
and this, a spot of beauty in the midst of a sterile desert, was
scarce less dear to the imagination. It was a scene which,
perhaps, would elsewhere have deserved little notice; but as
the single speck, in a boundless horizon, which promised the
refreshment of shade and living water, these blessings, held
cheap where they are common, rendered the fountain and its
neighbourhood a little paradise. Some generous or charitable
hand, ere yet the evil days of Palestine began, had walled in
and arched over the fountain, to preserve it from being absorbed
in the earth, or choked by the flitting clouds of dust with which
the least breath of wind covered the desert. The arch was now
broken, and partly ruinous; but it still so far projected over,
and covered in the fountain, that it excluded the sun in a great
measure from its waters, which, hardly touched by a straggling
beam, while all around was blazing, lay in a steady repose,
alike delightful to the eye and the imagination. Stealing from
under the arch, they were first received in a marble basin,
much defaced indeed, but still cheering the eye, by showing
that the place was anciently considered as a station, that the
hand of man had been there, and that man's accommodation
had been in some measure attended to. The thirsty and weary
traveller was reminded by these signs, that others had suffered
similar difficulties, reposed in the same spot, and, doubtless,
found their way in safety to a more fertile country. Again, the
scarce visible current which escaped from the basin, served to
nourish the few trees which surrounded the fountain, and where
it sunk into the ground and disappeared, its refreshing presence
was acknowledged by a carpet of velvet verdure.

  In this delightful spot the two warriors halted, and each, after
his own fashion, proceeded to relieve his horse from saddle, bit,
and rein, and permitted the animals to drink at the basin ere
they refreshed themselves from the fountain head, which arose
under the vault. They then suffered the steeds to go loose, confident
that their interest, as well as their domesticated habits,
would prevent their straying from the pure water and fresh
grass.

  Christian and Saracen next sat down together on the turf,
and produced each the small allowance of store which they
carried for their own refreshment. Yet, ere they severally proceeded
to their scanty meal, they eyed each other with that
curiosity which the close and doubtful conflict in which they
had been so lately engaged was calculated to inspire. Each
was desirous to measure the strength, and form some estimate
of the character, of an adversary so formidable; and each was
compelled to acknowledge, that had he fallen in the conflict, it
had been by a noble hand.

  The champions formed a striking contrast to each other in
person and features, and might have formed no inaccurate representatives
of their different nations. The Frank seemed a
powerful man, built after the ancient Gothic cast of form, with
light brown hair, which, on the removal of his helmet, was seen
to curl thick and profusely over his head. His features had
acquired, from the hot climate, a hue much darker than those
parts of his neck which were less frequently exposed to view, or
than was warranted by his full and well-opened blue eye, the
colour of his hair, and of the mustaches which thickly shaded
his upper lip, while his chin was carefully divested of beard,
after the Norman fashion. His nose was Grecian and well
formed; his mouth a little large in proportion, but filled with
well-set, strong, and beautifully white teeth; his head small,
and set upon the neck with much grace. His age could not
exceed thirty, but if the effects of toil and climate were allowed
for, might be three or four years under that period. His form
was tall, powerful, and athletic, like that of a man whose strength
might, in later life, become unwieldy, but which was hitherto
united with lightness and activity. His hands, when he withdrew
the mailed gloves, were long, fair, and well proportioned;
the wrist-bones peculiarly large and strong; and the arms themselves
remarkably well-shaped and brawny. A military hardihood,
and careless frankness of expression, characterised his
language and his motions; and his voice had the tone of one
more accustomed to command than to obey, and who was in the
habit of expressing his sentiments aloud and boldly, whenever
he was called upon to announce them.

  The Saracen Emir formed a marked and striking contrast
with the western Crusader. His stature was indeed above the
middle size, but he was at least three inches shorter than the
European, whose size approached the gigantic. His slender
limbs, and long spare hands and arms, though well proportioned
to his person, and suited to the style of his countenance, did not
at first aspect promise the display of vigour and elasticity which
the Emir had lately exhibited. But on looking more closely,
his limbs, where exposed to view, seemed divested of all that was
fleshy or cumbersome; so that nothing being left but bone,
brawn, and sinew, it was a frame fitted for exertion and fatigue,
far beyond that of a bulky champion, whose strength and size
are counterbalanced by weight, and who is exhausted by his own
exertions. The countenance of the Saracen naturally bore a
general national resemblance to the Eastern tribe from whom
he descended, and was as unlike as possible to the exaggerated
terms in which the minstrels of the day were wont to represent
the infidel champions, and the fabulous description which a sister
art still presents as the Saracen's head upon signposts. His
features were small, well formed, and delicate, though deeply
embrowned by the Eastern sun, and terminated by a flowing
and curled black beard, which seemed trimmed with peculiar
care. The nose was straight and regular, the eyes keen, deep-set,
black, and glowing, and his teeth equalled in beauty the
ivory of his deserts. The person and proportions of the Saracen,
in short, stretched on the turf near to his powerful antagonist,
might have been compared to his sheeny and crescent-formed
sabre, with its narrow and light, but bright and keen Damascus
blade, contrasted with the long and ponderous Gothic war-sword
which was flung unbuckled on the same sod. The Emir was
in the very flower of his age, and might perhaps have been
termed eminently beautiful, but for the narrowness of his forehead,
and something of too much thinness and sharpness of
feature, or at least what might have seemed such in a European
estimate of beauty.

  The manners of the Eastern warrior were grave, graceful, and
decorous; indicating, however, in some particulars, the habitual
restraint which men of warm and choleric tempers often set as
a guard upon their native impetuosity of disposition, and at the
same time a sense of his own dignity, which seemed to impose
a certain formality of behaviour in him who entertained it.

  This haughty feeling of superiority was perhaps equally entertained
by his new European acquaintance, but the effect was
different; and the same feeling, which dictated to the Christian
knight a bold, blunt, and somewhat careless bearing, as one too
conscious of his own importance to be anxious about the opinions
of others, appeared to prescribe to the Saracen a style of courtesy
more studiously and formally observant of ceremony. Both were
courteous; but the courtesy of the Christian seemed to flow
rather from a good-humoured sense of what was due to others;
that of the Moslem, from a high feeling of what was to be expected
from himself.

  The provision which each had made for his refreshment was
simple, but the meal of the Saracen was abstemious. A handful
of dates, and a morsel of coarse barley-bread, sufficed to
relieve the hunger of the latter, whose education had habituated
him to the fare of the desert, although, since their Syrian conquests,
the Arabian simplicity of life frequently gave place to
the most unbounded profusion of luxury. A few draughts from
the lovely fountain by which they reposed completed his meal.
That of the Christian, though coarse, was more genial. Dried
hog's-flesh, the abomination of the Moslemah, was the chief
part of his repast; and his drink, derived from a leathern bottle,
contained something better than pure element. He fed with
more display of appetite, and drank with more appearance of
satisfaction, than the Saracen judged it becoming to show in
the performance of a mere bodily function; and, doubtless, the
secret contempt which each entertained for the other, as the
follower of a false religion, was considerably increased by the
marked difference of their diet and manners. But each had
found the weight of his opponent's arm, and the mutual respect
which the bold struggle had created, was sufficient to subdue
other and inferior considerations. Yet the Saracen could not
help remarking the circumstances which displeased him in the
Christian's conduct and manners; and, after he had witnessed
for some time in silence the keen appetite which protracted the
knight's banquet long after his own was concluded, he thus
addressed him:---

  ``Valiant Nazarene, is it fitting that one who can fight like
a man, should feed like a dog or a wolf? Even a misbelieving
Jew would shudder at the food which you seem to eat with as
much relish as if it were fruit from the trees of Paradise.''

  ``Valiant Saracen,'' answered the Christian, looking up with
some surprise at the accusation thus unexpectedly brought,
``know thou that I exercise my Christian freedom, in using that
which is forbidden to the Jews, being, as they esteem themselves,
under the bondage of the old law of Moses. We, Saracen, be
it known to thee, have a better warrant for what we do---Ave
Maria!---be we thankful.'' And, as if in defiance of his companion's
scruples, he concluded a short Latin grace with a long
draught from the leathern bottle.

  ``That, too, you call a part of your liberty,'' said the Saracen;
``and as you feed like the brutes, so you degrade yourself to the
bestial condition, by drinking a poisonous liquor which even they
refuse!''

  ``Know, foolish Saracen,'' replied the Christian, without
hesitation, ``that thou blasphemest the gifts of God, even with
the blasphemy, of thy father Ishmael. The juice of the grape
is given to him that will use it wisely, as that which cheers the
heart of man after toil, refreshes him in sickness, and comforts
him in sorrow. He who so enjoyeth it may thank God for his
wine-cup as for his daily bread: and he who abuseth the gift
of Heaven, is not a greater fool in his intoxication than thou in
thine abstinence.''

  The keen eye of the Saracen kindled at this sarcasm, and his
hand sought the hilt of his poniard. It was but a momentary
thought, however, and died away in the recollection of the
powerful champion with whom he had to deal, and the desperate
grapple, the impression of which still throbbed in his limbs and
veins; and he contented himself with pursuing the contest in
colloquy, as more convenient for the time.

  ``Thy words,'' he said, ``O Nazarene, might create anger, did
not thy ignorance raise compassion. See'st thou not, O thou
more blind than any who asks alms at the door of the Mosque,
that the liberty thou dost boast of is restrained even in that
which is dearest to man's happiness, and to his household; and
that thy law, if thou dost practise it, binds thee in marriage to
one single mate, be she sick or healthy, be she fruitful or barren,
bring she comfort and joy, or clamour and strife, to thy table
and to thy bed? This, Nazarene, I do indeed call slavery;
whereas, to the faithful, hath the Prophet assigned upon earth
the patriarchal privileges of Abraham our father, and of Solomon,
the wisest of mankind, having given us here a succession of
beauty at our pleasure, and beyond the grave the black-eyed
houris of Paradise.''

  ``Now, by His name that I most reverence in Heaven,'' said
the Christian, ``and by hers whom I most worship on earth, thou
art but a blinded and a bewildered infidel!---That diamond
signet, which thou wearest on thy finger, thou holdest it, doubtless,
as of inestimable value?''

  ``Balsora and Bagdad cannot show the like,'' replied the
Saracen; ``but what avails it to our purpose?''

  ``Much,'' replied the Frank, ``as thou shalt thyself confess.
Take my war-axe, and dash the stone into twenty shivers;---
would each fragment be as valuable as the original gem, or
would they, all collected, bear the tenth part of its estimation?''

  ``That is a child's question,'' answered the Saracen; ``the
fragments of such a stone would not equal the entire jewel in
the degree of hundreds to one.''

  ``Saracen,'' replied the Christian warrior, ``the love which
a true knight binds on one only, fair and faithful, is the gem
entire; the affection thou flingest among thy enslaved wives,
and half-wedded slaves, is worthless, comparatively, as the
sparkling shivers of the broken diamond.''

  ``Now, by the Holy Cahba,'' said the Emir, ``thou art a
madman, who hugs his chain of iron as if it were of gold!---
Look more closely. This ring of mine would lose half its
beauty were not the signet encircled and enchased with these
lesser brilliants, which grace it and set it off. The central
diamond is man, firm and entire, his value depending on himself
alone; and this circle of lesser jewels are women, borrowing
his lustre, which he deals out to them as best suits his pleasure
or his convenience. Take the central stone from the signet,
and the diamond itself remains as valuable as ever, while the
lesser gems are comparatively of little value. And this is the
true reading of thy parable; for, what sayeth the poet Mansour;
`It is the favour of man which giveth beauty and comeliness to
woman, as the stream glitters no longer when the sun ceaseth
to shine.' ''

  ``Saracen,'' replied the Crusader, ``thou speakest like one
who never saw a woman worthy the affection of a soldier.
Believe me, couldst thou look upon those of Europe, to whom,
after Heaven, we of the order of knighthood vow fealty and
devotion, thou wouldst loathe for ever the poor sensual slaves
who form thy harem. The beauty of our fair ones gives point
to our spears, and edge to our swords; their words are our law;
and as soon will a lamp shed lustre when unkindled, as a knight
distinguish himself by feats of arms, having no mistress of his
affection.''

  ``I have heard of this frenzy among the warriors of the west,''
said the Emir, ``and have ever accounted it one of the accompanying
symptoms of that insanity, which brings you hither to
obtain possession of an empty sepulchre. But yet, methinks,
so highly have the Franks whom I have met with extolled the
beauty of their women, I could be well contented to behold
with mine own eyes those charms, which can transform such
brave warriors into the tools of their pleasure.''

  ``Brave Saracen,'' said the Knight, ``if I were not on a
pilgrimage to the Holy Sepulchre, it should be my pride to conduct
you, on assurance of safety, to the camp of Richard of England,
than whom none knows better how to do honour to a noble
foe; and though I be poor and unattended, yet have I interest
to secure for thee, or any such as thou seemest, not safety only,
but respect and esteem. There shouldst thou see several of the
fairest beauties of France and Britain form a small circle, the
brilliancy of which exceeds ten-thousand-fold the lustre of mines
of diamonds such as thine.''

  ``Now, by the corner-stone of the Cahba,'' said the Saracen,
``I will accept thy invitation as freely as it is given, if thou wilt
postpone thy present intent; and, credit me, brave Nazarene, it
were better for thyself to turn back thy horse's head towards
the camp of thy people, for, to travel towards Jerusalem without
a passport, is but a wilful casting away of thy life.''

  ``I have a pass,'' answered the Knight, producing a parchment,
``under Saladin's hand and signet.''

  The Saracen bent his head to the dust as he recognised the
seal and handwriting of the renowned Soldan of Egypt and
Syria; and having kissed the paper with profound respect, he
pressed it to his forehead, then returned it to the Christian, saying,
``Rash Frank, thou hast sinned against thine own blood and
mine, for not showing this to me when we met.''

  ``You came with levelled spear,'' said the Knight; ``had a
troop of Saracens so assailed me, it might have stood with my
honour to have shown the Soldan's pass, but never to one man.''

  ``And yet one man,'' said the Saracen, haughtily, ``was
enough to interrupt your journey.''

  ``True, brave Moslem,'' replied the Christian; ``but there
are few such as thou art. Such falcons fly not in flocks, or if
they do, they pounce not in numbers upon one.''

  ``Thou dost us but justice,'' said the Saracen, evidently
gratified by the compliment, as he had been touched by the implied
scorn of the European's previous boast; ``from us thou
shouldst have had no wrong; but well was it for me that I
failed to slay thee, with the safeguard of the king of kings upon
thy person. Certain it were, that the cord or the sabre had
justly avenged such guilt.''

  ``I am glad to hear that its influence shall be availing to
me,'' said the Knight; ``for I have heard that the road is
infested with robber-tribes, who regard nothing in comparison of
an opportunity of plunder.''

  ``The truth has been told to thee, brave Christian,'' said the
Saracen; ``but I swear to thee, by the turban of the Prophet,
that shouldst thou miscarry in any haunt of such villains, I will
myself undertake thy revenge with five thousand horse; I will
slay every male of them, and send their women into such distant
captivity that the name of their tribe shall never again be heard
within five hundred miles of Damascus. I will sow with salt
the foundations of their village, and there shall never live thing
dwell there, even from that time forward.''

  ``I had rather the trouble which you design for yourself, were
in revenge of some other more important person than of me, noble
Emir,'' replied the Knight; ``but my vow is recorded in Heaven,
for good or for evil, and I must be indebted to you for pointing
me out the way to my resting-place for this evening.''

  ``That,'' said the Saracen, ``must be under the black covering
of my father's tent.''

  ``This night,'' answered the Christian, ``I must pass in prayer
and penitence with a holy man, Theodorick of Engaddi, who
dwells amongst these wilds, and spends his life in the service of
God.''

  ``I will at least see you safe thither,'' said the Saracen.

  ``That would be pleasant convoy for me,'' said the Christian,
``yet might endanger the future security of the good father; for
the cruel hand of your people has been red with the blood of the
servants of the Lord, and therefore do we come hither in plate
and mail, with sword and lance, to open the road to the Holy
Sepulchre, and protect the chosen saints and anchorites who
yet dwell in this land of promise and of miracle.''

  ``Nazarene,'' said the Moslem, ``in this the Greeks and
Syrians have much belied us, seeing we do but after the word
of Abu-Bekr El-sideek, the successor of the Prophet, and, after
him, the first commander of true believers. `Go forth,' he said,
`Yezed Ben Abi Sophyan,' when he sent that renowned general
to take Syria from the infidels, `quit yourselves like men in
battle, but slay neither the aged, the infirm, the women, nor the
children. Waste not the land, neither destroy corn and fruit-trees,
they are the gifts of Allah. Keep faith when you have
made any covenant, even if it be to your own harm. If ye find
holy men labouring with their hands, and serving God in the
desert, hurt them not, neither destroy their dwellings. But
when you find them with shaven crowns, they are of the synagogue
of Satan! smite with the sabre, slay, cease not till they
become believers or tributaries.' As the Caliph, companion of
the Prophet, hath told us, so have we done, and those whom our
justice has smitten are but the priests of Satan. But unto the
good men who, without stirring up nation against nation, worship
sincerely in the faith of Issa Ben Miriam,<*> we are a shadow and

* [_Arabic_---Jesus, son of Mary.]

a shield; and such being he whom you seek, even though the
light of the Prophet hath not reached him, from me he will only
have love, favour, and regard.''

  ``The anchorite, whom I would now visit,'' said the warlike
pilgrim, ``is, I have heard, no priest; but were he of that
anointed and sacred order, I would prove with my good lance,
against paynim and infidel''------

  ``Let us not defy each other, brother,'' interrupted the
Saracen; ``we shall find, either of us, enough of Franks or of
Moslemah on whom to exercise both sword and lance. This
Theodorick is protected both by Turk and Arab; and though
one of strange conditions at intervals, yet, on the whole, he bears
himself so well as the follower of his own prophet, that he merits
the protection of him who was sent''------

  ``Now, by Our Lady, Saracen,'' exclaimed the Christian, ``if
thou darest name in the same breath, the camel-driver of Mecca
with''------

  An electrical shock of passion thrilled through the form of
the Emir; but it was only momentary, and the calmness of his
reply had both dignity and reason in it, when he said, ``Slander
not him whom thou knowest not; the rather that we venerate
the founder of thy religion, while we condemn the doctrine
which priests have spun from it. I will myself guide thee to
the cavern of the hermit, which, methinks, without my help,
thou wouldst find it a hard matter to reach. And, on the way,
let us leave to mollahs and to monks, to dispute about the
divinity of our faith, and speak on themes which belong to
youthful warriors,---upon battles, upon beautiful women, upon
sharp swords, and upon bright armour.''
