




			CHAPTER SEVENTH.

	There never was a time on the March parts yet,
	    When Scottish with English met,
	But it was marvel if the red blood ran not
	    As the rain does in the street.
				Battle of Otterbourn.


  A considerable band of Scottish warriors had joined the
Crusaders, and had naturally placed themselves under the
command of the English monarch, being, like his native troops,
most of them of Saxon and Norman descent, speaking the same
languages, possessed, some of them, of English as well as Scottish
demesnes, and allied, in some cases, by blood and intermarriage.
The period also preceded that when the grasping
ambition of Edward I. gave a deadly and envenomed character
to the wars betwixt the two nations; the English fighting for
the subjugation of Scotland, and the Scotch, with all the stern
determination and obstinacy which has ever characterised their
nation, for the defence of their independence, by the most
violent means, under the most disadvantageous circumstances,
and at the most extreme hazard. As yet, wars betwixt the
two nations, though fierce and frequent, had been conducted
on principles of fair hostility, and admitted of those softening
shades by which courtesy, and the respect for open and generous
foemen, qualify and mitigate the horrors of war. In time
of peace, therefore, and especially when both, as at present,
were engaged in war, waged in behalf of a common cause, and
rendered dear to them by their ideas of religion, the adventurers
of both countries frequently fought side by side, their
national emulation serving only to stimulate them to excel each
other in their efforts against the common enemy.

  The frank and martial character of Richard, who made no
distinction betwixt his own subjects and those of William of
Scotland, excepting as they bore themselves in the field of
battle, tended much to conciliate the troops of both nations.
But upon his illness, and the disadvantageous circumstances in
which the Crusaders were placed, the national disunion between
the various bands united in the Crusade began to display itself,
just as old wounds break out afresh in the human body, when
under the influence of disease or debility.

  The Scotch and English, equally jealous and high-spirited,
and apt to take offence,---the former the more so, because the
poorer and the weaker nation,---began to fill up, by internal
dissension, the period when the truce forbade them to wreak
their united vengeance on the Saracens. Like the contending
Roman chiefs of old, the Scotch would admit no superiority,
and their southern neighbours would brook no equality. There
were charges and recriminations, and both the common soldiery,
and their leaders and commanders, who had been good comrades
in time of victory, lowered on each other in the period of adversity,
as if their union had not been then more essential than
ever, not only to the success of their common cause, but to their
joint safety. The same disunion had begun to show itself betwixt
the French and English, the Italians and the Germans,
and even between the Danes and Swedes; but it is only that
which divided the two nations whom one island bred, and who
seemed more animated against each other for the very reason,
that our narrative is principally concerned with.

  Of all the English nobles who had followed their King to
Palestine, De Vaux was most prejudiced against the Scotch;
they were his near neighbours, with whom he had been engaged
during his whole life in private or public warfare, and on whom
he had inflicted many calamities, while he had sustained at
their hands not a few. His love and devotion to the King was
like the vivid affection of the old English mastiff to his master,
leaving him churlish and inaccessible to all others, even towards
those to whom he was indifferent, and rough and dangerous to
any against whom he entertained a prejudice. De Vaux had
never observed, without jealousy and displeasure, his King exhibit
any mark of courtesy or favour to the wicked, deceitful,
and ferocious race, born on the other side of a river, or an imaginary
line drawn through waste and wilderness, and he even
doubted the success of a Crusade in which they were suffered to
bear arms, holding them in his secret soul little better than the
Saracens whom he came to combat. It may be added, that, as
being himself a blunt and downright Englishman, unaccustomed
to conceal the slightest movement either of love or of dislike,
he accounted the fair-spoken courtesy, which the Scots had
learned, either from imitation of their frequent allies, the French,
or which might have arisen from their own proud and reserved
character, as a false and astucious mark of the most dangerous
designs against their neighbours, over whom he believed, with
genuine English confidence, they could, by fair manhood, never
obtain any advantage.

  Yet, though De Vaux entertained these sentiments concerning
his northern neighbours, and extended them, with little
mitigation, even to such as had assumed the Cross, his respect
for the King, and a sense of the duty imposed by his vow as a
Crusader, prevented him from displaying them otherwise than
by regularly shunning all intercourse with his Scottish brethren-at-arms,
as far as possible,---by observing a sullen taciturnity,
when compelled to meet them occasionally,---and by looking
scornfully upon them when they encountered on the march and
in camp. The Scottish barons and knights were not men to bear
his scorn unobserved or unreplied to; and it came to that pass,
that he was regarded as the determined and active enemy of a
nation, whom, after all, he only disliked, and in some sort
despised. Nay, it was remarked by close observers, that, if he
had not towards them the charity of Scripture, which suffereth
long, and judges kindly, he was by no means deficient in the
subordinate and limited virtue, which alleviates and relieves the
wants of others. The wealth of Thomas of Gilsland procured
supplies of provisions and medicines, and some of these usually
flowed by secret channels into the quarters of the Scottish; his
surly benevolence proceeding on the principle, that, next to a
man's friend, his foe was of most importance to him, passing
over all the intermediate relations, as too indifferent to merit
even a thought. This explanation is necessary, in order that
the reader may fully understand what we are now to detail.

  Thomas de Vaux had not made many steps beyond the entrance
of the royal pavilion, when he was aware of what the far more
acute ear of the English monarch, no mean proficient in the art
of minstrelsy, had instantly discovered, that the musical strains,
namely, which had reached their ears, were produced by the pipes,
shalms, and kettle-drums of the Saracens; and, at the bottom
of an avenue of tents, which formed a broad access to the pavilion
of Richard, he could see a crowd of idle soldiers assembled around
the spot from which the music was heard, almost in the centre
of the camp; and he saw, with great surprise, mingled amid the
helmets of various forms worn by the Crusaders of different
nations, white turbans and long pikes, announcing the presence
of armed Saracens, and the huge deformed heads of several
camels or dromedaries overlooking the multitude by aid of their
long disproportioned necks.

  Wondering and displeased at a sight so unexpected and
singular,---for it was customary to leave all flags of truce and
other communications from the enemy at an appointed place
without the barriers,---the baron looked eagerly round for some
one of whom he might inquire the cause of this alarming novelty.

  The first person whom he met advancing to him, he set down
at once, by his grave and haughty step, as a Spaniard or a Scot;
and presently after muttered to himself---``And a Scot it is---he
of the Leopard.---I have seen him fight indifferently well for one
of his country.''

  Loath to ask even a passing question, he was about to pass
Sir Kenneth, with that sullen and lowering port which seems to
say, ``I know thee, but I will hold no communication with thee;''
but his purpose was defeated by the Northern Knight, who
moved forward directly to him, and accosting him with formal
courtesy, said, ``My Lord de Vaux of Gilsland, I have in charge
to speak with you.''

  ``Ha!'' returned the English baron, ``with me? But, say your
pleasure, so it be shortly spoken---I am on the King's errand.''

  ``Mine touches King Richard yet more nearly,'' answered Sir
Kenneth; ``I bring him, I trust, health.''

  The Lord of Gilsland measured the Scot with incredulous eyes,
and replied, ``Thou art no leech, I think, Sir Scot---I had as
soon thought of your bringing the King of England wealth.''

  Sir Kenneth, though displeased with the manner of the
baron's reply, answered calmly, ``Health to Richard is glory
and wealth to Christendom.---But my time presses; I pray you,
may I see the King?''

  ``Surely not, fair sir,'' said the baron, ``until your errand be
told more distinctly. The sick chambers of princes open not
to all who inquire, like a northern hostelry.''

  ``My lord,'' said Kenneth, ``the cross which I wear in common
with yourself, and the importance of what I have to tell, must,
for the present, cause me to pass over a bearing, which else I
were unapt to endure. In plain language, then, I bring with
me a Moorish physician, who undertakes to work a cure on King
Richard.''

  ``A Moorish physician;'' said De Vaux; ``and who will
warrant that he brings not poisons instead of remedies?''

  ``His own life, my lord---his head, which he offers as a
guarantee.''

  ``I have known many a resolute ruffian,'' said De Vaux,
``who valued his own life as little as it deserved, and would
troop to the gallows as merrily as if the hangman were his
partner in a dance.''

  ``But thus it is, my lord,'' replied the Scot; ``Saladin, to
whom none will deny the credit of a generous and valiant enemy,
hath sent this leech hither with an honourable retinue and guard,
befitting the high estimation in which El Hakim<*> is held by

* The physician.

the Soldan, and with fruits and refreshments for the King's.
private chamber, and such message as may pass betwixt honourable
enemies, praying him to be recovered of his fever, that he
may be the fitter to receive a visit from the Soldan, with his
naked scimitar in his hand, and an hundred thousand cavaliers
at his back. Will it please you, who are of the King's secret
council, to cause these camels to be discharged of their burdens,
and some order taken as to the reception of the learned
physician?''

  ``Wonderful!'' said de Vaux, as speaking to himself.---``And
who will vouch for the honour of Saladin, in a case when bad
faith would rid him at once of his most powerful adversary?''

  ``I myself,'' replied Sir Kenneth, ``will be his guarantee,
with honour, life, and fortune.''

  ``Strange!'' again ejaculated De Vaux; ``the North vouches
for the South---the Scot for the Turk!---May I crave of you,
Sir Knight, how you became concerned in this affair?''

  ``I have been absent on a pilgrimage, in the course of which,''
replied Sir Kenneth, ``I had a message to discharge towards
the holy hermit of Engaddi.''

  ``May I not be intrusted with it, Sir Kenneth, and with the
answer of the holy man?''

  ``It may not be, my lord,'' answered the Scot.

  ``I am of the secret council of England,'' said the Englishman,
haughtily.

  ``To which land I owe no allegiance,'' said Kenneth.
``Though I have voluntarily followed in this war the personal
fortunes of England's sovereign, I was despatched by the General
Council of the kings, princes, and supreme leaders of the army
of the Blessed Cross, and to them only I render my errand.''

  ``Ha! say'st thou?'' said the proud Baron de Vaux. ``But
know, messenger of the kings and princes as thou may'st be, no
leech shall approach the sick-bed of Richard of England, without
the consent of him of Gilsland; and they will come on evil
errand who dare to intrude themselves against it.''

  He was turning loftily away, when the Scot, placing himself
closer, and more opposite to him, asked, in a calm voice, yet not
without expressing his share of pride, whether the Lord of Gilsland
esteemed him a gentleman and a good knight.

  ``All Scots are ennobled by their birthright,'' answered Thomas
de Vaux, something ironically; but, sensible of his own injustice,
and perceiving that Kenneth's colour rose, he added, ``For a
good knight it were sin to doubt you, in one at least who has
seen you well and bravely discharge your devoir.''

  ``Well, then,'' said the Scottish knight, satisfied with the
frankness of the last admission, ``and let me swear to you,
Thomas of Gilsland, that as I am true Scottish man, which I
hold a privilege equal to my ancient gentry, and as sure as I am
a belted knight, and come hither to acquire _los_<*> and fame in

* _Los---laus,_ praise, or renown.

this mortal life, and forgiveness of my sins in that which is to
come---so truly, and by the blessed Cross which I wear, do
I protest unto you, that I desire but the safety of Richard
C<oe>ur de Lion, in recommending the ministry of this Moslem
physician.''

  The Englishman was struck with the solemnity of the obtestation,
and answered with more cordiality than he had yet exhibited,
``Tell me, Sir Knight of the Leopard, granting (which I
do not doubt) that thou art thyself satisfied in this matter, shall
I do well, in a land where the art of poisoning is as general as
that of cooking, to bring this unknown physician to practise with
his drugs on a health so valuable to Christendom?''

  ``My lord,'' replied the Scot, ``thus only can I reply; that
my squire, the only one of my retinue whom war and disease
had left in attendance on me, has been of late suffering dangerously
under this same fever, which, in valiant King Richard,
has disabled the principal limb of our holy enterprise. This
leech, this El Hakim, hath ministered remedies to him not two
hours since, and already he hath fallen into a refreshing sleep.
That he can cure the disorder, which has proved so fatal, I
nothing doubt; that he hath the purpose to do it, is, I think,
warranted by his mission from the royal Soldan, who is true-hearted
and loyal, so far as a blinded infidel may be called so;
and, for his eventual success, the certainty of reward in case of
succeeding, and punishment in case of voluntary failure, may be
a sufficient guarantee.''

  The Englishman listened with downcast looks, as one who
doubted, yet was not unwilling to receive conviction. At length
he looked up and said, ``May I see your sick squire, fair sir?''

  The Scottish knight hesitated and coloured, yet answered at
last, ``Willingly, my Lord of Gilsland; but you must remember,
when you see my poor quarter, that the nobles and knights of
Scotland feed not so high, sleep not so soft, and care not for
the magnificence of lodgment, which is proper to their southern
neighbours. I am poorly lodged, my Lord of Gilsland,'' he
added, with a haughty emphasis on the word, while, with some
unwillingness, he led the way to his temporary place of abode.

  Whatever were the prejudices of De Vaux against the nation
of his new acquaintance, and though we undertake not to deny
that some of these were excited by its proverbial poverty, he had
too much nobleness of disposition to enjoy the mortification of a
brave individual, thus compelled to make known wants which
his pride would gladly have concealed.

  ``Shame to the soldier of the Cross,'' he said, ``who thinks of
worldly splendour, or of luxurious accommodation, when pressing
forward to the conquest of the Holy City. Fare as hard as we
may, we shall yet be better than the host of martyrs and of
saints, who, having trod these scenes before us, now hold golden
lamps and evergreen palms.''

  This was the most metaphorical speech which Thomas of
Gilsland was ever known to utter, the rather, perhaps (as will
sometimes happen), that it did not entirely express his own
sentiments, being somewhat a lover of good cheer and splendid
accommodation. By this time they reached the place of the
camp, where the Knight of the Leopard had assumed his
abode.

  Appearances here did indeed promise no breach of the laws of
mortification, to which the Crusaders, according to the opinion
expressed by him of Gilsland, ought to subject themselves. A
space of ground large enough to accommodate perhaps thirty
tents according to the Crusaders' rules of castrametation, was
partly vacant---because, in ostentation, the knight had demanded
ground to the extent of his original retinue---partly occupied by
a few miserable huts, hastily constructed of boughs, and covered
with palm-leaves. These habitations seemed entirely deserted,
and several of them were ruinous. The central hut, which
represented the pavilion of the leader, was distinguished by
the swallow-tailed pennon, placed on the point of a spear; from
which its long folds dropt motionless to the ground, as if sickening
under the scorching rays of the Asiatic sun. But no pages
or squires, not even a solitary warder, was placed by the emblem
of feudal power and knightly degrees. If its reputation defended
it not from insult, it had no other guard.

  Sir Kenneth cast a melancholy look around him, but, suppressing
his feelings, entered the hut, making a sign to the Baron
of Gilsland to follow. He also cast around a glance of examination,
which implied pity not altogether unmingled with contempt,
to which, perhaps, it is as nearly akin as it is said to be to love.
He then stooped his lofty crest, and entered a lowly hut, which
his bulky form seemed almost entirely to fill.

  The interior of the hut was chiefly occupied by two beds.
One was empty, but composed of collected leaves, and spread
with an antelope's hide. It seemed, from the articles of armour
laid beside it, and from a crucifix of silver, carefully and reverentially
disposed at the head, to be the couch of the knight
himself. The other contained the invalid, of whom Sir Kenneth
had spoken, strong-built and harsh-featured man, past, as his
looks betokened, the middle age of life. His couch was trimmed
more softly than his master's, and it was plain that the more
courtly garments of the latter, the loose robe, in which the
knights showed themselves on pacific occasions, and the other
little spare articles of dress and adornment, had been applied by
Sir Kenneth to the accommodation of his sick domestic. In an
outward part of the hut, which yet was within the range of the
English baron's eye, a boy rudely attired with buskins of deer's
hide, a blue cap or bonnet, and a doublet, whose original finery
was much tarnished, sat on his knees by a chafing-dish filled with
charcoal, cooking upon a plate of iron the cakes of barley-bread,
which were then, and still are, a favourite food with the Scottish
people. Part of an antelope was suspended against one of the
main props of the hut, nor was it difficult to know how it had
been procured; for a large stag greyhound, nobler in size and
appearance than those even which guarded King Richard's sick-bed,
lay eyeing the process of baking the cake. The sagacious
animal, on their first entrance, uttered a stifled growl, which
sounded from his deep chest like distant thunder. But he saw
his master, and acknowledged his presence by wagging his tail
and couching his head, abstaining from more tumultuous or noisy
greeting, as if his noble instinct had taught him the propriety
of silence in a sick man's chamber.

  Beside the couch, sat on a cushion, also composed of skins,
the Moorish physician of whom Sir Kenneth had spoken, cross-legged,
after the Eastern fashion. The imperfect light showed
little of him, save that the lower part of his face was covered
with a long black beard, which descended over his breast---that
he wore a high _tolpach,_ a Tartar cap of the lamb's wool manufactured
at Astracan, bearing the same dusky colour, and that
his ample caftan, or Turkish robe, was also of a dark hue. Two
piercing eyes, which gleamed with unusual lustre, were the only
lineaments of his visage that could be discerned amid the darkness
in which he was enveloped. The English lord stood silent
with a sort of reverential awe; for, notwithstanding the roughness
of his general bearing, a scene of distress and poverty, firmly
endured without complaint or murmur, would at any time have
claimed more reverence from Thomas de Vaux than would all
the splendid formalities of a royal presence-chamber, unless that
presence-chamber were King Richard's own. Nothing was, for a
time, heard, but the heavy and regular breathings of the invalid,
who seemed in profound repose.

  ``He hath not slept for six nights before,'' said Sir Kenneth,
``as I am assured by the youth his attendant.''

  ``Noble Scot,'' said Thomas de Vaux, grasping the Scottish
knight's hand, with a pressure which had more of cordiality than
he permitted his words to utter, ``this gear must be amended---
Your esquire is but too evil fed and looked to.''

  In the latter part of this speech, he naturally raised his voice
to its usual decided tone. The sick man was disturbed in his
slumbers.

  ``My master,'' he said, murmuring as in a dream, ``noble Sir
Kenneth---taste not, to you as to me, the waters of the Clyde
cold and refreshing, after the brackish springs of Palestine?''

  ``He dreams of his native land, and is happy in his slumbers,''
whispered Sir Kenneth to De Vaux; but had scarce uttered the
words, when the physician, arising from the place which he had
taken near the couch of the sick, and laying the hand of the
patient, whose pulse he had been carefully watching, quietly
upon the couch, came to the two knights, and taking them
each by the arm, while he intimated to them to remain silent,
led them to the front of the hut.

  ``In the name of Issa Ben Miriam,'' he said, ``whom we
honour as you, though not with the same blinded superstition,
disturb not the effect of the blessed medicine of which he hath
partaken. To awaken him now is death or deprivation of
reason; but return at the hour when the Muezzin calls from
the minaret to evening prayer in the mosque, and, if left undisturbed
until then, I promise you, this same Frankish soldier shall
be able, without prejudice to his health, to hold some brief converse
with you, on any matters on which either, and especially
his master, may have to question him.''

  The knights retreated before the authoritative commands of
the leech, who seemed fully to comprehend the importance of
the Eastern proverb, that the sick chamber of the patient is the
kingdom of the physician.

  They paused, and remained standing together at the door of
the hut, Sir Kenneth, with the air of one who expected his
visitor to say farewell---and De Vaux, as if he had something
on his mind which prevented him from doing so. The hound,
however, had pressed out of the tent after them, and now thrust
his long rough countenance into the hand of his master, as if
modestly soliciting some mark of his kindness. He had no sooner
received the notice which he desired, in the shape of a kind word
and slight caress, than, eager to acknowledge his gratitude and
joy for his master's return, he flew off at full speed, galloping in
full career, and with outstretched tail, here and there, about and
around, crossways and endlong, through the decayed huts, and
the esplanade we have described, but never transgressing those
precincts which his sagacity knew were protected by his master's
pennon. After a few gambols of this kind, the dog, coming
close up to his master, laid at once aside his frolicsome mood,
relapsed into his usual gravity and slowness of gesture and
deportment, and looked as if he were ashamed that anything
should have moved him to depart so far out of his sober self-control.

  Both knights looked on with pleasure; for Sir Kenneth was
justly proud of his noble hound, and the northern English baron
was of course an admirer of the chase, and a judge of the animal's
merits.

  ``A right able dog,'' he said; ``I think, fair sir, King Richard
hath not an _alan_ which may match him, if he be as stanch as
he is swift. But let me pray you---speaking in all honour and
kindness---have you not heard the proclamation, that no one
under the rank of earl shall keep hunting dogs within King
Richard's camp without the royal license, which, I think, Sir
Kenneth, hath not been issued to you?---I speak as Master of
the Horse.''

  ``And I answer as a free Scottish knight,'' said Kenneth,
sternly. ``For the present I follow the banner of England, but
I cannot remember that I have ever subjected myself to the
forest-laws of that kingdom, nor have I such respect for them
as would incline me to do so. When the trumpet sounds to arms,
my foot is in the stirrup as soon as any---when it clangs for the
charge, my lance has not yet been the last laid in the rest. But
for my hours of liberty or of idleness, King Richard has no title
to bar my recreation.''

  ``Nevertheless,'' said De Vaux, ``it is a folly to disobey the
King's ordinance---so, with your good leave, I, as having authority
in that matter, will send you a protection for my friend
here.''

  ``I thank you,'' said the Scot, coldly; ``but he knows my
allotted quarters, and within these I can protect him myself---
And yet,'' he said, suddenly changing his manner, ``this is but
a cold return for a well-meant kindness. I thank you, my lord,
most heartily. The King's equerries, or prickers, might find
Roswal at disadvantage, and do him some injury, which I should
not, perhaps, be slow in returning, and so ill might come of it.
You have seen so much of my housekeeping, my lord,'' he added,
with a smile, ``that I need not shame to say that Roswal is our
principal purveyor; and well I hope our Lion Richard will not
be like the lion in the minstrel fable, that went a-hunting, and
kept the whole booty to himself. I cannot think he would
grudge a poor gentleman, who follows him faithfully, his hour
of sport, and his morsel of game, more especially when other food
is hard enough to come by.''

  ``By my faith, you do the King no more than justice---and
yet,'' said the baron, ``there is something in these words, vert
and venison, that turns the very brains of our Norman princes.''

  ``We have heard of late,'' said the Scot, ``by minstrels and
pilgrims, that your outlawed yeomen have formed great bands
in the shires of York and Nottingham, having at their head a
most stout archer, called Robin Hood, with his lieutenant,
Little John. Methinks it were better that Richard relaxed his
forest-code in England, than endeavoured to enforce it in the
Holy Land.''

  ``Wild work, Sir Kenneth,'' replied De Vaux, shrugging his
shoulders, as one who would avoid a perilous or unpleasing
topic---``a mad world, sir.---I must now bid you adieu, having
presently to return to the King's pavilion. At vespers I will
again, with your leave, visit your quarters, and speak with this
same infidel physician. I would, in the meantime, were it no
offence, willingly send you what would somewhat mend your
cheer.''

  ``I thank you, sir,'' said Sir Kenneth, ``but it needs not;
Roswal hath already stocked my larder for two weeks, since
the sun of Palestine, if it brings diseases, serves also to dry
venison.''

  The two warriors parted much better friends than they had
met; but ere they separated, Thomas de Vaux informed himself
at more length of the circumstances attending the mission of
the Eastern physician, and received from the Scottish knight the
credentials which he had brought to King Richard on the part
of Saladin.

