




			CHAPTER FOURTEENTH.

	--------- All my long arrear of honour lost,
	Reap'd up in youth, and hoarded up for age,
	Hath Honour's fountain then suck'd up the stream?
	He hath---and hooting boys may barefoot pass,
	And gather pebbles from the naked ford.
					Don Sebastian.

  After a torrent of afflicting sensations, by which he was at first
almost stunned and confounded, Sir Kenneth's first thought was
to look for the authors of this violation of the English banner;
but in no direction could he see traces of them. His next, which
to some persons, but scarce to any who have made intimate acquaintances
among the canine race, may appear strange, was to
examine the condition of his faithful Roswal, mortally wounded,
as it seemed, in discharging the duty which his master had been
seduced to abandon. He caressed the dying animal, who, faithful
to the last, seemed to forget his own pain in the satisfaction
he received from his master's presence, and continued wagging
his tail and licking his hand, even while by low moanings he
expressed that his agony was increased by the attempts which
Sir Kenneth made to withdraw from the wound the fragment of
the lance, or javelin, with which it had been inflicted; then redoubled
his feeble endearments, as if fearing he had offended his
master by showing a sense of the pain to which his interference
had subjected him. There was something in the display of the
dying creature's attachment, which mixed as a bitter ingredient
with the sense of disgrace and desolation by which Sir Kenneth
was oppressed. His only friend seemed removed from him, just
when he had incurred the contempt and hatred of all besides.
The knight's strength of mind gave way to a burst of agonised
distress, and he groaned and wept aloud.

  While he thus indulged his grief, a clear and solemn voice,
close beside him, pronounced these words in the sonorous tone
of the readers of the mosque, and in the Lingua Franca, mutually
understood by Christians and Saracens:---

  ``Adversity is like the period of the former and of the latter
rain---cold, comfortless, unfriendly to man and to animal; yet
from that season have their birth the flower and the fruit, the
date, the rose, and the pomegranate.''

  Sir Kenneth of the Leopard turned towards the speaker, and
beheld the Arabian physician, who, approaching unheard, had
seated himself a little behind him cross-legged, and uttered
with gravity, yet not without a tone of sympathy, the moral
sentences of consolation with which the Koran and its commentators
supplied him; for, in the East, wisdom is held to
consist, less in a display of the sage's own inventive talents, than
in his ready memory, and happy application of, and reference
to, ``that which is written.''

  Ashamed at being surprised in a woman-like expression of
sorrow, Sir Kenneth dashed his tears indignantly aside, and
again busied himself with his dying favourite.

  ``The poet hath said,'' continued the Arab, without noticing
the knight's averted looks and sullen deportment---`` `the ox
for the field, and the camel for the desert.' Were not the hand
of the leech fitter than that of the soldier to cure wounds, though
less able to inflict them?''

  ``This patient, Hakim, is beyond thy help,'' said Sir Kenneth;
``and, besides, he is, by thy law, an unclean animal.''

  ``Where Allah hath deigned to bestow life, and a sense of
pain and pleasure,'' said the physician, ``it were sinful pride
should the sage, whom he has enlightened, refuse to prolong
existence, or assuage agony. To the sage, the cure of a miserable
groom, of a poor dog, and of a conquering monarch, are
events of little distinction. Let me examine this wounded
animal.''

  Sir Kenneth acceded in silence, and the physician inspected
and handled Roswal's wound with as much care and attention
as if he had been a human being. He then took forth a case
of instruments, and, by the judicious and skilful application of
pincers, withdrew from the wounded shoulder the fragment of
the weapon, and stopped with styptics and bandages the effusion
of blood which followed; the creature all the while suffering
him patiently to perform these kind offices, as if he had been
aware of his kind intentions.

  ``The animal may be cured,'' said El Hakim, addressing himself
to Sir Kenneth, ``if you will permit me to carry him to my
tent, and treat him with the care which the nobleness of his
nature deserves. For know, that thy servant Adonbec is no
less skilful in the race and pedigree, and distinctions of good
dogs and of noble steeds, than in the diseases which affect the
human race.''

  ``Take him with you,'' said the knight. ``I bestow him on
you freely if he recovers. I owe thee a reward for attendance
on my squire, and have nothing else to pay it with. For myself,
---I will never again wind bugle, or halloo to hound!''

  The Arabian made no reply, but gave a signal with a clapping
of his hands, which was instantly answered by the appearance
of two black slaves. He gave them his orders in Arabic,
received the answer, that ``to hear was to obey,'' when, taking
the animal in their arms, they removed him, without much
resistance on his part; for though his eyes turned to his master,
he was too weak to struggle.

  ``Fare thee well, Roswal, then,'' said Sir Kenneth,---``fare
thee well, my last and only friend---thou art too noble a possession
to be retained by one such as I must in future call myself.
---I would,'' he said, as the slaves retired, ``that, dying as he
is, I could exchange conditions with that noble animal.''

  ``It is written,'' answered the Arabian, although the exclamation
had not been addressed to him, ``that all creatures are
fashioned for the service of man; and the master of the earth
speaketh folly when he would exchange, in his impatience, his
hopes here and to come, for the servile condition of an inferior
being.''

  ``A dog who dies in discharging his duty,'' said the knight,
sternly, ``is better than a man who survives the desertion of it.
Leave me, Hakim; thou hast, on this side of miracle, the most
wonderful science which man ever possessed, but the wounds of
the spirit are beyond thy power.''

  ``Not if the patient will explain his calamity, and be guided
by the physician,'' said Adonbec el Hakim.

  ``Know, then,'' said Sir Kenneth, ``since thou art so importunate,
that last night the banner of England was displayed
from this mound---I was its appointed guardian---morning is now
breaking---there lies the broken banner-spear, the standard itself
is lost---and here sit I a living man!''

  ``How!'' said El Hakim, examining him; ``thy armour is
whole---there is no blood on thy weapons, and report speaks
thee one unlikely to return thus from fight.---Thou hast been
trained from thy post---ay, trained by the rosy cheek and black
eye of one of those houris, to whom you Nazarenes vow rather
such service as is due to Allah, than such love as may lawfully
be rendered to forms of clay like our own. It has been thus
assuredly; for so hath man ever fallen, even since the days of
Sultan Adam.''

  ``And if it were so, physician,'' said Sir Kenneth, sullenly,
``what remedy?''

  ``Knowledge is the parent of power,'' said El Hakim, ``as
valour supplies strength.---Listen to me. Man is not as a tree,
bound to one spot of earth---nor is he framed to cling to one
bare rock, like the scarce animated shell-fish. Thine own
Christian writings command thee, when persecuted in one city,
to flee to another; and we Moslem also know that Mohammed,
the Prophet of Allah, driven forth from the holy city of Mecca,
found his refuge and his helpmates at Medina.''

  ``And what does this concern me?'' said the Scot.

  ``Much,'' answered the physician. ``Even the sage flies the
tempest which he cannot control. Use thy speed, therefore,
and fly from the vengeance of Richard to the shadow of Saladin's
victorious banner.''

  ``I might indeed hide my dishonour,'' said Sir Kenneth,
ironically, ``in a camp of infidel heathens, where the very phrase
is unknown. But had I not better partake more fully in their
reproach? Does not thy advice stretch so far as to recommend
me to take the turban?---Methinks I want but apostasy to consummate
my infamy.''

  ``Blaspheme not, Nazarene,'' said the physician, sternly;
``Saladin makes no converts to the law of the Prophet, save
those on whom its precepts shall work conviction. Open thine
eyes to the light, and the great Soldan, whose liberality is as
boundless as his power, may bestow on thee a kingdom; remain
blinded if thou wilt, and, being one whose second life is doomed
to misery, Saladin will yet, for this span of present time, make
thee rich and happy. But fear not that thy brows shall be
bound with the turban, save at thine own free choice.''

  ``My choice were rather,'' said the knight, ``that my writhen
features should blacken, as they are like to do, in this evening's
setting sun.''

  ``Yet thou art not wise, Nazarene,'' said El Hakim, ``to
reject this fair offer; for I have power with Saladin, and can
raise thee high in his grace. Look you, my son---this Crusade,
as you call your wild enterprise, is like a large dromond<*> parting

*   The largest sort of vessels then known were termed _dromonds,_ or
* dromedaries.

asunder in the waves. Thou thyself hast borne terms of truce
from the Kings and Princes, whose force is here assembled, to
the mighty Soldan, and knew'st not, perchance, the full tenor
of thine own errand.''

  ``I knew not, and I care not,'' said the knight, impatiently;
``what avails it to me that I have been of late the envoy of
princes, when, ere night, I shall be a gibbeted and dishonoured
corpse?''

  ``Nay, I speak that it may not be so with thee,'' said the
physician. ``Saladin is courted on all sides; the combined
Princes of this league formed against him, have made such
proposals of composition and peace, as, in other circumstances,
it might have become his honour to have granted to them.
Others have made private offers, on their own separate account,
to disjoin their forces from the camp of the Kings of Frangistan,
and even to lend their arms to the defence of the standard of the
Prophet. But Saladin will not be served by such treacherous
and interested defection. The King of kings will treat only with
the Lion King. Saladin will hold treaty with none but the
Melech Ric, and with him he will treat like a prince, or fight
like a champion. To Richard he will yield such conditions of
his free liberality, as the swords of all Europe could never compel
from him by force or terror. He will permit a free pilgrimage
to Jerusalem, and all the places where the Nazarenes list
to worship; nay, he wills so far share even his empire with his
brother Richard, that he will allow Christian garrisons in the
six strongest cities of Palestine, and one in Jerusalem itself, and
suffer them to be under the immediate command of the officers
of Richard, who, he consents, shall bear the name of King
Guardian of Jerusalem. Yet farther, strange and incredible as
you may think it, know, Sir Knight---for to your honour I can
commit even that almost incredible secret---know that Saladin
will put a sacred seal on this happy union betwixt the bravest
and noblest of Frangistan and Asia, by raising to the rank of his
royal spouse a Christian damsel, allied in blood to King Richard,
and known by the name of the Lady Edith of Plantagenet.''<*>

*   This may appear so extraordinary and improbable a proposition, that
* it is necessary to say such a one was actually made. The historians,
* however, substitute the widowed Queen of Naples, sister of Richard, for
* the bride, and Saladin's brother for the bridegroom. They appear to have
* been ignorant of the existence of Edith of Plantagenet---See Mill's _History
* of the Crusades,_ vol. ii. p. 61.


  ``Ha!---say'st thou!'' exclaimed Sir Kenneth, who, listening
with indifference and apathy to the preceding part of El Hakim's
speech, was touched by this last communication, as the thrill of
a nerve, unexpectedly jarred, will awaken the sensation of agony,
even in the torpor of palsy. Then, moderating his tone, by dint
of much effort, he restrained his indignation, and, veiling it
under the appearance of contemptuous doubt, he prosecuted the
conversation in order to get as much knowledge as possible of
the plot, as he deemed it, against the honour and happiness of
her, whom he loved not the less that his passion had ruined,
apparently, his fortunes, at once, and his honour.---``And what
Christian,'' he said, with tolerable calmness, ``would sanction
a union so unnatural, as that of a Christian maiden with an
unbelieving Saracen?''

  ``Thou art but an ignorant, bigoted Nazarene,'' said the
Hakim. ``Seest thou not how the Mohammedan princes daily
intermarry with the noble Nazarene maidens in Spain, without
scandal either to Moor or Christian? And the noble Soldan
will, in his full confidence in the blood of Richard, permit the
English maid the freedom which your Frankish manners have
assigned to women. He will allow her the free exercise of her
religion,---seeing that, in very truth, it signifies but little to
which faith females are addicted,---and he will assign her such
place and rank over all the women of his zenana, that she shall
be in every respect his sole and absolute Queen.''

  ``What!'' said Sir Kenneth, ``darest thou think, Moslem,
that Richard would give his kinswoman---a high-born and
virtuous princess, to be, at best, the foremost concubine in the
haram of a misbeliever? Know, Hakim, the meanest free
Christian noble would scorn, on his child's behalf, such splendid
ignominy.''

  ``Thou errest,'' said the Hakim; ``Philip of France, and
Henry of Champagne, and others of Richard's principal allies,
have heard the proposal without starting, and have promised,
as far as they may, to forward an alliance that may end these
wasteful wars; and the wise arch-priest of Tyre hath undertaken
to break the proposal to Richard, not doubting that he
shall be able to bring the plan to good issue. The Soldan's
wisdom hath as yet kept his proposition secret from others, such
as he of Montserrat, and the Master of the Templars, because
he knows they seek to thrive by Richard's death or disgrace, not
by his life or honour---Up, therefore, Sir Knight, and to horse.
I will give thee a scroll which shall advance thee highly with
the Soldan; and deem not that you are leaving your country,
or her cause, or her religion, since the interest of the two
monarchs will speedily be the same. To Saladin thy counsel
will be most acceptable, since thou canst make him aware of
much concerning the marriages of the Christians, the treatment
of their wives, and other points of their laws and usages, which,
in the course of such treaty, it much concerns him that he should
know. The right hand of the Soldan grasps the treasures of
the East, and is the fountain of generosity. Or, if thou desirest
it, Saladin, when allied with England, can have but little difficulty
to obtain from Richard not only thy pardon and restoration
to favour, but an honourable command in the troops which may
be left of the King of England's host, to maintain their joint
government in Palestine. Up, then, and mount, there lies a
plain path before thee.''

  ``Hakim,'' said the Scottish knight, ``thou art a man of peace
---also, thou hast saved the life of Richard of England---and,
moreover, of my own poor esquire, Strauchan. I have, therefore,
heard to an end a matter, which, being propounded by another
Moslem than thyself, I would have cut short with a blow of my
dagger! Hakim, in return for thy kindness, I advise thee to
see that the Saracen, who shall propose to Richard a union
betwixt the blood of Plantagenet and that of his accursed race,
do put on a helmet, which is capable to endure such a blow
of a battle-axe as that which struck down the gate of Acre.
Certes, he will be otherwise placed beyond the reach even of thy
skill.''

  ``Thou art, then, wilfully determined not to fly to the
Saracen host?'' said the physician---``Yet, remember, thou
stayest to certain destruction; and the writings of thy law, as
well as ours, prohibit man from breaking into the tabernacle of
his own life.''

  ``God forbid!'' replied the Scot, crossing himself; ``but we
are also forbidden to avoid the punishment which our crimes
have deserved. And, since so poor are thy thoughts of fidelity,
Hakim, it grudges me that I have bestowed my good hound on
thee, for, should he live, he will have a master ignorant of his
value.''

  ``A gift that is begrudged is already recalled,'' said El Hakim,
``only we physicians are sworn not to send away a patient uncured.
If the dog recover, he is once more yours.''

  ``Go to, Hakim,'' answered Sir Kenneth; ``men speak not
of hawk and hound when there is but an hour of day-breaking
betwixt them and death. Leave me to recollect my sins, and
reconcile myself to Heaven.''

  ``I leave thee in thine obstinacy,'' said the physician; ``the
mist hides the precipice from those who are doomed to fall
over it.''

  He withdrew slowly, turning from time to time his head, as
if to observe whether the devoted knight might not recall him
either by word or signal. At last his turbaned figure was lost
among the labyrinth of tents which lay extended beneath, whitening
in the pale light of the dawning, before which the moonbeam
had now faded away.

  But although the physician Adonbec's words had not made
that impression upon Kenneth which the sage desired, they
had inspired the Scot with a motive for desiring life, which,
dishonoured as he conceived himself to be, he was before willing
to part from as from a sullied vestment no longer becoming his
wear. Much that had passed betwixt himself and the hermit,
besides what he had observed between the anchorite and Sheerkohf
(or Ilderim), he now recalled to recollection, and tended
to confirm what the Hakim had told him of the secret article
of the treaty.

  ``The reverend impostor!'' he exclaimed to himself; ``the
hoary hypocrite! He spoke of the unbelieving husband converted
by the believing wife---and what do I know but that the
traitor exhibited to the Saracen, accursed of God, the beauties
of Edith Plantagenet, that the hound might judge if the
princely Christian lady were fit to be admitted into the haram
of a misbeliever? If I had yonder infidel Ilderim, or whatsoever
he is called, again in the gripe with which I once held him
fast as ever hound held hare, never again should he at least come
on errand disgraceful to the honour of Christian king, or noble
and virtuous maiden. But I---my hours are fast dwindling into
minutes---yet, while I have life and breath, something must be
done, and speedily.''

  He paused for a few minutes, threw from him his helmet,
then strode down the hill, and took the road to King Richard's
pavilion.
