




			CHAPTER EIGHTEENTH.

	This work desires a planetary intelligence
	Of Jupiter and Sol; and those great spirits
	Are proud, fantastical. It asks great charges
	To entice them from the guiding of their spheres
	To wait on mortals.
						Albumazar.

  The hermit followed the ladies from the pavilion of Richard,
as shadow follows a beam of sunshine when the clouds are driving
over the face of the sun. But he turned on the threshold,
and held up his hand towards the King in a warning, or almost
a menacing posture, as he said,---``Woe to him who rejects the
counsel of the Church, and betaketh himself to the foul divan
of the infidel! King Richard, I do not yet shake the dust from
my feet and depart from thy encampment---the sword falls not
---but it hangs but by a hair.---Haughty monarch, we shall
meet again.''

  ``Be it so, haughty priest,'' returned Richard, ``prouder in
thy goat-skins than princes in purple and fine linen.''

  The hermit vanished from the tent, and the King continued,
addressing the Arabian,---``Do the dervises of the East, wise
Hakim, use such familiarity with their princes?''

  ``The dervise,'' replied Adonbec, ``should be either a sage or
a madman; there is no middle course for him who wears the
khirkhah,<*> who watches by night, and fasts by day. Hence,

*  Literally, the torn robe. The habit of the dervises is so called.

hath he either wisdom enough to bear himself discreetly in the
presence of princes, or else, having no reason bestowed on him,
he is not responsible for his own actions.''

  ``Methinks our monks have adopted chiefly the latter character,''
said Richard---``But to the matter.---In what can I
pleasure you, my learned physician?''

  ``Great King,'' said El Hakim, making his profound Oriental
obeisance, ``let thy servant speak one word, and yet live. I
would remind thee that thou owest---not to me, their humble
instrument---but to the Intelligences, whose benefits I dispense
to mortals, a life''------

  ``And I warrant me thou wouldst have another in requital,
ha?'' interrupted the King.

  ``Such is my humble prayer,'' said the Hakim, ``to the great
Melech Ric---even the life of this good knight, who is doomed
to die, and but for such fault as was committed by the Sultan
Adam, surnamed Aboulbeschar, or the father of all men.''

  ``And thy wisdom might remind thee, Hakim, that Adam
died for it,'' said the King, somewhat sternly, and then began
to pace the narrow space of his tent with some emotion, and to
talk to himself. ``Why, God-a-mercy---I knew what he desired
as soon as ever he entered the pavilion!---Here is one poor life
justly condemned to extinction, and I, a king and a soldier,
who have slain thousands by my command, and scores with my
own hand, am to have no power over it, although the honour of
my arms, of my house, of my very Queen, hath been attainted
by the culprit---By Saint George, it makes me laugh!---By
Saint Louis, it reminds me of Blondel's tale of an enchanted
castle, where the destined knight was withstood successively in
his purpose of entrance by forms and figures the most dissimilar,
but all hostile to his undertaking!---No sooner one
sunk than another appeared!---Wife---Kinswoman---Hermit---
Hakim---each appears in the lists as soon as the other is defeated!---
Why, this is a single knight fighting against the
whole m<e^>l<e'>e of the tournament---ha! ha! ha!''---And Richard
laughed aloud; for he had, in fact, begun to change his mood,
his resentment being usually too violent to be of long endurance.

  The physician meanwhile looked on him with a countenance
of surprise, not unmingled with contempt; for the Eastern
people make no allowance for those mercurial changes in the
temper, and consider open laughter, upon almost any account,
as derogatory to the dignity of man, and becoming only to
women and children. At length the sage addressed the King,
when he saw him more composed.

  ``A doom of death should not issue from laughing lips.---Let
thy servant hope that thou hast granted him this man's life.''

  ``Take the freedom of a thousand captives instead,'' said
Richard; ``restore so many of thy countrymen to their tents
and families, and I will give the warrant instantly. This man's
life can avail thee nothing, and it is forfeited.''

  ``All our lives are forfeited,'' said the Hakim, putting his
hand to his cap. ``But the great Creditor is merciful, and
exacts not the pledge rigorously nor untimely.''

  ``Thou canst show me,'' said Richard, ``no special interest
thou hast to become intercessor betwixt me and the execution
of justice, to which I am sworn as a crowned King.''

  ``Thou art sworn to the dealing forth mercy as well as
justice,'' said El Hakim; ``but what thou seekest, great King,
is the execution of thine own will. And, for the concern I have
in this request, know that many a man's life depends upon thy
granting this boon.''

  ``Explain thy words,'' said Richard; ``but think not to
impose upon me by false pretexts.''

  ``Be it far from thy servant!'' said Adonbec. ``Know, then,
that the medicine to which thou, Sir King, and many one beside,
owe their recovery, is a talisman, composed under certain aspects
of the heavens, when the Divine Intelligences are most propitious.
I am but the poor administrator of its virtues. I dip
it in a cup of water, observe the fitting hour to administer it to
the patient, and the potency of the draught works the cure.''

  ``A most rare medicine,'' said the King, ``and a commodious!
and, as it may be carried in the leech's purse, would save the
whole caravan of camels which they require to convey drugs
and physic-stuff---I marvel there is any other in use.''

  ``It is written,'' answered the Hakim, with imperturbable
gravity, `` `abuse not the steed which hath borne thee from the
battle.' Know, that such talismans might indeed be framed,
but rare has been the number of adepts who have dared to
undertake the application of their virtue. Severe restrictions,
painful observances, fasts, and penance, are necessary on the
part of the sage who uses this mode of cure; and if, through
neglect of these preparations, by his love of ease, or his indulgence
of sensual appetite, he omits to cure at least twelve
persons within the course of each moon, the virtue of the divine
gift departs from the amulet, and both the last patient and the
physician will be exposed to speedy misfortune, neither will
they survive the year. I require yet one life to make up the
appointed number.''

  ``Go out into the camp, good Hakim, where thou wilt find
a-many,'' said the King, ``and do not seek to rob my headsman
of _his_ patients; it is unbecoming a mediciner of thine eminence
to interfere with the practice of another.---Besides, I cannot see
how delivering a criminal from the death he deserves, should go
to make up thy tale of miraculous cures.''

  ``When thou canst show why a draught of cold water should
have cured thee, when the most precious drugs failed,'' said the
Hakim, ``thou may'st reason on the other mysteries attendant
on this matter. For myself, I am inefficient to the great work,
having this morning touched an unclean animal. Ask, therefore,
no farther questions; it is enough that, by sparing this
man's life at my request, you will deliver yourself, great King,
and thy servant, from a great danger.''

  ``Hark thee, Adonbec,'' replied the King, ``I have no objection
that leeches should wrap their words in mist, and pretend
to derive knowledge from the stars; but when you bid Richard
Plantagenet fear that a danger will fall upon _him_ from some
idle omen, or omitted ceremonial, you speak to no ignorant
Saxon, or doting old woman, who foregoes her purpose because
a hare crosses the path, a raven croaks, or a cat sneezes.''

  ``I cannot hinder your doubt of my words,'' said Adonbec;
``but yet, let my Lord the King grant that truth is on the
tongue of his servant---will he think it just to deprive the
world, and every wretch who may suffer by the pains which so
lately reduced him to that couch, of the benefit of this most
virtuous talisman, rather than extend his forgiveness to one
poor criminal? Bethink you, Lord King, that though thou
canst slay thousands, thou canst not restore one man to health.
Kings have the power of Satan to torment, sages that of Allah
to heal---beware how thou hinderest the good to humanity,
which thou canst not thyself render. Thou canst cut off the
head, but not cure the aching tooth.''

  ``This is over insolent,'' said the King, hardening himself,
as the Hakim assumed a more lofty, and almost a commanding
tone. ``We took thee for our leech, not for our counsellor, or
conscience-keeper.''

  ``And is it thus the most renowned Prince of Frangistan
repays benefit done to his royal person?'' said El Hakim, exchanging
the humble and stooping posture, in which he had
hitherto solicited the King, for an attitude lofty and commanding.
``Know, then,'' he said, ``that through every court of
Europe and Asia---to Moslem and Nazarene---to knight and
lady---wherever harp is heard and sword worn---wherever
honour is loved and infamy detested---to every quarter of the
world will I denounce thee, Melech Ric, as thankless and ungenerous;
and even the lands---if there be any such---that
never heard of thy renown, shall yet be acquainted with thy
shame!''

  ``Are these terms to me, vile infidel!'' said Richard, striding
up to him in fury.---``Art weary of thy life?''

  ``Strike!'' said El Hakim; ``thine own deed shall then paint
thee more worthless than could my words, though each had an
hornet's sting.''

  Richard turned fiercely from him, folded his arms, traversed
the tent as before, and then exclaimed, ``Thankless and ungenerous!---
as well be termed coward and infidel!---Hakim,
thou hast chosen thy boon; and though I had rather thou
hadst asked my crown-jewels, yet I may not, king-like, refuse
thee. Take this Scot, therefore, to thy keeping---the provost
will deliver him to thee on this warrant.''

  He hastily traced one or two lines, and gave them to the
physician. ``Use him as thy bond-slave, to be disposed of as
thou wilt---only, let him beware how he comes before the eyes
of Richard. Hark thee---thou art wise---he hath been over
bold among those in whose fair looks and weak judgments we
trust our honour, as you of the East lodge your treasures in
caskets of silver wire, as fine and as frail as the web of a
gossamer.''

  ``Thy servant understands the word of the King,'' said the
sage, at once resuming the reverent style of address in which he
had commenced. ``When the rich carpet is soiled, the fool
pointeth to the stain---the wise man covers it with his mantle.
I have heard my lord's pleasure, and to hear is to obey.''

  ``It is well,'' said the King; ``let him consult his own
safety, and never appear in my presence more.---Is there aught
else in which I may do thee pleasure?''

  ``The bounty of the King hath filled my cup to the brim,''
said the sage; ``yea, it hath been abundant as the fountain
which sprung up amid the camp of the descendants of Israel,
when the rock was stricken by the rod of Moussa Ben Amran.''

  ``Ay, but,'' said the King, smiling, ``it required, as in the
desert, a hard blow on the rock ere it yielded its treasures. I
would that I knew something to pleasure thee, which I might
yield as freely as the natural fountain sends forth its waters.''

  ``Let me touch that victorious hand,'' said the sage, ``in
token, that if Adonbec el Hakim should hereafter demand a boon
of Richard of England, he may do so, yet plead his command.''

  ``Thou hast hand and glove upon it, man,'' replied Richard;
``only, if thou couldst consistently make up thy tale of patients
without craving me to deliver from punishment those who have
deserved it, I would more willingly discharge my debt in some
other form.''

  ``May thy days be multiplied!'' answered the Hakim, and
withdrew from the apartment after the usual deep obeisance.
King Richard gazed after him as he departed, like one but
half-satisfied with what had passed.

  ``Strange pertinacity,'' he said, ``in this Hakim, and a wonderful
chance to interfere between that audacious Scot and the
chastisement he has merited so richly. Yet, let him live!
there is one brave man the more in the world.---And now for
the Austrian.---Ho, is the Baron of Gilsland there without?''

  Sir Thomas de Vaux thus summoned, his bulky form speedily
darkened the opening of the pavilion, while behind him glided
as a spectre unannounced, yet unopposed, the savage form of
the hermit of Engaddi, wrapped in his goat-skin mantle.

  Richard, without noticing his presence, called in a loud tone
to the Baron, ``Sir Thomas de Vaux, of Lanercost and Gilsland,
take trumpet and herald, and go instantly to the tent of
him whom they call Archduke of Austria, and see that it be
when the press of his knights and vassals is greatest around
him,---as is likely at this hour, for the German boar breakfasts
ere he hears mass---enter his presence with as little reverence
as thou may'st, and impeach him, on the part of Richard of
England, that he hath this night, by his own hand, or that of
others, stolen from its staff the Banner of England. Wherefore,
say to him our pleasure, that, within an hour from the
time of my speaking, he restore the said banner with all reverence---
he himself and his principal barons waiting the whilst
with heads uncovered, and without their robes of honour.---
And that, moreover, he pitch beside it, on the one hand, his
own Banner of Austria reversed, as that which hath been dishonoured
by theft and felony---and on the other, a lance bearing
the bloody head of him who was his nearest counsellor or
assistant, in this base injury---And say, that such our behests
being punctually discharged, we will, for the sake of our vow,
and the weal of the Holy Land, forgive his other forfeits.''

  ``And how if the Duke of Austria deny all accession to this
act of wrong and of felony?'' said Thomas de Vaux.

  ``Tell him,'' replied the King, ``we will prove it upon his
body---ay, were he backed with his two bravest champions.
Knight-like will we prove it, on foot or on horse, in the desert
or in the field, time, place, and arms, all at his own choice.''

  ``Bethink you of the peace of God and the Church, my liege
lord,'' said the Baron of Gilsland, ``among those princes
engaged in this holy Crusade.''

  ``Bethink you how to execute my commands, my liege vassal,''
answered Richard, impatiently. ``Methinks men expect to turn
our purpose by their breath, as boys blow feathers to and fro
---Peace of the Church!---who, I prithee, minds it? The
peace of the Church, among Crusaders, implies war with the
Saracens, with whom the princes have made truce, and the
one ends with the other. And, besides, see you not how every
prince of them is seeking his own several ends?---I will seek
mine also---and that is honour. For honour I came hither,
and if I may not win it upon the Saracens, at least I will not
lose a jot from any respect to this paltry Duke, though he were
bulwarked and buttressed by every prince in the Crusade.''

  De Vaux turned to obey the King's mandate, shrugging his
shoulders at the same time, the bluntness of his nature being
unable to conceal that its tenor went against his judgment.

  But the hermit of Engaddi stepped forward, and assumed the
air of one charged with higher commands than those of a mere
earthly potentate. Indeed, his dress of shaggy skins, his uncombed
and untrimmed hair and beard, his lean, wild, and contorted
features, and the almost insane fire which gleamed from
under his bushy eyebrows, made him approach nearly to our
idea of some seer of Scripture, who, charged with high mission
to the sinful Kings of Judah or Israel, descended from the rocks
and caverns in which he dwelt in abstracted solitude, to abash
earthly tyrants in the midst of their pride, by discharging on
them the blighting denunciations of Divine Majesty, even as the
cloud discharges the lightning with which it is fraught, on the
pinnacles and towers of castles and palaces. In the midst of his
most wayward mood, Richard respected the Church and its
ministers, and though offended at the intrusion of the hermit
into his tent, he greeted him with respect; at the same time,
however, making a sign to Sir Thomas de Vaux to hasten on
his message.

  But the hermit prohibited the baron, by gesture, look, and
word, to stir a yard on such an errand; and, holding up his
bare arm, from which the goat-skin mantle fell back in the
violence of his action, he waved it aloft, meagre with famine,
and wealed with the blows of the discipline.

  ``In the name of God, and of the most holy Father, the
vicegerent of the Christian Church upon earth, I prohibit this
most profane, bloodthirsty, and brutal defiance, betwixt two
Christian princes, whose shoulders are signed with the blessed
mark under which they swore brotherhood. Woe to him by
whom it is broken!---Richard of England, recall the most unhallowed
message thou hast given to that baron---Danger and
Death are nigh thee!---the dagger is glancing at thy very
throat!''------

  ``Danger and Death are playmates to Richard,'' answered the
monarch proudly; ``and he hath braved too many swords to
fear a dagger.''

  ``Danger and Death are near,'' replied the seer; and, sinking
his voice to a hollow, unearthly tone, he added, ``And after
death the judgment!''

  ``Good and holy father,'' said Richard, ``I reverence thy
person and thy sanctity''------

  ``Reverence not me!'' interrupted the hermit; ``reverence
sooner the vilest insect that crawls by the shores of the Dead
Sea, and feeds upon its accursed slime. But reverence Him
whose commands I speak---Reverence him whose sepulchre you
have vowed to rescue---Revere the oath of concord which you
have sworn, and break not the silver cord of union and fidelity
with which you have bound yourself to your princely confederates.''

  ``Good father,'' said the King, ``you of the Church seem to
me to presume somewhat, if a layman may say so much, upon
the dignity of your holy character. Without challenging your
right to take charge of our conscience, methinks you might
leave us the charge of our own honour.''

  ``Presume!'' repeated the hermit---``is it for me to presume,
royal Richard, who am but the bell obeying the hand of the
sexton---but the senseless and worthless trumpet, carrying the
command of him who sounds it?---See, on my knees I throw
myself before thee, imploring thee to have mercy on Christendom,
on England, and on thyself!''

  ``Rise, rise,'' said Richard, compelling him to stand up; ``it
beseems not that knees, which are so frequently bended to the
Deity, should press the ground in honour of man. What
danger awaits us, reverend father? and when stood the power
of England so low, that the noisy bluster of this new-made
Duke's displeasure should alarm her, or her monarch?''

  ``I have looked forth from my mountain turret upon the
starry host of heaven, as each in his midnight circuit uttered
wisdom to another, and knowledge to the few who can understand
their voice. There sits an enemy in thy House of Life,
Lord King, malign at once to thy fame, and thy prosperity---
an emanation of Saturn, menacing thee with instant and bloody
peril, and which, but thou yield thy proud will to the rule of
thy duty, will presently crush thee, even in thy pride.''

  ``Away, away---this is heathen science,'' said the King
``Christians practise it not---wise men believe it not.---Old
man, thou dotest.''

  ``I dote not, Richard,'' answered the hermit---``I am not
so happy. I know my condition, and that some portion of
reason is yet permitted me, not for my own use, but that of the
Church, and the advancement of the Cross. I am the blind
man who holds a torch to others, though it yields no light to
himself. Ask me touching what concerns the weal of Christendom,
and of this Crusade, and I will speak with thee as the
wisest counsellor on whose tongue persuasion ever sat. Speak
to me of my own wretched being, and my words shall be those
of the maniac outcast which I am.''

  ``I would not break the bands of unity asunder among the
Princes of the Crusade,'' said Richard, with a mitigated tone
and manner; ``but what atonement can they render me for the
injustice and insult which I have sustained?''

  ``Even of that I am prepared and commissioned to speak by
the Council, which, meeting hastily at the summons of Philip
of France, have taken measures for that effect.''

  ``Strange,'' replied Richard, ``that others should treat of
what is due to the wounded Majesty of England!''

  ``They are willing to anticipate your demands, if it be possible,''
answered the hermit. ``In a body they consent that the
Banner of England be replaced on Saint George's Mount, and
they lay under ban and condemnation the audacious criminal,
or criminals, by whom it was outraged, and will announce a
princely reward to any who shall denounce the delinquent's
guilt, and give his flesh to the wolves and ravens.''

  ``And Austria,'' said Richard---``upon whom rest such strong
presumptions that he was the author of the deed?''

  ``To prevent discord in the host,'' replied the hermit,
``Austria will clear himself of the suspicion, by submitting to
whatsoever ordeal the Patriarch of Jerusalem shall impose.''

  ``Will he clear himself by the trial by combat?'' said King
Richard.

  ``His oath prohibits it,'' said the hermit; ``and, moreover,
the Council of the Princes''------

  ``Will neither authorise battle against the Saracens,'' interrupted
Richard, ``nor against any one else. But it is enough,
father---thou hast shown me the folly of proceeding as I designed
in this matter. You shall sooner light your torch in a
puddle of rain, than bring a spark out of a cold-blooded coward.
There is no honour to be gained on Austria, and so let him
pass---I will have him perjure himself, however; I will insist
on the ordeal.---How I shall laugh to hear his clumsy fingers
hiss, as he grasps the red-hot globe of iron!---Ay, or his huge
mouth riven, and his gullet swelling to suffocation, as he
endeavours to swallow the consecrated bread.''

  ``Peace, Richard,'' said the hermit---``Oh, peace, for shame
if not for charity! Who shall praise or honour princes, who
insult and calumniate each other?---Alas! that a creature so
noble as thou art---so accomplished in princely thoughts and
princely daring---so fitted to honour Christendom by thy actions,
and, in thy calmer mood, to rule her by thy wisdom, should yet
have the brute and wild fury of the lion, mingled with the
dignity and courage of that king of the forest!''

  He remained an instant musing with his eyes fixed on the
ground, and then proceeded---``But Heaven, that knows our
imperfect nature, accepts of our imperfect obedience, and hath
delayed, though not averted, the bloody end of thy daring life.
The destroying angel hath stood still, as of old, by the threshing
floor of Araunah the Jebusite, and the blade is drawn in his
hand, by which, at no distant date, Richard, the lion-hearted,
shall be as low as the meanest peasant.''

  ``Must it then be so soon?''---said Richard. ``Yet, even so
be it. May my course be bright, if it be but brief!''

  ``Alas! noble King,'' said the solitary, and it seemed as if a
tear (unwonted guest) were gathering in his dry and glazened
eye---``short and melancholy, marked with mortification, and
calamity, and captivity, is the span that divides thee from the
grave which yawns for thee---a grave in which thou shalt be
laid without lineage to succeed thee---without the tears of a
people, exhausted by thy ceaseless wars, to lament thee---without
having extended the knowledge of thy subjects---without
having done aught to enlarge their happiness.''

  ``But not without renown, monk---not without the tears of
the lady of my love! These consolations, which thou canst
neither know nor estimate, await upon Richard to his grave.''

  ``_Do_ I not know---_can_ I not estimate, the value of minstrel's
praise, and of lady's love!'' retorted the hermit, in a tone which
for a moment seemed to emulate the enthusiasm of Richard
himself. ``King of England,'' he continued, extending his
emaciated arm, ``the blood which boils in thy blue veins is not
more noble than that which stagnates in mine. Few and cold
as the drops are, they still are of the blood of the royal Lusignan
---of the heroic and sainted Godfrey. I am---that is, I was
when in the world---Alberick Mortemar''-------

  ``Whose deeds,'' said Richard, ``have so often filled Fame's
trumpet! Is it so----can it be so?---Could such a light as thine
fall from the horizon of chivalry, and yet men be uncertain
where its embers had alighted?''

  ``Seek a fallen star,'' said the hermit, ``and thou shalt only
light on some foul jelly, which, in shooting through the horizon,
has assumed for a moment an appearance of splendour. Richard,
if I thought that rending the bloody veil from my horrible fate
could make thy proud heart stoop to the discipline of the church,
I could find in my heart to tell thee a tale, which I have hitherto
kept gnawing at my vitals in concealment, like the self-devoted
youth of Heathenesse.---Listen, then, Richard, and may the grief
and despair, which cannot avail this wretched remnant of what
was once a man, be powerful as an example to so noble, yet so
wild a being as thou art! Yes---I will---I _will_ tear open the
long hidden wounds, although in thy very presence they should
bleed to death!''

  King Richard, upon whom the history of Alberick of Mortemar
had made a deep impression in his early years, when
minstrels were regaling his father's halls with legends of the
Holy Land, listened with respect to the outlines of a tale, which,
darkly and imperfectly sketched, indicated sufficiently the cause
of the partial insanity of this singular and most unhappy being.

  ``I need not,'' he said, ``tell thee that I was noble in birth,
high in fortune, strong in arms, wise in council. All these I
was; but while the noblest ladies in Palestine strove which
should wind garlands for my helmet, my love was fixed---unalterably
and devotedly fixed---on a maiden of low degree. Her
father, an ancient soldier of the Cross, saw our passion, and,
knowing the difference betwixt us, saw no other refuge for his
daughter's honour than to place her within the shadow of the
cloister. I returned from a distant expedition, loaded with
spoils and honour, to find my happiness was destroyed for ever!
I, too, sought the cloister, and Satan, who had marked me for
his own, breathed into my heart a vapour of spiritual pride,
which could only have had its source in his own infernal regions.
I had risen as high in the church as before in the state---I was,
forsooth, the wise, the self-sufficient, the impeccable!---I was
the counsellor of councils---I was the director of prelates---how
should I stumble?---wherefore should I fear temptation?---Alas!
I became confessor to a sisterhood, and amongst that sisterhood
I found the long loved---the long lost. Spare me farther confession!---
a fallen nun, whose guilt was avenged by self-murder,
sleeps soundly in the vaults of Engaddi, while, above her very
grave, gibbers, moans, and roars a creature, to whom but so
much reason is left as may suffice to render him completely
sensible to his fate!''

  ``Unhappy man!'' said Richard, ``I wonder no longer at thy
misery. How didst thou escape the doom, which the canons
denounce against thy offence?''

  ``Ask one who is yet in the gall of worldly bitterness,'' said
the hermit, ``and he will speak of a life spared for personal
respects, and from consideration to high birth. But, Richard,
I tell thee, that Providence hath preserved me, to lift me on
high as a light and beacon, whose ashes, when this earthly fuel
is burnt out, must yet be flung into Tophet. Withered and
shrunk as this poor form is, it is yet animated with two spirits
---one active, shrewd, and piercing, to advocate the cause of the
Church of Jerusalem---one mean, abject, and despairing, fluctuating
between madness and misery, to mourn over my own
wretchedness, and to guard holy relies, on which it would be
most sinful for me even to cast my eye. Pity me not!---it is
but sin to pity the loss of such an abject---pity me not, but
profit by my example. Thou standest on the highest and, therefore
on the most dangerous pinnacle, occupied by any Christian
prince. Thou art proud of heart, loose of life, bloody of hand.
Put from thee the sins which are to thee as daughters---though
they be dear to the sinful Adam, expel these adopted furies from
thy breast---thy pride, thy luxury, thy blood-thirstiness.''

  ``He raves,'' said Richard, turning from the solitary to De
Vaux, as one who felt some pain from a sarcasm which yet
he could not resent---then turned him calmly, and somewhat
scornfully to the anchoret, as he replied---``Thou hast found a
fair bevy of daughters, reverend father, to one who hath been but
few months married; but since I must put them from my roof,
it were but like a father, to provide them with suitable matches.
Wherefore, I will part with my pride to the noble Canons of
the Church---my luxury, as thou call'st it, to the Monks of the
rule---and my blood-thirstiness to the Knights of the Temple.''

  ``Oh, heart of steel, and hand of iron,'' said the anchoret,
``upon whom example, as well as advice, is alike thrown away!
---Yet shalt thou be spared for a season, in case it so be thou
shouldst turn and do that which is acceptable in the sight of
Heaven.---For me, I must return to my place.---Kyrie Eleison!
---I am he through whom the rays of heavenly grace dart like
those of the sun through a burning glass, concentrating them
on other objects, until they kindle and blaze, while the glass
itself remains cold and uninfluenced.---Kyrie Eleison!---the poor
must be called, for the rich have refused the banquet---Kyrie
Eleison!''

  So saying, he burst from the tent, uttering loud cries.

  ``A mad priest!''---said Richard, from whose mind the frantic
exclamations of the hermit had partly obliterated the impression
produced by the detail of his personal history and misfortunes.
``After him, De Vaux, and see he comes to no harm; for,
Crusaders as we are, a juggler hath more reverence amongst our
varlets than a priest or a saint, and they may, perchance, put
some scorn upon him.''

  The knight obeyed, and Richard presently gave way to the
thoughts which the wild prophecy of the monk had inspired.---
``To die early---without lineage---without lamentation? a heavy
sentence, and well that it is not passed by a more competent
judge. Yet the Saracens, who are accomplished in mystical
knowledge, will often maintain, that He, in whose eyes the
wisdom of the sage is but as folly, inspires wisdom and prophecy
into the seeming folly of the madman. Yonder hermit is said
to read the stars too, an art generally practised in these lands,
where the heavenly host was of yore the object of idolatry. I
would I had asked him touching the loss of my banner; for not
the blessed Tishbite, the founder of his order, could seem more
wildly rapt out of himself, or speak with a tongue more resembling
that of a prophet.---How now, Do Vaux, what news of
the mad priest?''

  ``Mad priest, call you him, my lord?'' answered De Vaux.
Methinks he resembles more the blessed Baptist himself, just
issued from the wilderness. He has placed himself on one of
the military engines, and from thence he preaches to the soldiers,
as never man preached since the time of Peter the Hermit. The
camp, alarmed by his cries, crowd around him in thousands; and
breaking off every now and then from the main thread of his discourse,
he addresses the several nations, each in their own
language, and presses upon each the arguments best qualified to
urge them to perseverance in the delivery of Palestine.''

  ``By this light, a noble hermit!'' said King Richard. ``But
what else could come from the blood of Godfrey? _He_ despair
of safety, because he hath in former days lived _par amours?_ I
will have the Pope send him an ample remission, and I would
not less willingly be intercessor had his _belle amie_ been an
abbess.''

  As he spoke, the Archbishop of Tyre craved audience, for the
purpose of requesting Richard's attendance, should his health
permit, on a secret conclave of the chiefs of the Crusade, and to
explain to him the military and political incidents which had
occurred during his illness.
