




			CHAPTER FIRST.

		------ They, too, retired
	To the wilderness, but 'twas with arms.
					Paradise Regained.

  The burning sun of Syria had not yet attained its highest point
in the horizon, when a knight of the Red-cross, who had left his
distant northern home, and joined the host of the Crusaders in
Palestine, was pacing slowly along the sandy deserts which lie
in the vicinity of the Dead Sea, or, as it is called, the Lake
Asphaltites, where the waves of the Jordan pour themselves into
an inland sea, from which there is no discharge of waters.

  The warlike pilgrim had toiled among cliffs and precipices during
the earlier part of the morning; more lately, issuing from
those rocky and dangerous defiles, he had entered upon that
great plain, where the accursed cities provoked, in ancient days,
the direct and dreadful vengeance of the Omnipotent.

  The toil, the thirst, the dangers of the way, were forgotten,
as the traveller recalled the fearful catastrophe, which had converted
into an arid and dismal wilderness the fair and fertile
valley of Siddim, once well watered, even as the Garden of the
Lord, now a parched and blighted waste, condemned to eternal
sterility.

  Crossing himself, as he viewed the dark mass of rolling
waters, in colour as in quality unlike those of every other lake,
the traveller shuddered as he remembered, that beneath these
sluggish waves lay the once proud cities of the plain, whose
grave was dug by the thunder of the heavens, or the eruption
of subterraneous fire, and whose remains were hid, even by that
sea which holds no living fish in its bosom, bears no skiff on its
surface, and, as if its own dreadful bed were the only fit receptacle
for its sullen waters, sends not, like other lakes, a tribute
to the ocean. The whole land around, as in the days of Moses,
was ``brimstone and salt; it is not sown, nor beareth, nor any
grass groweth thereon;'' the land as well as the lake might
be termed dead, as producing nothing having resemblance to
vegetation, and even the very air was entirely devoid of its
ordinary winged inhabitants, deterred probably by the odour of
bitumen and sulphur, which the burning sun exhaled from the
waters of the lake, in steaming clouds, frequently assuming the
appearance of waterspouts. Masses of the slimy and sulphurous
substance called naphtha, which floated idly on the sluggish and
sullen waves, supplied those rolling clouds with new vapours,
and afforded awful testimony to the truth of the Mosaic history.

  Upon this scene of desolation the sun shone with almost
intolerable splendour, and all living nature seemed to have hidden
itself from the rays, excepting the solitary figure which
moved through the flitting sand at a foot's pace, and appeared
the sole breathing thing on the wide surface of the plain. The
dress of the rider and the accoutrements of his horse, were
peculiarly unfit for the traveller in such a country. A coat of
linked mail, with long sleeves, plated gauntlets, and a steel
breastplate, had not been esteemed a sufficient weight of
armour; there was also his triangular shield suspended round
his neck, and his barred helmet of steel, over which he had a
hood and collar of mail, which was drawn around the warrior's
shoulders and throat, and filled up the vacancy between the
hauberk and the head-piece. His lower limbs were sheathed,
like his body, in flexible mail, securing the legs and thighs,
while the feet rested in plated shoes, which corresponded with
the gauntlets. A long, broad, straight-shaped, double-edged
falchion, with a handle formed like a cross, corresponded with
a stout poniard, on the other side. The Knight also bore,
secured to his saddle, with one end resting on his stirrup, the
long steel-headed lance, his own proper weapon, which, as he
rode, projected backwards, and displayed its little pennoncelle,
to dally with the faint breeze, or drop in the dead calm. To
this cumbrous equipment must be added a surcoat of embroidered
cloth, much frayed and worn, which was thus far useful, that
it excluded the burning rays of the sun from the armour, which
they would otherwise have rendered intolerable to the wearer.
The surcoat bore, in several places, the arms of the owner,
although much defaced. These seemed to be a couchant leopard,
with the motto, ``I sleep---wake me not.'' An outline of the
same device might be traced on his shield, though many a blow
had almost effaced the painting. The flat top of his cumbrous
cylindrical helmet was unadorned with any crest. In retaining
their own unwieldy defensive armour, the northern Crusaders,
seemed to set at defiance the nature of the climate and country
to which they had come to war.

  The accoutrements of the horse were scarcely less massive
and unwieldy than those of the rider. The animal had a heavy
saddle plated with steel, uniting in front with a species of
breastplate, and behind with defensive armour made to cover
the loins. Then there was a steel axe, or hammer, called a
mace-of-arms, and which hung to the saddle-bow; the reins
were secured by chain-work, and the front-stall of the bridle was
a steel plate, with apertures for the eyes and nostrils, having in
the midst a short sharp pike, projecting from the forehead of
the horse like the horn of the fabulous unicorn.

  But habit had made the endurance of this load of panoply a
second nature, both to the knight and his gallant charger.
Numbers, indeed, of the western warriors who hurried to Palestine,
died ere they became inured to the burning climate; but
there were others to whom that climate became innocent and
even friendly, and among this fortunate number was the solitary
horseman who now traversed the border of the Dead Sea.

  Nature, which cast his limbs in a mould of uncommon
strength, fitted to wear his linked hauberk with as much ease
as if the meshes had been formed of cobwebs, had endowed
him with a constitution as strong as his limbs, and which bade
defiance to almost all changes of climate, as well as to fatigue
and privations of every kind. His disposition seemed, in some
degree, to partake of the qualities of his bodily frame; and as
the one possessed great strength and endurance, united with
the power of violent exertion, the other, under a calm and undisturbed
semblance, had much of the fiery and enthusiastic
love of glory which constituted the principal attribute of the
renowned Norman line, and had rendered them sovereigns in
every corner of Europe, where they had drawn their adventurous
swords.

  It was not, however, to all the race that fortune proposed
such tempting rewards; and those obtained by the solitary
knight during two years' campaign in Palestine, had been only
temporal fame, and, as he was taught to believe, spiritual
privileges. Meantime, his slender stock of money had melted
away, the rather that he did not pursue any of the ordinary
modes by which the followers of the Crusade condescended to
recruit their diminished resources, at the expense of the people
of Palestine; he exacted no gifts from the wretched natives
for sparing their possessions when engaged in warfare with the
Saracens, and he had not availed himself of any opportunity of
enriching himself by the ransom of prisoners of consequence.
The small train which had followed him from his native country
had been gradually diminished, as the means of maintaining
them disappeared, and his only remaining squire was at
present on a sick-bed, and unable to attend his master, who
travelled, as we have seen, singly and alone. This was of
little consequence to the Crusader, who was accustomed to consider
his good sword as his safest escort, and devout thoughts
as his best companion.

  Nature had, however, her demands for refreshment and
repose, even on the iron frame and patient disposition of the
Knight of the Sleeping Leopard; and at noon, when the Dead
Sea lay at some distance on his right, he joyfully hailed the
sight of two or three palm-trees, which arose beside the well
which was assigned for his mid-day station. His good horse,
too, which had plodded forward with the steady endurance of
his master, now lifted his head, expanded his nostrils, and
quickened his pace, as if he snuffed afar off the living waters,
which marked the place of repose and refreshment. But labour
and danger were doomed to intervene ere the horse or horseman
reached the desired spot.

  As the Knight of the Couchant Leopard continued to fix his
eyes attentively on the yet distant cluster of palm-trees, it seemed
to him as if some object was moving among them. The distant
form separated itself from the trees, which partly hid its motions,
and advanced towards the knight with a speed which soon showed
a mounted horseman, whom his turban, long spear, and green
caftan floating in the wind, on his nearer approach, showed to be
a Saracen cavalier. ``In the desert,'' saith an Eastern proverb,
``no man meets a friend.'' The Crusader was totally indifferent
whether the infidel, who now approached on his gallant barb, as
if borne on the wings of an eagle, came as friend or foe---perhaps,
as a vowed champion of the Cross, he might rather have preferred
the latter. He disengaged his lance from his saddle, seized it
with the right hand, placed it in rest with its point half elevated,
gathered up the reins in the left, waked his horse's mettle with
the spur, and prepared to encounter the stranger with the calm
self-confidence belonging to the victor in many contests.

  The Saracen came on at the speedy gallop of an Arab horseman,
managing his steed more by his limbs, and the inflection
of his body, than by any use of the reins, which hung loose in
his left hand; so that he was enabled to wield the light round
buckler of the skin of the rhinoceros, ornamented with silver
loops, which he wore on his arm, swinging it as if he meant to
oppose its slender circle to the formidable thrust of the western
lance. His own long spear was not couched or levelled like
that of his antagonist, but grasped by the middle with his right
hand, and brandished at arm's length above his head. As the
cavalier approached his enemy at full career, he seemed to expect
that the Knight of the Leopard should put his horse to the gallop
to encounter him. But the Christian knight, well acquainted
with the customs of Eastern warriors, did not mean to exhaust
his good horse by any unnecessary exertion; and, on the contrary,
made a dead halt, confident that if the enemy advanced to the
actual shock, his own weight, and that of his powerful charger,
would give him sufficient advantage, without the additional
momentum of rapid motion. Equally sensible and apprehensive
of such a probable result, the Saracen cavalier, when he had
approached towards the Christian within twice the length of his
lance, wheeled his steed to the left with inimitable dexterity,
and rode twice round his antagonist, who, turning without
quitting his ground, and presenting his front constantly to his
enemy, frustrated his attempts to attack him on an unguarded
point so that the Saracen, wheeling his horse, was fain to
retreat to the distance of a hundred yards. A second time,
like a hawk attacking a heron, the Heathen renewed the charge,
and a second time was fain to retreat without coming to a close
struggle. A third time he approached in the same manner,
when the Christian knight, desirous to terminate this elusory
warfare, in which he might at length have been worn out by the
activity of his foeman, suddenly seized the mace which hung at
his saddlebow, and, with a strong hand and unerring aim, hurled
it against the head of the Emir, for such and not less his enemy
appeared. The Saracen was just aware of the formidable missile
in time to interpose his light buckler betwixt the mace and his
head; but the violence of the blow forced the buckler down on
his turban, and though that defence also contributed to deaden
its violence, the Saracen was beaten from his horse. Ere the
Christian could avail himself of this mishap, his nimble foeman
sprung from the ground, and calling on his horse, which instantly
returned to his side, he leaped into his seat without touching
the stirrup, and regained all the advantage of which the Knight
of the Leopard hoped to deprive him. But the latter had in
the meanwhile recovered his mace, and the Eastern cavalier, who
remembered the strength and dexterity with which his antagonist
had aimed it, seemed to keep cautiously out of reach of that
weapon, of which he had so lately felt the force, while he showed
his purpose of waging a distant warfare with missile weapons
of his own. Planting his long spear in the sand at a distance
from the scene of combat, he strung, with great address, a short
bow which he carried at his back, and putting his horse to the
gallop, once more described two or three circles of a wider extent
than formerly, in the course of which he discharged six arrows
at the Christian with such unerring skill, that the goodness of
his harness alone saved him from being wounded in as many
places. The seventh shaft apparently found a less perfect part
of the armour, and the Christian dropped heavily from his horse.
But what was the surprise of the Saracen, when, dismounting to
examine the condition of his prostrate enemy, he found himself
suddenly within the grasp of the European, who had had recourse
to this artifice to bring his enemy within his reach! Even in
this deadly grapple, the Saracen was saved by his agility and
presence of mind. He unloosed the sword-belt, in which the
Knight of the Leopard had fixed his hold, and thus eluding his
fatal grasp, mounted his horse, which seemed to watch his motions
with the intelligence of a human being, and again rode off. But
in the last encounter the Saracen had lost his sword and his
quiver of arrows, both of which were attached to the girdle
which he was obliged to abandon. He had also lost his turban
in the struggle. These disadvantages seemed to incline the
Moslem to a truce. He approached the Christian with his right
hand extended, but no longer in a menacing attitude.

  ``There is truce betwixt our nations,'' he said, in the Lingua
Franca, commonly used for the purpose of communication with
the Crusaders; ``wherefore should there be war betwixt thee
and me?---Let there be peace betwixt us.''

  ``I am well contented,'' answered he of the Couchant Leopard;
``but what security dost thou offer that thou wilt observe
the truce?''

  ``The word of a follower of the Prophet was never broken,''
answered the Emir. ``It is thou, brave Nazarene, from whom
I should demand security, did I not know that treason seldom
dwells with courage.''

  The Crusader felt that the confidence of the Moslem made
him ashamed of his own doubts.

  ``By the cross of my sword,'' he said, laying his hand on the
weapon as he spoke, ``I will be true companion to thee, Saracen,
while our fortune wills that we remain in company together.''

  ``By Mahommed, Prophet of God, and by Allah, God of the
Prophet,'' replied his late foeman, ``there is not treachery in my
heart towards thee. And now wend we to yonder fountain, for
the hour of rest is at hand, and the stream had hardly touched
my lip when I was called to battle by thy approach.''

  The Knight of the Couchant Leopard yielded a ready and
courteous assent; and the late foes, without an angry look, or
gesture of doubt, rode side by side to the little cluster of palm-trees.
