





			CHAPTER NINTH.

	This is the prince of leeches; fever, plague,
	Cold rheum, and hot podagra, do but look on him,
	And quit their grasp upon the tortured sinews.
						Anonymous.


  The Baron of Gilsland walked with slow step and an anxious
countenance towards the royal pavilion. He had much diffidence
of his own capacity, except in a field of battle, and,
conscious of no very acute intellect, was usually contented to
wonder at circumstances, which a man of livelier imagination
would have endeavoured to investigate and understand, or at
least would have made the subject of speculation. But it seemed
very extraordinary, even to him, that the attention of the bishop
should have been at once abstracted from all reflection on the
marvellous cure which they had witnessed, and upon the probability
it afforded of Richard being restored to health, by what
seemed a very trivial piece of information, announcing the motions
of a beggarly Scottish knight, than whom Thomas of Gilsland
knew nothing within the circle of gentle blood more unimportant
or contemptible; and, despite his usual habit of passively beholding
passing events, the baron's spirit toiled with unwonted
attempts to form conjectures on the cause.

  At length the idea occurred at once to him, that the whole
might be a conspiracy against King Richard, formed within the
camp of the allies, and to which the bishop, who was by some
represented as a politic and unscrupulous person, was not unlikely
to have been accessory. It was true, that in his own opinion,
there existed no character so perfect as that of his master; for
Richard being the flower of chivalry, and the chief of Christian
leaders, and obeying in all points the commands of Holy Church,
De Vaux's ideas of perfection went no farther. Still he knew
that, however unworthily, it had been always his master's fate,
to draw as much reproach and dislike, as honour and attachment,
from the display of his great qualities; and that in the
very camp, and amongst those princes bound by oath to the
Crusade, were many who would have sacrificed all hope of
victory over the Saracens, to the pleasure of ruining, or at least
of humbling, Richard of England.

  ``Wherefore,'' said the baron to himself, ``it is in no sense
impossible that this El Hakim, with this his cure, or seeming
cure, wrought on the body of the Scottish squire, may mean
nothing but a trick, to which he of the Leopard may be accessary,
and wherein the Bishop of Tyre, prelate as he is, may have
some share.''

  This hypothesis, indeed, could not be so easily reconciled with
the alarm manifested by the bishop, on learning that, contrary
to his expectation, the Scottish knight had suddenly returned to
the Crusaders' camp. But De Vaux was influenced only by his
general prejudices, which dictated to him the assured belief, that
a wily Italian priest, a false-hearted Scot, and an infidel physician,
formed a set of ingredients from which all evil, and no
good, was likely to be extracted. He resolved, however, to lay
his scruples bluntly before the King, of whose judgment he had
nearly as high an opinion as of his valour.

  Meantime, events had taken place very contrary to the suppositions
which Thomas de Vaux had entertained. Scarce had
he left the royal pavilion, when, betwixt the impatience of the
fever, and that which was natural to his disposition, Richard
began to murmur at his delay, and express an earnest desire for
his return. He had seen enough to try to reason himself out of
this irritation, which greatly increased his bodily malady. He
wearied his attendants by demanding from them amusements,
and the breviary of the priest, the romance of the clerk, even the
harp of his favourite minstrel, were had recourse to in vain. At
length, some two hours before sundown, and long, therefore, ere
he could expect a satisfactory account of the process of the cure
which the Moor or Arabian had undertaken, he sent, as we have
already heard, a messenger, commanding the attendance of the
Knight of the Leopard, determined to soothe his impatience by
obtaining from Sir Kenneth a more particular account of the
cause of his absence from the camp, and the circumstances of his
meeting with this celebrated physician.

  The Scottish knight, thus summoned, entered the royal
presence, as one who was no stranger to such scenes. He was
scarcely known to the King of England, even by sight, although,
tenacious of his rank, as devout in the adoration of the lady of
his secret heart, he had never been absent on those occasions
when the munificence and hospitality of England opened the
Court of its monarch to all who held a certain rank in chivalry
The King gazed fixedly on Sir Kenneth approaching his bedside,
while the knight bent his knee for a moment, then arose,
and stood before him in a posture of deference, but not of subservience
or humility, as became an officer in the presence of his
sovereign.

  ``Thy name,'' said the King, ``is Kenneth of the Leopard---
From whom hadst thou degree of knighthood?''

  ``I took it from the sword of William the Lion, King of
Scotland,'' replied the Scot.

  ``A weapon,'' said the King, ``well worthy to confer honour,
nor has it been laid on an undeserving shoulder. We have seen
thee bear thyself knightly and valiantly in press of battle, when
most need there was; and thou hadst not been yet to learn that
thy deserts were known to us, but that thy presumption in other
points has been such, that thy services can challenge no better
reward than that of pardon for thy transgression. What sayest
thou---ha?''

  Kenneth attempted to speak, but was unable to express himself
distinctly; the consciousness of his too ambitious love, and
the keen falcon glance with which C<oe>ur de Lion seemed to
penetrate his inmost soul, combining to disconcert him.

  ``And yet,'' said the King, ``although soldiers should obey
command, and vassals be respectful towards their superiors, we
might forgive a brave knight greater offence than the keeping
a simple hound, though it were contrary to our express public
ordinance.''

  Richard kept his eye fixed on the Scot's face, beheld, and beholding,
smiled inwardly at the relief produced by the turn he
had given to his general accusation.

  ``So please you, my lord,'' said the Scot, ``your Majesty
must be good to us poor gentlemen of Scotland in this matter.
We are far from home, scant of revenues, and cannot support
ourselves as your wealthy nobles, who have credit of the Lombards.
The Saracens shall feel our blows the harder that we
eat a piece of dried venison from time to time, with our herbs
and barley-cakes.''

  ``It skills not asking my leave,'' said Richard, ``since Thomas
de Vaux, who doth, like all around me, that which is fittest in
his own eyes, hath already given thee permission for hunting
and hawking.''

  ``For hunting only, and please you,'' said the Scot; ``but if it
please your Majesty to indulge me with the privilege of hawking
also, and you list to trust me with a falcon on fist, I trust I could
supply your royal mess with some choice water-fowl.''

  ``I dread me, if thou hadst but the falcon,'' said the King,
``thou wouldst scarce wait for the permission. I wot well it is
said abroad that we of the line of Anjou resent offence against
our forest laws, as highly as we would do treason against our
crown. To brave and worthy men, however, we could pardon
either misdemeanour.---But enough of this---I desire to know
of you, Sir Knight, wherefore, and by whose authority, you
took this recent journey to the wilderness of the Dead Sea, and
Engaddi?''

  ``By order,'' replied the knight, ``of the Council of Princes
of the Holy Crusade.''

  ``And how dared any one to give such an order, when I---not
the least, surely, in the league---was unacquainted with it?''

  ``It was not my part, please your highness,'' said the Scot,
``to inquire into such particulars. I am a soldier of the Cross
---serving, doubtless, for the present, under your highness's
banner, and proud of the permission to do so---but still, one
who hath taken on him the holy symbol for the rights of
Christianity, and the recovery of the Holy Sepulchre, and
bound, therefore, to obey, without question, the orders of the
princes and chiefs by whom the blessed enterprise is directed.
That indisposition should seclude, I trust for but a short time,
your highness from their councils, in which you hold so potential
a voice, I must lament with all Christendom; but, as a
soldier, I must obey those on whom the lawful right of command
devolves, or set but an evil example in the Christian camp.''

  ``Thou say'st well,'' said King Richard; ``and the blame
rests not with thee, but with those with whom, when it shall
please Heaven to raise me from this accursed bed of pain and
inactivity, I hope to reckon roundly. What was the purport of
thy message?''

  ``Methinks, and please your highness,'' replied Sir Kenneth,
``that were best asked of those who sent me, and who can
render the reasons of mine errand; whereas I can only tell its
outward form and purport.''

  ``Palter not with me, Sir Scot---it were ill for thy safety,''
said the irritable monarch.

  ``My safety, my lord,'' replied the knight firmly, ``I cast
behind me as a regardless thing when I vowed myself to this
enterprise, looking rather to my immortal welfare, than to that
which concerns my earthly body.''

  ``By the mass,'' said King Richard, ``thou art a brave fellow!
Hark thee, Sir Knight, I love the Scottish people; they are hardy,
though dogged and stubborn, and, I think, true men in the main,
though the necessity of state has sometimes constrained them to
be dissemblers. I deserve some love at their hand, for I have
voluntarily done what they could not by arms have extorted from
me, any more than from my predecessors---I have re-established
the fortresses of Roxburgh and Berwick, which lay in pledge to
England---I have restored your ancient boundaries---and finally,
I have renounced a claim to homage upon the crown of England,
which I thought unjustly forced on you. I have endeavoured to
make honourable and independent friends, where former kings
of England attempted only to compel unwilling and rebellious
vassals.''

  ``All this you have done, my Lord King,'' said Sir Kenneth,
bowing---``All this you have done by your royal treaty with our
sovereign at Canterbury. Therefore have you me, and many
better Scotsmen, making war against the infidels under your
banners, who would else have been ravaging your frontiers in
England. If their numbers are now few, it is because their lives
have been freely waged and wasted.''

  ``I grant it true,'' said the King; ``and for the good offices I
have done your land, I require you to remember, that, as a
principal member of the Christian league, I have a right to
know the negotiations of my confederates. Do me, therefore,
the justice to tell me what I have a title to be acquainted with,
and which I am certain to know more truly from you than from
others.''

  ``My lord,'' said the Scot, ``thus conjured, I will speak the
truth; for I well believe that your purposes towards the principal
object of our expedition are single-hearted and honest; and
it is more than I dare warrant for others of the Holy League.
Be pleased, therefore, to know, my charge was to propose, through
the medium of the hermit of Engaddi---a holy man, respected
and protected by Saladin himself''------

  ``A continuation of the truce, I doubt not,'' said Richard,
hastily interrupting him.

  ``No, by Saint Andrew, my liege,'' said the Scottish knight,
``but the establishment of a lasting peace, and the withdrawing
our armies from Palestine.''

  ``Saint George!'' said Richard, in astonishment---``Ill as I
have justly thought of them, I could not have dreamed they
would have humbled themselves to such dishonour. Speak, Sir
Kenneth, with what will did you carry such a message?''

  ``With right good will, my lord,'' said Kenneth; ``because,
when we had lost our noble leader, under whose guidance alone
I hoped for victory, I saw none who could succeed him likely
to lead us to conquest, and I accounted it well in such circumstances
to avoid defeat.''

  ``And on what conditions was this hopeful peace to be contracted?''
said King Richard, painfully suppressing the passion
with which his heart was almost bursting.

  ``These were not intrusted to me, my lord,'' answered the
Knight of the Couchant Leopard. ``I delivered them sealed
to the hermit.''

  ``And for what hold you this reverend hermit?---for fool,
madman, traitor, or saint?'' said Richard.

  ``His folly, sire,'' replied the shrewd Scotsman, ``I hold to
be assumed to win favour and reverence from the Paynimrie,
who regard madmen as the inspired of Heaven; at least it
seemed to me as exhibited only occasionally, and not a's mixing,
like natural folly, with the general tenor of his mind.''

  ``Shrewdly replied,'' said the monarch, throwing himself back
on his couch, from which he had half-raised himself.---``Now
of his penitence?''

  ``His penitence,'' continued Kenneth, ``appears to me sincere,
and the fruits of remorse for some dreadful crime, for which he
seems, in his own opinion, condemned to reprobation.''

  ``And for his policy?'' said King Richard.

  ``Methinks, my lord,'' said the Scottish knight, ``he despairs
of the security of Palestine, as of his own salvation, by any
means short of a miracle---at least since the arm of Richard of
England hath ceased to strike for it.''

  ``And therefore, the coward policy of this hermit is like that
of these miserable princes, who, forgetful of their knighthood and
their faith, are only resolved and determined when the question
is retreat, and, rather than go forward against an armed Saracen,
would trample in their flight over a dying ally!''

  ``Might I so far presume, my Lord King,'' said the Scottish
knight, ``this discourse but heats your disease, the enemy from
which Christendom dreads more evil, than from armed hosts of
infidels.''

  The countenance of King Richard was, indeed, more flushed,
and his action became more feverishly vehement, as, with clenched
hand, expanded arm, and flashing eyes, he seemed at once to suffer
under bodily pain, and at the same time under vexation of mind,
while his high spirit led him to speak on, as if in contempt of
both.

  ``You can flatter, Sir Knight,'' he said, ``but you escape me
not. I must know more from you than you have yet told me.
Saw you my royal consort when at Engaddi?''

  ``To my knowledge---no, my lord,'' replied Sir Kenneth, with
considerable perturbation; for he remembered the midnight procession
in the chapel of the rocks.

  ``I ask you,'' said the King, in a sterner voice, ``whether you
were not in the chapel of the Carmelite nuns at Engaddi, and
there saw Berengaria, Queen of England, and the ladies of her
Court, who went thither on pilgrimage?''

  ``My lord,'' said Sir Kenneth, ``I will speak the truth as in
the confessional. In a subterranean chapel, to which the anchorite
conducted me, I beheld a choir of ladies do homage to a relic
of the highest sanctity; but as I saw not their faces, nor heard
their voices, unless in the hymns which they chanted, I cannot
tell whether the Queen of England was of the bevy.''

  ``And was there no one of these ladies known to you?''

  Sir Kenneth stood silent.

  ``I ask you,'' said Richard, raising himself on his elbow, ``as
a knight and a gentleman, and I shall know by your answer
how you value either character---did you or did you not know
any lady amongst that band of worshippers?''

  ``My lord,'' said Kenneth, not without much hesitation, ``I
might guess.''

  ``And I also may guess,'' said the King, frowning sternly;
``but it is enough. Leopard as you are, Sir Knight, beware
tempting the lion's paw. Hark ye---to become enamoured of
the moon would be but an act of folly; but to leap from the
battlements of a lofty tower, in the wild hope of coming within
her sphere, were self-destructive madness.''

  At this moment some bustling was heard in the outer apartment,
and the King, hastily changing to his more natural manner,
said, ``Enough---begone---speed to De Vaux, and send him hither
with the Arabian physician. My life for the faith of the Soldan!
Would he but abjure his false law, I would aid him with my
sword to drive this scum of French and Austrians from his
dominions, and think Palestine as well ruled by him as when her
kings were anointed by the decree of Heaven itself.''

  The Knight of the Leopard retired, and presently afterwards
the chamberlain announced a deputation from the Council, who
had come to wait on the Majesty of England.

  ``It is well they allow that I am living yet,'' was his reply.
``Who are the reverend ambassadors?''

  ``The Grand Master of the Templars, and the Marquis of
Montserrat.''

  ``Our brother of France loves not sick-beds,'' said Richard;
``yet, had Philip been ill, I had stood by his couch long since.
---Jocelyn, lay me the couch more fairly, it is tumbled like a
stormy sea---reach me yonder steel mirror---pass a comb through
my hair and beard. They look, indeed, liker a lion's mane than
a Christian man's locks---bring water.''

  ``My lord,'' said the trembling chamberlain, ``the leeches say
that cold water may be fatal.''

  ``To the foul fiend with the leeches!'' replied the monarch;
``if they cannot cure me, think you I will allow them to torment
me?---There, then''---he said, after having made his ablutions,
``admit the worshipful envoys; they will now, I think, scarcely
see that disease has made Richard negligent of his person.''

  The celebrated Master of the Templars was a tall, thin, war-worn
man, with a slow yet penetrating eye, and a brow on which
a thousand dark intrigues had stamped a portion of their obscurity.
At the head of that singular body, to whom their order
was everything, and their individuality nothing---seeking the advancement
of its power, even at the hazard of that very religion
which the fraternity were originally associated to protect---accused
of heresy and witchcraft, although by their character Christian
priests---suspected of secret league with the Soldan, though by
oath devoted to the protection of the Holy Temple, or its recovery
---the whole order, and the whole personal character of its commander,
or Grand Master, was a riddle, at the exposition of which
most men shuddered. The Grand Master was dressed in his
white robes of solemnity, and he bare the _abacus,_ a mystic staff
of office, the peculiar form of which has given rise to such singular
conjectures and commentaries, leading to suspicions that this
celebrated fraternity of Christian knights were embodied under
the foulest symbols of Paganism.

  Conrade of Montserrat had a much more pleasing exterior than
the dark and mysterious priest-soldier by whom he was accompanied.
He was a handsome man, of middle age, or something
past that term, bold in the field, sagacious in council, gay and
gallant in times of festivity; but, on the other hand, he was generally
accused of versatility, of a narrow and selfish ambition, of
a desire to extend his own principality, without regard to the
weal of the Latin Kingdom of Palestine, and of seeking his own
interest, by private negotiations with Saladin, to the prejudice
of the Christian leaguers.

  When the usual salutations had been made by these dignitaries,
and courteously returned by King Richard, the Marquis
of Montserrat commenced an explanation of the motives of their
visit, sent, as he said they were, by the anxious Kings and Princes
who composed the Council of the Crusaders, to ``inquire into the
health of their magnanimous ally, the valiant King of England.''

  ``We know the importance in which the Princes of the
Council hold our health,'' replied the English King; ``and are
well aware how much they must have suffered by suppressing
all curiosity concerning it for fourteen days, for fear, doubtless,
of aggravating our disorder, by showing their anxiety regarding
the event.''

  The flow of the Marquis's eloquence being checked, and he
himself thrown into some confusion by this reply, his more
austere companion took up the thread of the conversation, and,
with as much dry and brief gravity as was consistent with the
presence which he addressed, informed the King that they came
from the Council to pray, in the name of Christendom, ``that he
would not suffer his health to be tampered with by an infidel physician,
said to be despatched by Saladin, until the Council had taken
measures to remove or confirm the suspicion which they at present
conceived did attach itself to the mission of such a person.''

  ``Grand Master of the Holy and Valiant Order of Knights
Templars, and you, Most Noble Marquis of Montserrat,'' replied
Richard, ``if it please you to retire into the adjoining pavilion,
you shall presently see what account we make of the tender remonstrances
of our royal and princely colleagues in this most
religious warfare.''

  The Marquis and Grand Master retired accordingly; nor had
they been many minutes in the outward pavilion when the
Eastern physician arrived, accompanied by the Baron of Gilsland
and Kenneth of Scotland. The baron, however, was a little later
of entering the tent than the other two, stopping, perchance, to
issue some orders to the warders without.

  As the Arabian physician entered, he made his obeisance,
after the Oriental fashion, to the Marquis and Grand Master,
whose dignity was apparent, both from their appearance and
their bearing. The Grand Master returned the salutation with
an expression of disdainful coldness, the Marquis, with the
popular courtesy which he habitually practised to men of every
rank and nation. There was a pause; for the Scottish knight,
waiting for the arrival of De Vaux, presumed not, of his own
authority, to enter the tent of the King of England, and,
during this interval, the Grand Master sternly demanded of the
Moslem,---``Infidel, hast thou the courage to practise thine art
upon the person of an anointed sovereign of the Christian host?''

  ``The sun of Allah,'' answered the sage, ``shines on the
Nazarene as well as on the true believer, and his servant dare
make no distinction betwixt them when called on to exercise
his art of healing.''

  ``Misbelieving Hakim,'' said the Grand Master, ``or whatsoever
they call thee for an unbaptized slave of darkness, dost thou
well know, that thou shalt be torn asunder by wild horses should
King Richard die under thy charge?''

  ``That were hard justice,'' answered the physician; ``seeing
that I can but use human means, and that the issue is written
in the book of light.''

  ``Nay, reverend and valiant Grand Master,'' said the Marquis
of Montserrat, ``consider that this learned man is not acquainted
with our Christian order, adopted in the fear of God, and for the
safety of his anointed.---Be it known unto thee, grave physician,
whose skill we doubt not, that your wisest course is to repair to
the presence of the illustrious Council of our Holy League, and
there to give account and reckoning to such wise and learned
leeches as they shall nominate, concerning your means of process
and cure of this illustrious patient; so shall you escape all the
danger, which, rashly taking such a high matter upon your sole
answer, you may else most likely incur.''

  ``My lords,'' said El Hakim, ``I understand you well. But
knowledge hath its champions as well as your military art, nay,
hath sometimes had its martyrs as well as religion. I have the
command of my sovereign, the Soldan Saladin, to heal this
Nazarene King, and, with the blessing of the Prophet, I will
obey his commands. If I fail, ye wear swords thirsting for the
blood of the faithful, and I proffer my body to your weapons.
But I will not reason with one uncircumcised upon the virtue of
the medicines of which I have obtained knowledge, through the
grace of the Prophet, and I pray you interpose no delay between
me and my office.''

  ``Who talks of delay?'' said the Baron de Vaux, hastily entering
the tent; ``we have had but too much already.---I salute you,
my Lord of Montserrat, and you, valiant Grand Master. But
I must presently pass with this learned physician to the bedside
of my master.''

  ``My lord,'' said the Marquis, in Norman French, or the
language of Ouie, as it was then called, ``are you well advised
that we came to expostulate on the part of the Council of the
Monarchs and Princes of the Crusade, against the risk of permitting
an infidel and Eastern physician to tamper with a health so
valuable as that of your master King Richard?''

  ``Noble Lord Marquis,'' replied the Englishman, bluntly,
``I can neither use many words, nor do I delight in listening
to them---moreover, I am much more ready to believe what my
eyes have seen, than what my ears have heard. I am satisfied
that this heathen can cure the sickness of King Richard, and I
believe and trust he will labour to do so. Time is precious.
If Mahommed---may God's curse be on him!---stood at the
door of the tent, with such fair purpose as this Adonbec el
Hakim entertains, I would hold it sin to delay him for a minute.
---So, give ye God'en, my lords.''

  ``Nay, but,'' said Conrade of Montserrat, ``the King himself said
we should be present when this same physician dealt upon him.''

  The baron whispered the chamberlain, probably to know
whether the Marquis spoke truly, and then replied, ``My lords,
if you will hold your patience, you are welcome to enter with
us; but if you interrupt, by action or threat, this accomplished
physician in his duty, be it known, that, without respect to
your high quality, I will enforce your absence from Richard's
tent; for know, I am so well satisfied with the virtue, of this
man's medicines, that were Richard himself to refuse them, by
Our Lady of Lanercost, I think I could find in my heart to force
him to take the means of his cure whether he would or no---
Move onward, El Hakim.''

  The last word was spoken in the Lingua Franca, and instantly
obeyed by the physician. The Grand Master looked grimly on
the unceremonious old soldier, but, on exchanging a glance with
the Marquis, smoothed his frowning brow as well as he could,
and both followed De Vaux and the Arabian into the inner tent,
where Richard lay expecting them, with that impatience with
which the sick patient watches the step of his physician. Sir
Kenneth, whose attendance seemed neither asked nor prohibited,
felt himself, by the circumstances in which he stood, entitled
to follow these high dignitaries, but, conscious of his inferior
power and rank, remained aloof during the scene which took
place.

  Richard, when they entered his apartment, immediately exclaimed,
``So ho! a goodly fellowship come to see Richard take
his leap in the dark---My noble allies, I greet you as the representatives
of our assembled league; Richard will again be amongst
you in his former fashion, or ye shall bear to the grave what is
left of him---De Vaux, lives he or dies he, thou hast the thanks
of thy prince---There is yet another---but this fever hath wasted
my eyesight---what, the bold Scot, who would climb Heaven
without a ladder?---he is welcome too.---Come, Sir Hakim, to
the work, to the work.''

  The physician, who had already informed himself of the
various symptoms of the King's illness, now felt his pulse for a
long time, and with deep attention, while all around stood
silent, and in breathless expectation. The sage next filled a
cup with spring water, and dipt into it the small red purse,
Which, as formerly, he took from his bosom. When he seemed
to think it sufficiently medicated, he was about to offer it to
the sovereign, who prevented him, by saying, ``Hold an
instant---Thou hast felt my pulse---let me lay my finger on
thine---I too, as becomes a good knight, know something of
thine art.''

  The Arabian yielded his hand without hesitation, and his
long slender dark fingers were, for an instant, enclosed, and
almost buried, in the large enfoldment of King Richard's
hand.

  ``His blood beats calm as an infant's,'' said the King; ``so
throb not theirs who poison princes. De Vaux, whether we live
or die, dismiss this Hakim with honour and safety---Commend
us, friend, to the noble Saladin. Should I die, it is without
doubt of his faith---should I live, it will be to thank him as a
warrior would desire to be thanked.''

  He then raised himself in bed, took the cup in his hand, and,
turning to the Marquis and the Grand Master,---``Mark what
I say, and let my royal brethren pledge me in Cyprus wine,---
`To the immortal honour of the first Crusader, who shall strike
lance or sword on the gate of Jerusalem; and to the shame and
eternal infamy of whomsoever shall turn back from the plough
on which he hath laid his hand!' ''

  He drained the cup to the bottom, resigned it to the Arabian,
and sunk back, as if exhausted, upon the cushions which were
arranged to receive him. The physician, then, with silent but
expressive signs, directed that all should leave the tent, excepting
himself and De Vaux, whom no remonstrance could induce
to withdraw. The apartment was cleared accordingly.
