




			CHAPTER TWENTY-SECOND.

	Who's there?---Approach---'tis kindly done---
	My learn'd physician and a friend.
				Sir Eustace Grey.


  Our narrative retrogrades to a period shortly previous to the
incidents last mentioned, when, as the reader must remember,
the unfortunate Knight of the Leopard, bestowed upon the
Arabian physician by King Richard, rather as a slave than in
any other capacity, was exiled from the camp of the Crusaders,
in whose ranks he had so often and so brilliantly distinguished
himself. He followed his new master, for so we must now term
the Hakim, to the Moorish tents which contained his retinue and
his property, with the stupid feelings of one, who, fallen from
the summit of a precipice, and escaping unexpectedly with life,
is just able to drag himself from the fatal spot, but without the
power of estimating the extent of the damage which he has sustained.
Arrived at the tent, he threw himself, without speech
of any kind, upon a couch of dressed buffalo's hide, which was
pointed out to him by his conductor, and hiding his face betwixt
his hands, groaned heavily, as if his heart was on the point of
bursting. The physician heard him, as he was giving orders to
his numerous domestics to prepare for their departure the next
morning before daybreak, and moved with compassion, interrupted
his occupation, to sit down cross-legged, by the side of his couch,
and administer comfort according to the Oriental manner.

  ``My friend,'' he said, ``be of good comfort---for what sayeth
the poet---`It is better that a man should be the servant of a
kind master, than be the slave of his own wild passions.' Again,
be of good courage; because, whereas Ysouf Ben Yagoube was
sold to a King by his brethren, even to Pharaoh King of Egypt,
thy King hath, on the other hand, bestowed thee on one who
will be to thee as a brother.''

  Sir Kenneth made an effort to thank the Hakim, but his heart
was too full, and the indistinct sounds which accompanied his
abortive attempts to reply, induced the kind physician to desist
from his premature endeavours at consolation. He left his new
domestic, or guest, in quiet, to indulge his sorrows, and having
commanded all the necessary preparations for their departure on
the morning, sat down upon the carpet of the tent, and indulged
himself in a moderate repast. After he had thus refreshed himself,
similar viands were offered to the Scottish Knight; but
though the slaves let him understand that the next day would be
far advanced ere they would halt for the purpose of refreshment,
Sir Kenneth could not overcome the disgust which he felt against
swallowing any nourishment, and could be prevailed upon to taste
nothing, saving a draught of cold water.

  He was awake, long after his Arab host had performed his
usual devotions, and betaken himself to his repose, nor had sleep
visited him at the hour of midnight, when a movement took place
among the domestics, which, though attended with no speech,
and very little noise, made him aware they were loading the
camels and preparing for departure. In the course of these preparations,
the last person who was disturbed, excepting the
physician himself, was the Knight of Scotland, whom, about three
in the morning, a sort of majordomo, or master of the household,
acquainted that he must arise. He did so, without farther answer,
and followed him into the moonlight, where stood the camels,
most of which were already loaded, and one only remained kneeling
until its burden should be completed.

  A little apart from the camels stood a number of horses ready
bridled and saddled, and the Hakim himself, coming forth,
mounted on one of them with as much agility as the grave decorum
of his character permitted, and directed another, which he
pointed out, to be led towards Sir Kenneth. An English officer
was in attendance, to escort them through the camp of the
Crusaders, and to ensure their leaving it in safety, and all was
ready for their departure. The pavilion which they had left,
was, in the meanwhile, struck with singular despatch, and the
tent-poles and coverings composed the burden of the last camel
---when the physician, pronouncing solemnly the verse of the
Koran, ``God be our guide, and Mohammed our protector, in the
desert as in the watered field,'' the whole cavalcade was instantly
in motion.

  In traversing the camp, they were challenged by the various
sentinels who maintained guard there, and suffered to proceed
in silence, or with a muttered curse upon their prophet, as they
passed the post of some more zealous Crusader. At length the
last barriers were left behind them, and the party formed themselves
for the march with military precaution. Two or three
horsemen advanced in front as a vanguard; one or two remained
a bowshot in the rear; and, wherever the ground admitted, others
were detached to keep an outlook on the flanks. In this manner
they proceeded onward, while Sir Kenneth, looking back on the
moonlight camp, might now indeed seem banished, deprived at
once of honour and liberty, from the glimmering banners under
which he had hoped to gain additional renown, and the tented
dwellings of chivalry, of Christianity, and---of Edith Plantagenet.

  The Hakim, who rode by his side, observed, in his usual tone
of sententious consolation---``It is unwise to look back when the
journey lieth forward;'' and as he spoke, the horse of the knight
made such a perilous stumble, as threatened to add a practical
moral to the tale.

  The knight was compelled by this hint to give more attention
to the management of his steed, which more than once required
the assistance and support of the check-bridle, although, in other
respects, nothing could be more easy at once, and active, than the
ambling pace at which the animal (which was a mare) proceeded.

  ``The conditions of that horse,'' observed the sententious
physician, ``are like those of human fortune; seeing that amidst
his most swift and easy pace, the rider must guard himself
against a fall, and that it is when prosperity is at the highest,
that our prudence should be awake and vigilant to prevent
misfortune.''

  The overloaded appetite loathes even the honeycomb, and it
is scarce a wonder that the knight, mortified and harassed with
misfortunes and abasement, became something impatient of
hearing his misery made, at every turn, the ground of proverbs
and apothegms, however just and apposite.

  ``Methinks,'' he said, rather peevishly, ``I wanted no additional
illustration of the instability of fortune---though I would
thank thee, Sir Hakim, for thy choice of a steed for me, would
the jade but stumble so effectually as at once to break my neck
and her own.''

  ``My brother,'' answered the Arab sage, with imperturbable
gravity, ``thou speakest as one of the foolish. Thou say'st in
thy heart, that the sage should have given you, as his guest,
the younger and better horse, and reserved the old one for himself;
but know that the defects of the older steed may be compensated
by the energies of the young rider, whereas the violence
of the young horse requires to be moderated by the cold temper
of the older.''

  So spoke the sage; but neither to this observation did Sir
Kenneth return any answer which could lead to a continuance
of their conversation, and the physician, wearied, perhaps, of
administering comfort to one who would not be comforted,
signed to one of his retinue.

  ``Hassan,'' he said, ``hast thou nothing wherewith to beguile
the way?''

  Hassan, story-teller and poet by profession, spurred up, upon
this summons, to exercise his calling.---``Lord of the palace of
life,'' he said, addressing the physician, ``thou, before whom
the angel Azrael spreadeth his wings for flight---thou, wiser
than Solimaun Ben Daoud, upon whose signet was inscribed
the =real name= which controls the spirits of the elements---
forbid it, Heaven, that while thou travellest upon the track of
benevolence, bearing healing and hope wherever thou comest,
thine own course should be saddened for lack of the tale and
of the song. Behold, while thy servant is at thy side, he will
pour forth the treasures of his memory, as the fountain sendeth
her stream beside the pathway, for the refreshment of him that
walketh thereon.''

  After this exordium, Hassan uplifted his voice, and began a
tale of love and magic, intermixed with feats of warlike achievement,
and ornamented with abundant quotations from the Persian
poets, with whose compositions the orator seemed familiar.
The retinue of the physician, such excepted as were necessarily
detained in attendance on the camels, thronged up to the narrator,
and pressed as close as deference for their master permitted,
to enjoy the delight which the inhabitants of the East have ever
derived from this species of exhibition.

  At another time, notwithstanding his imperfect knowledge
of the language, Sir Kenneth might have been interested in the
recitation, which, though dictated by a more extravagant imagination,
and expressed in more inflated and metaphorical language,
bore yet a strong resemblance to the romances of chivalry, then
so fashionable in Europe. But as matters stood with him, he
was scarcely even sensible that a man in the centre of the
cavalcade recited and sung, in a low tone, for nearly two hours,
modulating his voice to the various moods of passion introduced
into the tale, and receiving, in return, now low murmurs
of applause, now muttered expressions of wonder, now
sighs and tears, and sometimes, what it was far more difficult
to extract from such an audience, a tribute of smiles, and even
laughter.

  During the recitation, the attention of the exile, however
abstracted by his own deep sorrow, was occasionally awakened
by the low wail of a dog, secured in a wicker enclosure suspended
on one of the camels, which, as an experienced woodsman,
he had no hesitation in recognising to be that of his own
faithful hound; and from the plaintive tone of the animal, he
had no doubt that he was sensible of his master's vicinity, and,
in his way, invoking his assistance for liberty and rescue.

  ``Alas! poor Roswal,'' he said, ``thou callest for aid and
sympathy upon one in stricter bondage than thou thyself
art. I will not seem to heed thee, or return thy affection,
since it would serve but to load our parting with yet more
bitterness.''

  Thus passed the hours of night, and the space of dim hazy
dawn, which forms the twilight of a Syrian morning. But
when the very first line of the sun's disk began to rise above
the level horizon, and when the very first level ray shot glimmering
in dew along the surface of the desert, which the
travellers had now attained, the sonorous voice of El Hakim
himself overpowered and cut short the narrative of the tale-teller,
while he caused to resound along the sands the solemn
summons, which the muezzins thunder at morning from the
minaret of every mosque.

  ``To prayer!---to prayer! God is the one God.---To prayer---
to prayer! Mohammed is the prophet of God.---To prayer---
to prayer! Time is flying from you.---To prayer---to prayer!
Judgment is drawing nigh to you.''

  In an instant each Moslem cast himself from his horse,
turned his face towards Mecca, and performed with sand an
imitation of those ablutions, which were elsewhere required to
be made with water, while each individual, in brief but fervent
ejaculations, recommended himself to the care, and his sins to
the forgiveness, of God and the Prophet. Even Sir Kenneth,
whose reason at once and prejudices were offended by seeing
his companions in that which he considered as an act of
idolatry, could not help respecting the sincerity of their misguided
zeal, and being stimulated by their fervour to apply
supplications to Heaven in a purer form, wondering, meanwhile,
what new-born feelings could teach him to accompany in prayer,
though with varied invocation, those very Saracens, whose
heathenish worship he had conceived a crime dishonourable to
the land in which high miracles had been wrought, and where
the day-star of redemption had arisen.

  The act of devotion, however, though rendered in such
strange society, burst purely from his natural feelings of
religious duty, and had its usual effect in composing the spirits,
which had been long harassed by so rapid a succession of
calamities. The sincere and earnest approach of the Christian
to the throne of the Almighty teaches the best lesson of patience
under affliction; since wherefore should we mock the Deity
with supplications, when we insult him by murmuring under
his decrees? or how, while our prayers have in every word
admitted the vanity and nothingness of the things of time in
comparison to those of eternity, should we hope to deceive the
Searcher of Hearts, by permitting the world and worldly
passions to reassume the reins even immediately after a solemn
address to Heaven? But Sir Kenneth was not of these. He
felt himself comforted and strengthened, and better prepared to
execute or submit to whatever his destiny might call upon him
to do or to suffer.

  Meanwhile, the party of Saracens regained their saddles, and
continued their route, and the tale-teller, Hassan, resumed the
thread of his narrative; but it was no longer to the same
attentive audience. A horseman, who had ascended some high
ground on the right hand of the little column, had returned on
a speedy gallop to El Hakim, and communicated with him.
Four or five more cavaliers had then been despatched, and the
little band, which might consist of about twenty or thirty persons,
began to follow them with their eyes, as men from whose
gestures, and advance or retreat, they were to augur good or
evil. Hassan, finding his audience inattentive, or being himself
attracted by the dubious appearances on the flank, stinted in his
song; and the march became silent, save when a camel-driver
called out to his patient charge, or some anxious follower of the
Hakim communicated with his next neighbour, in a hurried
and low whisper.

  This suspense continued until they had rounded a ridge,
composed of hillocks of sand, which concealed from their main
body the object that had created this alarm among their
scouts. Sir Kenneth could now see, at the distance of a mile
or more, a dark object moving rapidly on the bosom of the
desert, which his experienced eye recognised for a party of cavalry,
much superior to their own in numbers, and, from the thick and
frequent flashes which flung back the level beams of the rising sun,
it was plain that these were Europeans in their complete panoply.

  The anxious looks which the horsemen of El Hakim now
cast upon their leader, seemed to indicate deep apprehension;
while he, with gravity as undisturbed as when he called his
followers to prayer, detached two of his best mounted cavaliers,
with instructions to approach as closely as prudence permitted
to these travellers of the desert, and observe more minutely
their numbers, their character, and, if possible, their purpose.
The approach of danger, or what was feared as such, was like
a stimulating draught to one in apathy, and recalled Sir
Kenneth to himself and his situation.

  ``What fear you from these Christian horsemen, for such
they seem?'' he said to the Hakim.

  ``Fear!'' said El Hakim, repeating the word disdainfully---
``The sage fears nothing but Heaven---but ever expects from
wicked men the worst which they can do.''

  ``They are Christians,'' said Sir Kenneth, ``and it is the
time of truce---why should you fear a breach of faith?''

  ``They are the priestly soldiers of the Temple,'' answered
El Hakim, ``whose vow limits them to know neither truce nor
faith with the worshippers of Islam. May the Prophet blight
them, both root, branch, and twig!---Their peace is war, and
their faith is falsehood. Other invaders of Palestine have their
times and moods of courtesy. The Lion Richard will spare
when he has conquered---the eagle Philip will close his wing
when he has stricken a prey---even the Austrian bear will sleep
when he is gorged; but this horde of ever-hungry wolves know
neither pause nor satiety in their rapine.---Seest thou not that
they are detaching a party from their main body, and that they
take an eastern direction? Yon are their pages and squires,
whom they train up in their accursed mysteries, and whom, as
lighter mounted, they send to cut us off from our watering-place.
But they will be disappointed; I know the war of the
desert yet better than they.''

  He spoke a few words to his principal officer, and his whole
demeanour and countenance was at once changed from the
solemn repose of an eastern sage, accustomed more to contemplation
than to action, into the prompt and proud expression
of a gallant soldier, whose energies are roused by the near
approach of a danger, which he at once foresees and despises.

  To Sir Kenneth's eyes the approaching crisis had a different
aspect, and when Adonbec said to him, ``Thou must tarry close
by my side,'' he answered solemnly in the negative.

  ``Yonder,'' he said, ``are my comrades in arms---the men in
whose society I have vowed to fight or fall---on their banner
gleams the sign of our most blessed redemption---I cannot fly
from the Cross in company with the Crescent.''

  ``Fool!'' said the Hakim; ``their first action would be to
do thee to death, were it only to conceal their breach of the
truce.''

  ``Of that I must take my chance,'' replied Sir Kenneth;
``but I wear not the bonds of the infidels an instant longer
than I can cut them from me.''

  ``Then will I compel thee to follow me,'' said El Hakim.

  ``Compel!'' answered Sir Kenneth, angrily. ``Wert thou
not my benefactor, or one who has showed will to be such, and
were it not that it is to thy confidence I owe the freedom of
these hands, which thou mightest have loaded with fetters, I
would show thee that, unarmed as I am, compulsion would be
no easy task.''

  ``Enough, enough,'' replied the Arabian physician; ``we lose
time even when it is becoming precious.''

  So saying, he threw his arm aloft, and uttered a loud and
shrill cry, as a signal to those of his retinue, who instantly dispersed
themselves on the face of the desert, in as many different
directions as a chaplet of beads when the string is broken. Sir
Kenneth had no time to note what ensued; for, at the same
instant, the Hakim seized the rein of his steed, and putting his
own to its mettle, both sprung forth at once with the suddenness
of light, and at a pitch of velocity which almost deprived
the Scottish knight of the power of respiration, and left him
absolutely incapable, had he been desirous, to have checked the
career of his guide. Practised as Sir Kenneth was in horsemanship
from his earliest youth, the speediest horse he had ever
mounted was a tortoise in comparison to those of the Arabian
sage. They spurned the sand from behind them---they seemed
to devour the desert before them---miles flew away with minutes,
and yet their strength seemed unabated, and their respiration
as free as when they first started upon the wonderful race.
The motion, too, as easy as it was swift, seemed more like flying
through the air than riding on the earth, and was attended
with no unpleasant sensation, save the awe naturally felt
by one who is moving at such astonishing speed, and the
difficulty of breathing occasioned by their passing through the
air so rapidly.

  It was not until after an hour of this portentous motion, and
when all human pursuit was far, far behind, that the Hakim at
length relaxed his speed, and slackening the pace of the horses
into a hand gallop, began, in a voice as composed and even as if
he had been walking for the last hour, a descant upon the excellence
of his coursers to the Scot, who, breathless, half blind, half
deaf, and altogether giddy, from the rapidity of this singular ride,
hardly comprehended the words which flowed so freely from his
companion.

  ``These horses,'' he said, ``are of the breed called the Winged,
equal in speed to aught excepting the Borak of the Prophet.
They are fed on the golden barley of Yemen, mixed with spices,
and with a small portion of dried sheep's flesh. Kings have
given provinces to possess them, and their age is active as their
youth. Thou, Nazarene, art the first, save a true believer, that
ever had beneath his loins one of this noble race, a gift of the
Prophet himself to the blessed Ali, his kinsman and lieutenant,
well called the Lion of God. Time lays his touch so lightly on
these generous steeds, that the mare on which thou sittest has
seen five times five years pass over her, yet retains her pristine
speed and vigour, only that in the career the support of a bridle,
managed by a hand more experienced than thine, hath now
become necessary. May the Prophet be blessed, who hath bestowed
on the true believers the means of advance and retreat,
which causeth their iron-clothed enemies to be worn out with
their own ponderous weight! How the horses of yonder dog
Templars must have snorted and blown, when they had toiled
fetlock-deep in the desert for one-twentieth part of the space
which these brave steeds have left behind them, without one
thick pant, or a drop of moisture upon their sleek and velvet
coats!''

  The Scottish knight, who had now begun to recover his
breath and powers of attention, could not help acknowledging
in his heart the advantage possessed by these Eastern warriors
in a race of animals, alike proper for advance or retreat, and so
admirably adapted to the level and sandy deserts of Arabia and
Syria. But he did not choose to augment the pride of the
Moslem by acquiescing in his proud claim of superiority, and
therefore suffered the conversation to drop, and looking around
him could now, at the more moderate pace at which they moved,
distinguish that he was in a country not unknown to him.
The blighted borders and sullen waters of the Dead Sea, the
ragged and precipitous chain of mountains arising on the left,
the two or three palms clustered together, forming the single
green speck on the bosom of the waste wilderness,---objects
which, once seen, were scarcely to be forgotten,---showed to Sir
Kenneth that they were approaching the fountain called the
Diamond of the Desert, which had been the scene of his interview,
on a former occasion, with the Saracen Emir, Sheerkohf,
or Ilderim. In a few minutes they checked their horses beside
the spring, and the Hakim invited Sir Kenneth to descend from
horseback, and repose himself as in a place of safety. They
unbridled their steeds, El Hakim observing that farther care of
them was unnecessary, since they would be speedily joined by
some of the best mounted among his slaves, who would do what
farther was needful.

  ``Meantime,'' he said, spreading some food on the grass, ``eat
and drink, and be not discouraged. Fortune may raise up or
abase the ordinary mortal, but the sage and the soldier should
have minds beyond her control.''

  The Scottish knight endeavoured to testify his thanks by
showing himself docile; but though he strove to eat out of
complaisance, the singular contrast between his present situation,
and that which he had occupied on the same spot, when
the envoy of princes, and the victor in combat, came like a cloud
over his mind, and fasting, lassitude, and fatigue, oppressed
his bodily powers. El Hakim examined his hurried pulse, his
red and inflamed eye, his heated hand, and his shortened
respiration.

  ``The mind,'' he said, ``grows wise by watching, but her
sister, the body, of coarser materials, needs the support of
repose. Thou must sleep; and that thou mayest do so to
refreshment, thou must take a draught mingled with this
elixir.''

  He drew from his bosom a small crystal vial, cued in silver
filigree-work, and dropped into a little golden drinking cup a
small portion of a dark-coloured fluid.

  ``This,'' he said, ``is one of those productions which Allah
hath sent on earth for a blessing, though man's weakness and
wickedness have sometimes converted it into a curse. It is
powerful as the wine-cup of the Nazarene to drop the curtain
on the sleepless eye, and to relieve the burden of the overloaded
bosom; but when applied to the purposes of indulgence and
debauchery, it rends the nerves, destroys the strength, weakens
the intellect, and undermines life. But fear not thou to use its
virtues in the time of need, for the wise man warms him by the
same firebrand with which the madman burneth the tent.''<*>

* Some preparation of opium seems to be intimated.


  ``I have seen too much of thy skill, sage Hakim,'' said Sir
Kenneth, ``to debate thine hest;'' and swallowed the narcotic,
mingled as it was with some water from the spring, then
wrapped him in the haik, or Arab cloak, which had been
fastened to his saddle-pommel, and, according to the directions
of the physician, stretched himself at ease in the shade to await
the promised repose. Sleep came not at first, but in her stead
a train of pleasing yet not rousing or awakening sensations. A
state ensued, in which, still conscious of his own identity and
his own condition, the knight felt enabled to consider them not
only without alarm and sorrow, but as composedly as he might
have viewed the story of his misfortunes acted upon a stage, or
rather as a disembodied spirit might regard the transactions of
its past existence. From this state of repose, amounting almost
to apathy respecting the past, his thoughts were carried forward
to the future, which, in spite of all that existed to overcloud
the prospect, glittered with such hues, as under much happier
auspices his unstimulated imagination had not been able to
produce even in its most exalted state. Liberty, fame, successful
love, appeared to be the certain and not very distant prospect
of the enslaved exile, the dishonoured knight, even of the despairing
lover, who had placed his hopes of happiness so far beyond
the prospect of chance, in her wildest possibilities, serving to
countenance his wishes. Gradually as the intellectual sight
became overclouded, these gay visions became obscure, like the
dying hues of sunset, until they were at last lost in total oblivion;
and Sir Kenneth lay extended at the feet of El Hakim, to all
appearance, but for his deep respiration, as inanimate a corpse
as if life had actually departed.
