




			CHAPTER FOURTH.


  Kenneth the Scot was uncertain how long his senses had been
lost in profound repose, when he was roused to recollection by a
sense of oppression on his chest, which at first suggested a flitting
dream of struggling with a powerful opponent, and at length recalled
him fully to his senses. He was about to demand who
was there, when, opening his eyes, he beheld the figure of the
anchorite, wild and savage-looking as we have described him,
standing by his bedside, and pressing his right hand upon his
breast, while he held a small silver lamp in the other.

  ``Be silent,'' said the hermit, as the prostrate knight looked
up in surprise; ``I have that to say to you which yonder infidel
must not hear.''

  These words he spoke in the French language, and not in the
Lingua Franca, or compound of Eastern and European dialects,
which had hitherto been used amongst them.

  ``Arise,'' he continued, ``put on thy mantle---speak not, but
tread lightly, and follow me.''

  Sir Kenneth arose, and took his sword.

  ``It needs not,'' answered the anchorite in a whisper; ``we
are going where spiritual arms avail much, and fleshly weapons
are but as the reed and the decayed gourd.''

  The knight deposited his sword by the bedside as before, and
armed only with his dagger, from which, in this perilous country,
he never parted, prepared to attend his mysterious host.

  The hermit then moved slowly forwards, and was followed by
the knight, still under some uncertainty whether the dark form
which glided on before to show him the path, was not, in fact,
the creation of a disturbed dream. They passed, like shadows,
into the outer apartment, without disturbing the Paynim Emir,
who lay still buried in repose. Before the cross and altar in the
outward room a lamp was still burning, a missal was displayed,
and on the floor lay a discipline, or penitential scourge of small
cord and wire, the lashes of which were stained with recent
blood, a token, no doubt, of the severe penance of the recluse.
Here Theodorick kneeled down, and pointed to the knight to
take his place beside him upon the sharp flints, which seemed
placed for the purpose of rendering the posture of reverential
devotion as uneasy as possible; he read many prayers of the
Catholic Church, and chanted, in a low but earnest voice, three
of the penitential psalms. These last he intermixed with sighs
and tears, and convulsive throbs, which bore witness how deeply
he felt the divine poetry which he recited. The Scottish knight
assisted with profound sincerity at these acts of devotion, his
opinions of his host beginning, in the meantime, to be so much
changed, that he doubted whether, from the severity of his
penance, and the ardour of his prayers, he ought not to regard
him as a saint; and when they arose from the ground, he stood
with reverence before him, as a pupil before an honoured master.
The hermit was, on his side, silent and abstracted for the space
of a few minutes.

  ``Look into yonder recess, my son,'' he said, pointing to the
farther corner of the cell; ``there thou wilt find a veil---bring
it hither.''

  The knight obeyed; and, in a small aperture cut out of the
wall, and secured with a door of wicker, he found the veil
inquired for. When he brought it to the light, he discovered
that it was torn, and soiled in some places with some dark
substance. The anchorite looked at it with a deep but smothered
emotion, and ere he could speak to the Scottish knight, was
compelled to vent his feelings in a convulsive groan.

  ``Thou art now about to look upon the richest treasure that
the earth possesses,'' he at length said; ``woe is me, that my
eyes are unworthy to be lifted towards it! Alas! I am but the
vile and despised sign, which points out to the wearied traveller
a harbour of rest and security, but must itself remain for ever
without doors. In vain have I fled to the very depths of the
rocks, and the very bosom of the thirsty desert. Mine enemy
hath found me---even he whom I have denied has pursued me
to my fortresses.''

  He paused again for a moment, and, turning to the Scottish
knight, said, in a firmer tone of voice, ``You bring me a greeting
from Richard of England?''

  ``I come from the Council of Christian Princes,'' said the
knight; ``but the King of England being indisposed, I am not
honoured with his Majesty's commands.''

  ``Your token?'' demanded the recluse.

  Sir Kenneth hesitated---former suspicions, and the marks of
insanity which the hermit had formerly exhibited, rushed suddenly
on his thoughts; but how suspect a man whose manners
were so saintly?---``My pass-word,'' he said at length, ``is this
---Kings begged of a beggar.''

  ``It is right,'' said the hermit, while he paused; ``I know
you well; but the sentinel upon his post---and mine is an
important one---challenges friend as well as foe.''

  He then moved forward with the lamp, leading the way into
the room which they had left. The Saracen lay on his conch,
still fast asleep, The hermit paused by his side, and looked
down on him.

  ``He sleeps,'' he said, ``in darkness, and must not be
awakened.''

  The attitude of the Emir did indeed convey the idea of profound
repose. One arm, flung across his body, as he lay with
his face half turned to the wall, concealed, with its loose and
long sleeve, the greater part of his face; but the high forehead
was yet visible. Its nerves, which during his waking hours
were so uncommonly active, were now motionless, as if the face
had been composed of dark marble, and his long silken eyelashes
closed over his piercing and hawk-like eyes. The open
and relaxed hand, and the deep, regular, and soft breathing,
gave all tokens of the most profound repose. The slumberer
formed a singular group along with the tall forms of the hermit
in his shaggy dress of goat-skins, bearing the lamp, and the
knight in his close leathern coat; the former with an austere
expression of ascetic gloom, the latter with anxious curiosity
deeply impressed on his manly features.

  ``He sleeps soundly,'' said the hermit, in the same low tone
as before, and repeating the words, though he had changed the
meaning from that which is literal to a metaphorical sense---
``He sleeps in darkness, but there shall be for him a day-spring.
---O Ilderim, thy waking thoughts are yet as vain and wild as
those which are wheeling their giddy dance through thy sleeping
brain; but the trumpet shall be heard, and the dream shall be
dissolved.''

  So saying, and making the knight a sign to follow him, the
hermit went towards the altar, and passing behind it, pressed a
spring, which, opening without noise, showed a small iron door
wrought on the side of the cavern, so as to be almost imperceptible,
unless upon the most severe scrutiny. The hermit, ere
he ventured fully to open the door, dropt some oil on the hinges,
which the lamp supplied. A small staircase, hewn in the rock,
was discovered, when the iron door was at length completely
opened.

  ``Take the veil which I hold,'' said the hermit, in a melancholy
tone, ``and blind mine eyes; for I may not look on the
treasure which thou art presently to behold, without sin and
presumption.''

  Without reply, the knight hastily muffled the recluse's head
in the veil, and the latter began to ascend the staircase as one
too much accustomed to the way to require the use of light,
while at the same time he held the lamp to the Scot, who
followed him for many steps up the narrow ascent. At length
they rested in a small vault of irregular form, in one nook of
which the staircase terminated, while in another corner a corresponding
stair was seen to continue the ascent. In a third angle
was a Gothic door, very rudely ornamented with the usual
attributes of clustered columns and carving, and defended by a
wicket, strongly guarded with iron, and studded with large nails.
To this last point the hermit directed his steps, which seemed to
falter as he approached it.

  ``Put off thy shoes,'' he said to his attendant; ``the ground
on which thou standest is holy. Banish from thy innermost
heart each profane and carnal thought, for to harbour such
while in this place were a deadly impiety.''

  The knight laid aside his shoes as he was commanded, and
the hermit stood in the meanwhile as if communing with his
soul in secret prayer, and when he again moved, commanded the
knight to knock at the wicket three times. He did so. The
door opened spontaneously, at least Sir Kenneth beheld no one,
and his senses were at once assailed by a stream of the purest
light, and by a strong and almost oppressive sense of the richest
perfumes. He stepped two or three paces back, and it was the
space of a minute ere he recovered the dazzling and overpowering
effects of the sudden change from darkness to light.

  When he entered the apartment in which this brilliant lustre
was displayed, he perceived that the light proceeded from a
combination of silver lamps, fed with purest oil, and sending
forth the richest odours, hanging by silver chains from the roof
of a small Gothic chapel, hewn, like most part of the hermit's
singular mansion, out of the sound and solid rock. But whereas,
in every other place which Sir Kenneth had seen, the labour
employed upon the rock had been of the simplest and coarsest
description, it had in this chapel employed the invention and
the chisels of the most able architects. The groined roofs rose
from six columns on each side, carved with the rarest skill; and
the manner in which the crossings of the concave arches were
bound together, as it were, with appropriate ornaments, were
all in the finest tone of the architecture, and of the age. Corresponding
to the line of pillars, there were on each side six richly
wrought niches, each of which contained the image of one of the
twelve apostles.

  At the upper and eastern end of the chapel stood the altar,
behind which a very rich curtain of Persian silk, embroidered
deeply with gold, covered a recess, containing, unquestionably,
some image or relic of no ordinary sanctity, in honour of whom
this singular place of worship had been erected. Under the
persuasion that this must be the case, the knight advanced to
the shrine, and, kneeling down before it, repeated his devotions
with fervency, during which his attention was disturbed by the
curtain being suddenly raised, or rather pulled aside, how or by
whom he saw not; but in the niche which was thus disclosed,
he beheld a cabinet of silver and ebony, with a double folding
door, the whole formed into the miniature resemblance of a
Gothic church.

  As he gazed with anxious curiosity on the shrine, the two
folding doors also flew open, discovering a large piece of wood,
on which were blazoned the words, =Vera Crux,= at the same
time a choir of female voices sung =Gloria Patri.= The instant
the strain had ceased, the shrine was closed, and the curtain
again drawn, and the knight who knelt at the altar might now
continue his devotions undisturbed, in honour of the holy relic
which had been just disclosed to his view. He did this under
the profound impression of one who had witnessed, with his own
eyes, an awful evidence of the truth of his religion, and it was
some time ere, concluding his orisons, he arose, and ventured to
look around him for the hermit, who had guided him to this
sacred and mysterious spot. He beheld him, his head still
muffled in the veil, which he had himself wrapped around it,
couching, like a rated hound, upon the threshold of the chapel
but apparently without venturing to cross it; the holiest reverence,
the most penitential remorse, was expressed by his posture,
which seemed that of a man borne down and crushed to the
earth by the burden of his inward feelings. It seemed to the
Scot, that only the sense of the deepest penitence, remorse, and
humiliation, could have thus prostrated a frame so strong, and
a spirit so fiery.

  He approached him as if to speak, but the recluse anticipated
his purpose, murmuring in stifled tones, from beneath the fold
in which his head was muffled, and which sounded like a voice
proceeding from the cerements of a corpse,---``Abide, abide---
happy thou that mayst---the vision is not yet ended.''---So saying,
he reared himself from the ground, drew back from the
threshold on which he had hitherto lain prostrate, and closed the
door of the chapel, which, secured by a spring bolt within, the
snap of which resounded through the place, appeared so much
like a part of the living rock from which the cavern was hewn,
that Kenneth could hardly discern where the aperture had been.
He was now alone in the lighted chapel, which contained the
relic to which he had lately rendered his homage, without other
arms than his dagger, or other companion than his pious thoughts
and dauntless courage.

  Uncertain what was next to happen, but resolved to abide
the course of events, Sir Kenneth paced the solitary chapel till
about the time of the earliest cock-crowing. At this dead season,
when night and morning met together, he heard, but from what
quarter he could not discover, the sound of such a small silver
bell as is rung at the elevation of the host, in the ceremony, or
sacrifice, as it has been called, of the mass. The hour and the
place rendered the sound fearfully solemn, and, bold as he was,
the knight withdrew himself into the farther nook of the chapel,
at the end opposite to the altar, in order to observe, without
interruption, the consequences of this unexpected signal.

  He did not wait long ere the silken curtain was again withdrawn,
and the relic again presented to his view. As he sunk
reverentially on his knee, he heard the sound of the lauds, or
earliest office of the Catholic church, sung by female voices,
which united together in the performance as they had done in
the former service. The knight was soon aware that the voices
were no longer stationary in the distance, but approached the
chapel and became louder, when a door, imperceptible when
closed, like that by which he had himself entered, opened on
the other side of the vault, and gave the tones of the choir more
room to swell along the ribbed arches of the roof.

  The knight fixed his eyes on the opening with breathless
anxiety, and, continuing to kneel in the attitude of devotion
which the place and scene required, expected the consequence
of these preparations. A procession appeared about to issue
from the door. First, four beautiful boys, whose arms, neck,
and legs were bare, showing the bronze complexion of the East,
and contrasting with the snow-white tunics which they wore,
entered the chapel by two and two. The first pair bore censers,
which they swung from side to side, adding double fragrance
to the odours with which the chapel already was impregnated.
The second pair scattered flowers.

  After these followed, in due and majestic order, the females
who composed the choir; six, who, from their black scapularies,
and black veils over their white garments, appeared to be professed
nuns of the order of Mount Carmel; and as many whose
veils, being white, argued them to be novices, or occasional inhabitants
in the cloister, who were not as yet bound to it by
vows. The former held in their hands large rosaries, while the
younger and lighter figures who followed, carried each a chaplet
of red and white roses. They moved in procession around the
chapel, without appearing to take the slightest notice of Kenneth,
although passing so near him that their robes almost touched
him; while they continued to sing, the knight doubted not that
he was in one of those cloisters where the noble Christian maidens
had formerly openly devoted themselves to the services of the
church. Most of them had been suppressed since the Mahometans
had reconquered Palestine, but many, purchasing connivance
by presents, or receiving it from the clemency or contempt
of the victors, still continued to observe in private the ritual to
which their vows had consecrated them. Yet, though Kenneth
knew this to be the case, the solemnity of the place and hour,
the surprise at the sudden appearance of these votresses, and
the visionary manner in which they moved past him, had such
influence on his imagination, that he could scarce conceive that
the fair procession which he beheld was formed of creatures of
this world, so much did they resemble a choir of supernatural
beings, rendering homage to the universal object of adoration.

  Such was the knight's first idea, as the procession passed him,
scarce moving, save just sufficiently to continue their progress;
so that, seen by the shadowy and religious light, which the
lamps shed through the clouds of incense which darkened the
apartment, they appeared rather to glide than to walk.

  But as a second time, in surrounding the chapel, they passed
the spot on which he kneeled, one of the white-stoled maidens,
as she glided by him, detached from the chaplet which she
carried a rose-bud, which dropped from her fingers, perhaps unconsciously,
on the foot of Sir Kenneth. The knight started as
if a dart had suddenly struck his person; for, when the mind
is wound tip to a high pitch of feeling and expectation, the
slightest incident, if unexpected, gives fire to the train which
imagination has already laid. But he suppressed his emotion,
recollecting how easily an incident so indifferent might have
happened, and that it was only the uniform, monotony of the
movement of the choristers, which made the incident in the
slightest degree remarkable.

  Still, while the procession, for the third time, surrounded the
chapel, the thoughts and the eyes of Kenneth followed exclusively
the one among the novices who had dropped the rose-bud. Her
step, her face, her form, were so completely assimilated to the
rest of the choristers, that it was impossible to perceive the least
marks of individuality, and yet Kenneth's heart throbbed like a
bird that would burst from its cage, as if to assure him, by its
sympathetic suggestions, that the female who held the right file
on the second rank of the novices, was dearer to him, not only
than all the rest that were present, but than the whole sex
besides. The romantic passion of love, as it was cherished, and
indeed enjoined, by the rules of chivalry, associated well with
the no less romantic feelings of devotion; and they might be
said much more to enhance than to counteract each other. It
was, therefore, with a glow of expectation, that had something
even of a religious character, that Sir Kenneth, his sensations
thrilling from his heart to the ends of his fingers, expected some
second sign of the presence of one, who, he strongly fancied, had
already bestowed on him the first. Short as the space was
during which the procession again completed a third perambulation
of the chapel, it seemed an eternity to Kenneth. At length
the form, which he had watched with such devoted attention,
drew nigh---there was no difference betwixt that shrouded figure
and the others, with whom it moved in concert and in unison,
until, just as she passed for the third time the kneeling Crusader,
a part of a little and well-proportioned hand, so beautifully formed
as to give the highest idea of the perfect proportions of the form.
to which it belonged, stole through the folds of the gauze, like
a moonbeam through the fleecy cloud of a summer night, and
again a rose-bud lay at the feet of the Knight of the Leopard.

  This second intimation could not be accidental---it could not
be fortuitous the resemblance of that half-seen, but beautiful
female hand, with one which his lips had once touched, and,
while they touched it, had internally sworn allegiance to the
lovely owner. Had farther proof been wanting, there was the
glimmer of that matchless ruby ring on that snow-white finger,
whose invaluable worth Kenneth would yet have prized less
than the slightest sign which that finger could have made---
and, veiled too, as she was, he might see, by chance, or by
favour, a stray curl of the dark tresses, each hair of which was
dearer to him a hundred times than a chain of massive gold.
It was the lady of his love! But that she should be here---
in the savage and sequestered desert---among vestals, who
rendered themselves habitants of wilds and of caverns, that they
might perform in secret those Christian rites which they dared
not assist in openly---that this should be so---in truth and in
reality---seemed too incredible---it must be a dream---a delusive
trance of the imagination. While these thoughts passed through
the mind of Kenneth, the same passage, by which the procession
had entered the chapel, received them on their return. The
young sacristans, the sable nuns, vanished successively through
the open door---at length she from whom he had received this
double intimation, passed also---yet, in passing, turned her head,
slightly indeed, but perceptibly, towards the place where he
remained fixed as an image. He marked the last wave of her
veil---it was gone---and a darkness sunk upon his soul, scarce
less palpable than that which almost immediately enveloped his
external sense; for the last chorister had no sooner crossed the
threshold of the door, than it shut with a loud sound, and at
the same instant the voices of the choir were silent, the lights
of the chapel were at once extinguished, and Sir Kenneth remained
solitary, and in total darkness. But to Kenneth, solitude,
and darkness, and the uncertainty of his mysterious situation,
were as nothing---he thought not of them---cared not for them
---cared for nought in the world save the flitting vision which
had just glided past him, and the tokens of her favour which
she had bestowed. To grope on the floor for the buds which
she had dropped---to press them to his lips---to his bosom---now
alternately, now together---to rivet his lips to the cold stones on
which, as near as he could judge, she had so lately stept---to
play all the extravagances which strong affection suggests and
vindicates to those who yield themselves up to it, were but the
tokens of passionate love, proper to all ages. But it was peculiar
to the times of chivalry, that in his wildest rapture the knight
imagined of no attempt to follow or to trace the object of such
romantic attachment; that he thought of her as of a deity,
who, having deigned to show herself for an instant to her devoted
worshipper, had again returned to the darkness of her sanctuary
---or as an influential planet, which, having darted in some
auspicious minute one favourable ray, wrapped itself again in
its veil of mist. The motions of the lady of his love were to
him those of a superior being, who was to move without watch
or control, rejoice him by her appearance, or depress him by her
absence, animate him by her kindness, or drive him to despair
by her cruelty---all at her own free will, and without other
importunity or remonstrance than that expressed by the most
devoted services of the heart and sword of the champion, whose
sole object in life was to fulfil her commands, and, by the splendour
of his own achievements, to exalt her fame.

  Such were the rules of chivalry, and of the love which was its
ruling principle. But Sir Kenneth's attachment was rendered
romantic by other and still more peculiar circumstances. He
had never even heard the sound of his lady's voice, though he
had often beheld her beauty with rapture. She moved in a circle,
which his rank of knighthood permitted him indeed to approach,
but not to mingle with; and highly as he stood distinguished
for warlike skill and enterprise, still the poor Scottish soldier
was compelled to worship his divinity at a distance almost as
great as divides the Persian from the sun which he adores.
But when was the pride of woman too lofty to overlook the
passionate devotion of a lover, however inferior in degree? Her
eye had been on him in the tournament, her ear had heard his
praises in the report of the battles which were daily fought;
and while count, duke, and lord, contended for her grace, it
flowed, unwillingly perhaps at first, or even unconsciously,
towards the poor Knight of the Leopard, who, to support his
rank, had little besides his sword. When she looked, and when
she listened, the lady saw and heard enough to encourage her
in her partiality, which had at first crept on her unawares. If
a knight's personal beauty was praised, even the most prudish
dames of the military court of England would make an exception
in favour of the Scottish Kenneth; and it oftentimes happened,
that notwithstanding the very considerable largesses which
princes and peers bestowed on the minstrels, an impartial spirit
of independence would seize the poet, and the harp was swept
to the heroism of one who had neither palfreys nor garments to
bestow in guerdon of his applause.

  The moments when she listened to the praises of her lover
became gradually more and more dear to the high-born Edith,
relieving the flattery with which her ear was weary, and presenting
to her a subject of secret contemplation, more worthy,
as he seemed by general report, than those who surpassed him
in rank and in the gifts of fortune. As her attention became
constantly, though cautiously, fixed on Sir Kenneth, she grew
more and more convinced of his personal devotion to herself,
and more and more certain in her mind, that in Kenneth of
Scotland she beheld the fated knight doomed to share with her
through weal and woe---and the prospect looked gloomy and
dangerous---the passionate attachment to which the poets of the
age ascribed such universal dominion, and which its manners
and morals placed nearly on the same rank with devotion itself.

  Let us not disguise the truth from our readers. When Edith
became aware of the state of her own sentiments, chivalrous as
were her sentiments, becoming a maiden not distant from the
throne of England---gratified as her pride must have been with
the mute though unceasing homage rendered to her by the knight
whom she had distinguished, there were moments when the feelings
of the woman, loving and beloved, murmured against the
restraints of state and form by which she was surrounded, and
when she almost blamed the timidity of her lover, who seemed
resolved not to infringe them. The etiquette, to use a modern
phrase, of birth and rank, had drawn around her a magical circle,
beyond which Sir Kenneth might indeed bow, and gaze, but
within which he could no more pass, than an evoked spirit can
transgress the boundaries prescribed by the rod of a powerful enchanter.
The thought involuntarily pressed on her that she herself
must venture, were it but the point of her fairy foot, beyond
the prescribed boundary, if she ever hoped to give a lover so
reserved and bashful, an opportunity of so slight a favour, as but
to salute her shoe-tie. There was an example, the noted precedent
of the " King's daughter of Hungary," who thus generously
encouraged the ``Squire of low degree;'' and Edith, though of
kingly blood, was no King's daughter, any more than her lover was
of low degree---fortune had put no such extreme barrier in obstacle
to their affection. Something, however, within the maiden's
bosom---that modest pride, which throws fetters even on love
itself---forbade her, notwithstanding the superiority of her condition,
to make those advances, which, in every case, delicacy
assigns to the other sex; above all, Sir Kenneth was a knight
so gentle and honourable, so highly accomplished---as her imagination
at least suggested, together with the strictest feelings of
what was due to himself and to her---that however constrained
her attitude might be while receiving his adorations, like the
image of some deity, who is neither supposed to feel nor to reply
to the homage of its votaries, still the idol feared that to step
prematurely from her pedestal would be to degrade herself in the
eyes of her devoted worshipper.

  Yet the devout adorer of an actual idol can even discover signs
of approbation in the rigid and immovable features of a marble
image, and it is no wonder that something, which could be as
favourably interpreted, glanced from the bright eye of the lovely
Edith, whose beauty, indeed, consisted rather more in that very
power of expression, than on absolute regularity of contour, or
brilliancy of complexion. Some light marks of distinction had
escaped from her, notwithstanding her own jealous vigilance, else
how could Sir Kenneth have so readily, and so undoubtingly,
recognised the lovely hand, of which scarce two fingers were visible
from under the veil, or how could he have rested so thoroughly
assured that two flowers, successively dropt on the spot, were
intended as a recognition on the part of his lady-love? By what
train of observation---by what secret signs, looks, or gestures---
by what instinctive free-masonry of love, this degree of intelligence
came to subsist between Edith and her lover, we cannot
attempt to trace; for we are old, and such slight vestiges of affection,
quickly discovered by younger eyes, defy the power of ours.
Enough, that such affection did subsist between parties who had
never even spoken to one another, though, on the side of Edith,
it was checked by a deep sense of the difficulties and dangers
which must necessarily attend the farther progress of their attachment,
and upon that of the knight by a thousand doubts and
fears, lest he had over-estimated the slight tokens of the lady's
notice, varied, as they necessarily were, by long intervals of
apparent coldness, during which, either the fear of exciting the
observation of others, and thus drawing danger upon her lover,
or that of sinking in his esteem by seeming too willing to be
won, made her behave with indifference, as if unobservant of his
presence.

  This narrative, tedious perhaps, but which the story renders
necessary, may serve to explain the state of intelligence, if it
deserves so strong a name, betwixt the lovers, when Edith's unexpected
appearance in the chapel produced so powerful an effect
on the feelings of her knight.
