




			CHAPTER TWELFTH.

	'Tis woman that seduces all mankind.
					Gay.

  In the days of chivalry, a dangerous post, or a perilous adventure,
was a reward frequently assigned to military bravery as a compensation
for its former trials---just as, in ascending a precipice
the surmounting one crag only lifts the climber to points yet
more dangerous.

  It was midnight, and the moon rode clear and high in heaven,
when Kenneth of Scotland stood upon his watch on Saint
George's Mount, beside the banner of England, a solitary sentinel,
to protect the emblem of that nation against the insults
which might be meditated among the thousands whom
Richard's pride had made his enemies. High thoughts rolled,
one after another, upon the mind of the warrior. It seemed to
him as if he had gained some favour in the eyes of the chivalrous
monarch, who till now had not seemed to distinguish him
among the crowds of brave men whom his renown had assembled
under his banner, and Sir Kenneth little recked that the display
of royal regard consisted in placing him upon a post so
perilous. The devotion of his ambitious and high-placed affection
inflamed his military enthusiasm.

  Hopeless as that attachment was, in almost any conceivable
circumstances, those which had lately occurred had, in some
degree, diminished the distance between Edith and himself.
He upon whom Richard had conferred the distinction of guarding
his banner, was no longer an adventurer of slight note, but
placed within the regard of a princess, although he was as far
as ever from her level. An unknown and obscure fate could
not now be his. If he was surprised and slain on the post
which had been assigned him, his death---and he resolved it
should be glorious---must deserve the praises, as well as call
down the vengeance, of C<oe>ur de Lion, and be followed by the
regrets, and even the tears, of the high-born beauties of the
English Court. He had now no longer reason to fear that he
should die as a fool dieth.

  Sir Kenneth had full leisure to enjoy these and similar high-souled
thoughts, fostered by that wild spirit of chivalry, which,
amid its most extravagant and fantastic flights, was still pure
from all selfish alloy---generous, devoted, and perhaps only thus
far censurable, that it proposed objects and courses of action
inconsistent with the frailties and imperfections of man. All
nature around him slept in calm moonshine, or in deep shadow.
The long rows of tents and pavilions, glimmering or darkening
as they lay in the moonlight or in the shade, were still and
silent as the streets of a deserted city. Beside the banner-staff
lay the large stag-hound already mentioned, the sole companion
of Kenneth's watch, on whose vigilance he trusted for early
warning of the approach of any hostile footstep. The noble
animal seemed to understand the purpose of their watch, for
he looked from time to time at the rich folds of the heavy
pennon, and, when the cry of the sentinels came from the distant
lines and defences of the camp, he answered them with
one deep and reiterated bark, as if to affirm that he too was
vigilant in his duty. From time to time, also, he lowered his
lofty head, and wagged his tail, as his master passed and
repassed him in the short turns which he took upon his post;
or, when the knight stood silent and abstracted, leaning on his
lance, and looking up towards Heaven, his faithful attendant
ventured sometimes, in the phrase of romance, ``to disturb his
thoughts,'' and awaken him from his reverie, by thrusting his
large rough snout into the knight's gauntleted hand, to solicit
a transitory caress.

  Thus passed two hours of the knight's watch without any
thing remarkable occurring. At length, and upon a sudden,
the gallant stag-hound bayed furiously, and seemed about to
clash forward where the shadow lay the darkest, yet waited, as
if in the slips, till he should know the pleasure of his master.

  ``Who goes there?'' said Sir Kenneth, aware that there was
something creeping forward on the shadowy side of the mount.

  ``In the name of Merlin and Maugis,'' answered a hoarse
disagreeable voice, ``tie up your four-footed demon there, or I
come not at you.''

  ``And who art thou, that would approach my post?'' said
Sir Kenneth, bending his eyes as keenly as he could on some
object which he could just observe at the bottom of the ascent,
without being able to distinguish its form. ``Beware---I am
here for death and life.''

  ``Take up thy long-fanged Sathanas,'' said the voice, ``or I
will conjure him with a bolt from my arblast.''

  At the same time was heard the sound of a spring or cheek,
as when a crossbow is bent.

  ``Unbend thy arblast, and come into the moonlight,'' said the
Scot, ``or, by Saint Andrew, I will pin thee to the earth, be
what or whom thou wilt!''

  As he spoke, he poised his long lance by the middle, and,
fixing his eye upon the object which seemed to move, he
brandished the weapon, as if meditating to cast it from his
hand---a use of the weapon, sometimes, though rarely, resorted to,
when a missile was necessary. But Sir Kenneth was ashamed
of his purpose, and grounded his weapon, when there stepped
from the shadow into the moonlight, like an actor entering upon
the stage, a stunted decrepit creature, whom, by his fantastic
dress and deformity, he recognised, even at some distance, for
the male of the two dwarfs whom he had seen at the chapel of
Engaddi. Recollecting, at the same moment, the other, and
far different, visions of that extraordinary night, he gave his
dog a signal, which he instantly understood, and, returning to
the standard, laid himself down beside it with a stifled growl.

  The little distorted miniature of humanity, assured of his
safety from an enemy so formidable, came panting up the ascent,
which the shortness of his legs rendered laborious, and when he
arrived on the platform on the top, shifted to his left hand the
little cross-bow, which was just such a toy as children at that
period were permitted to shoot small birds with, and, assuming
an attitude of great dignity, gracefully extended his right hand
to Sir Kenneth, in an attitude as if he expected he would salute
it. But such a result not following, he demanded in a sharp
and angry tone of voice, ``Soldier, wherefore renderest thou not
to Nectabanus the homage due to his dignity?---Or, is it possible
that thou canst have forgotten him?''

  ``Great Nectabanus,'' answered the knight, willing to soothe
the creature's humour, ``that were difficult for any one who has
ever looked upon thee. Pardon me, however, that being a soldier
upon my post, with my lance in my hand, I may not give to one
of thy puissance the advantage of coming within my guard, or
of mastering my weapon. Suffice it, that I reverence thy dignity,
and submit myself to thee as humbly as a man-at-arms in my
place may.''

  ``It shall suffice,'' said Nectabanus, ``so that you presently
attend me to the presence of those who have sent me hither to
summon you.''

  ``Great sir,'' replied the knight, ``neither in this can I gratify
thee, for my orders are to abide by this banner till daybreak---
so I pray you to hold me excused in that matter also.''

  So saying, he resumed his walk upon the platform; but the
dwarf did not suffer him so easily to escape from his importunity.

  ``Look you,'' he said, placing himself before Sir Kenneth, so as
to interrupt his way, ``either obey me, Sir Knight, as in duty
bound, or I will lay the command upon thee, in the name of one
whose beauty could call down the genii from their sphere, and
whose grandeur could command the immortal race when they
had descended.''

  A wild and improbable conjecture arose in the knight's mind,
but he repelled it. It was impossible, he thought, that the lady
of his love should have sent him such a message by such a
messenger---yet his voice trembled as he said, ``Go to, Nectabanus.
Tell me at once, and as a true man, whether this sublime
lady of whom thou speakest, be other than the houri, with
whose assistance I beheld thee sweeping the chapel at Engaddi?''

  ``How! presumptuous knight,'' replied the dwarf; ``think'st
thou the mistress of our own royal affections, the sharer of our
greatness, and the partner of our comeliness, would demean herself
by laying charge on such a vassal as thou? No, highly as thou
art honoured, thou hast not yet deserved the notice of Queen
Guenevra, the lovely bride of Arthur, from whose high seat even
princes seem but pigmies. But look thou here, and as thou
knowest or disownest this token, so obey or refuse her commands,
who hath deigned to impose them on thee.''

  So saying, he placed in the knight's hands a ruby ring, which,
even in the moonlight, he had no difficulty to recognise as that
which usually graced the finger of the high-born lady to whose
service he had devoted himself. Could he have doubted the
truth of the token, he would have been convinced by the small
knot of carnation-coloured ribbon, which was fastened to the
ring. This was his lady's favourite colour, and more than once
had he himself, assuming it for that of his own liveries, caused
the carnation to triumph over all other hues in the lists and in
the battle.

  Sir Kenneth was struck nearly mute, by seeing such a token
in such hands.

  ``In the name of all that is sacred, from whom didst thou
receive this witness?'' said the knight; ``bring, if thou canst,
thy wavering understanding to a right settlement for a minute
or two, and tell me the person by whom thou art sent, and the
real purpose of thy message---and take heed what thou say'st,
for this is no subject for buffoonery.''

  ``Fond and foolish knight,'' said the dwarf, ``wouldst thou
know more of this matter, than that thou art honoured with
commands from a princess, delivered to thee by a king?---We
list not to parley with thee farther than to command thee, in
the name, and by the power of that ring, to follow us to her
who is the owner of the ring. Every minute that thou tarriest
is a crime against thy allegiance.''

  ``Good Nectabanus---bethink thyself,'' said the knight,---
Can my lady know where and upon what duty I am this
night engaged?---Is she aware that my life---Pshaw, why should
I speak of life---but that my honour depends on my guarding
this banner till daybreak---and can it be her wish that I should
leave it even to pay homage to her?---It is impossible---the
princess is pleased to be merry with her servant, in sending him
such a message; and I must think so the rather that she hath
chosen such a messenger.''

  ``Oh, keep your belief,'' said Nectabanus, turning round as if
to leave the platform; ``it is little to me whether you be traitor
or true man to this royal lady---so fare-thee-well.''

  ``Stay, stay---I entreat you stay,'' said Sir Kenneth; ``answer
me but one question---Is the lady who sent thee near to
this place?''

  ``What signifies it?'' said the dwarf; ``ought fidelity to
reckon furlongs, or miles, or leagues---like the poor courier, who
is paid for his labour by the distance which he traverses? Nevertheless,
thou soul of suspicion, I tell thee, the fair owner of the
ring, now sent to so unworthy a vassal, in whom there is neither
truth nor courage, is not more distant from this place, than this
arblast can send a bolt.''

  The knight gazed again on the ring, as if to ascertain that
there was no possible falsehood in the token.---``Tell me,'' he said
to the dwarf, ``is my presence required for any length of time?''

  ``Time!'' answered Nectabanus, in his flighty manner;
``what call you time? I see it not---I feel it not---it is but a
shadowy name---a succession of breathings measured forth by
night by the clank of a bell, by day by a shadow crossing along
a dial-stone. Know'st thou not a true knight's time should
only be reckoned by the deeds that he performs in behalf of
God and his lady?''

  ``The words of truth, though in the mouth of folly,'' said the
knight. ``And doth my lady really summon me to some deed
of action, in her name and for her sake?---and may it not be
postponed for even the few hours till daybreak?''

  ``She requires thy presence instantly,'' said the dwarf, ``and
without the loss of so much time as would be told by ten grains
of the sand-glass---Hearken, thou cold-blooded and suspicious
knight, these are her very words---`Tell him, that the hand
which dropped roses can bestow laurels.' ''

  This allusion to their meeting in the chapel of Engaddi sent
a thousand recollections through Sir Kenneth's brain, and convinced
him that the message delivered by the dwarf was genuine.
The rose-buds, withered as they were, were still treasured under
his cuirass, and nearest to his heart. He paused, and could not
resolve to forego an opportunity---the only one which might ever
offer, to gain grace in her eyes, whom he had installed as
sovereign of his affections. The dwarf, in the meantime,
augmented his confusion by insisting either that he must return
the ring, or instantly attend him.

  ``Hold, hold, yet a moment hold,'' said the knight, and proceeded
to mutter to himself---``Am I either the subject or
slave of King Richard, more than as a free knight sworn to
the service of the Crusade? And whom have I come hither
to honour with lance and sword? Our holy cause and my
transcendent lady!''

  ``The ring, the ring!'' exclaimed the dwarf, impatiently;
``false and slothful knight, return the ring, which thou art
unworthy to touch or to look upon.''

  ``A moment, a moment, good Nectabanus,'' said Sir Kenneth;
``disturb not my thoughts.---What if the Saracens were
just now to attack our lines? Should I stay here like a sworn
vassal of England, watching that her king's pride suffered no
humiliation; or should I speed to the breach, and fight for the
Cross?---To the breach, assuredly; and next to the cause of
God, come the commands of my liege lady---And yet, C<oe>ur
de Lion's behest---my own promise!---Nectabanus, I conjure
thee once more to say, are you to conduct me far from hence?''

  ``But to yonder pavilion; and since you must needs know,''
replied Nectabanus, ``the moon is glimmering on the gilded
ball which crowns its roof, and which is worth a king's
ransom.''

  ``I can return in an instant,'' said the knight, shutting his
eyes desperately to all farther consequences. ``I can hear from
thence the bay of my dog, if any one approaches the standard---
I will throw myself at my lady's feet, and pray her leave to
return to conclude my watch.---Here, Roswal'' (calling his
hound, and throwing down his mantle by the side of the
standard-spear), ``watch thou here, and let no one approach.''

  The majestic dog looked in his master's face, as if to be sure
that he understood his charge, then sat down beside the mantle,
with ears erect and head raised, like a sentinel, understanding
perfectly the purpose for which he was stationed there.

  ``Come now, good Nectabanus,'' said the knight, ``let us
hasten to obey the commands thou hast brought.''

  ``Haste he that will,'' said the dwarf, sullenly; ``thou hast
not been in haste to obey my summons, nor can I walk fast
enough to follow your long strides---you do not walk like a
man, but bound like an ostrich in the desert.''

  There were but two ways of conquering the obstinacy of
Nectabanus, who, as he spoke, diminished his walk into a snail
pace. For bribes Sir Kenneth had no means---for soothing no
time; so in his impatience he snatched the dwarf up from the
ground, and bearing him along, notwithstanding his entreaties
and his fear, reached nearly to the pavilion pointed out as that
of the Queen. In approaching it, however, the Scot observed
there was a small guard of soldiers sitting on the ground, who
had been concealed from him by the intervening tents. Wondering
that the clash of his own armour had not yet attracted
their attention, and supposing that his motions might, on the
present occasion, require to be conducted with secrecy, he
placed the little panting guide upon the ground to recover his
breath, and point out what was next to be done. Nectabanus
was both frightened and angry; but he had felt himself as
completely in the power of the robust knight, as an owl in the
claws of an eagle, and therefore cared not to provoke him to
any farther display of his strength.

  He made no complaints, therefore, of the usage he had
received, but turning amongst the labyrinth of tents, he led the
knight in silence to the opposite side of the pavilion, which
thus screened them from the observation of the warders, who
seemed either too negligent or too sleepy to discharge their duty
with much accuracy. Arrived there, the dwarf raised the under
part of the canvas from the ground, and made signs to Sir
Kenneth that he should introduce himself to the inside of the
tent, by creeping under it. The knight hesitated---there
seemed an indecorum in thus privately introducing himself into
a pavilion, pitched, doubtless, for the accommodation of noble
ladies, but he recalled to remembrance the assured tokens
which the dwarf had exhibited, and concluded that it was not
for him to dispute his lady's pleasure.

  He stooped accordingly, crept beneath the canvas enclosure of
the tent, and heard the dwarf whisper from without,---``Remain
there until I call thee.''
