




			CHAPTER TWENTY-FIRST.

	    ------ and wither'd Murder,
	Alarum'd by his sentinel, the wolf,
	Whose howl's his watch, thus with his stealthy pace,
	With Tarquin's ravishing strides, towards his design
	Moves like a ghost.
					Macbeth


  For the space of a quarter of an hour, or longer, after the
incident related, all remained perfectly quiet in the front of the
royal habitation. The King read, and mused in the entrance
of his pavilion---behind, and with his back turned to the same
entrance, the Nubian slave still burnished the ample pavesse---
in front of all, at a hundred paces distant, the yeomen of the
guard stood, sat, or lay extended on the grass, attentive to their
own sports, but pursuing them in silence, while on the esplanade
betwixt them and the front of the tent, lay, scarcely to be
distinguished from a bundle of rags, the senseless form of the
marabout.

  But the Nubian had the advantage of a mirror, from the
brilliant reflection which the surface of the highly polished
shield now afforded, by means of which he beheld, to his alarm
and surprise, that the marabout raised his head gently from
the ground, so as to survey all around him, moving with a
well-adjusted precaution, which seemed entirely inconsistent
with a state of ebriety. He couched his head instantly, as if
satisfied he was unobserved, and began, with the slightest
possible appearance of voluntary effort, to drag himself, as if by
chance, ever nearer and nearer to the King, but stopping, and
remaining fixed at intervals, like the spider, which, moving
towards her object, collapses into apparent lifelessness when
she thinks she is the subject of observation. This species of
movement appeared suspicious to the Ethiopian, who, on his
part, prepared himself, as quietly as possible, to interfere, the
instant that interference should seem to be necessary.

  The marabout meanwhile glided on gradually and imperceptibly,
serpent-like, or rather snail-like, till he was about ten yards'
distance from Richard's person, when, starting on his feet, he
sprung forward with the bound of a tiger, stood at the King's
back in less than an instant, and brandished aloft the cangiar,
or poniard, which he had hidden in his sleeve. Not the presence
of his whole army could have saved their heroic Monarch---but
the motions of the Nubian had been as well calculated as those
of the enthusiast, and ere the latter could strike, the former
caught his uplifted arm. Turning his fanatical wrath upon
what thus unexpectedly interposed betwixt him and his object,
the Charegite, for such was the seeming marabout, dealt the
Nubian a blow with the dagger, which, however, only grazed
his arm, while the far superior strength of the Ethiopian easily
dashed him to the ground. Aware of what had passed, Richard
had now arisen, and with little more of surprise, anger, or interest
of any kind in his countenance, than an ordinary man would
show in brushing off and crushing an intrusive wasp, caught up
the stool on which he had been sitting, and exclaiming only,
``Ha dog!'' dashed almost to pieces the skull of the assassin,
who uttered twice, once in a loud, and once in a broken tone,
the words, ``Allah ackbar!''---God is victorious---and expired
at the King's feet.

  ``Ye are careful warders,'' said Richard to his archers, in a
tone of scornful reproach, as, aroused by the bustle of what had
passed, in terror and tumult they now rushed into his tent;---
``watchful sentinels ye are, to leave me to do such hangman's
work with my own hand.---Be silent all of you, and cease your
senseless clamour! saw ye never a dead Turk before?---Here
---cast that carrion out of the camp, strike the head from the
trunk, and stick it on a lance, taking care to turn the face to
Mecca, that he may the easier tell the foul impostor, on whose
inspiration he came hither, how he has sped on his errand.---
For thee, my swart and silent friend,'' he added, turning to the
Ethiopian---``But how's this?---thou art wounded---and with
a poisoned weapon, I warrant me, for by force of stab so weak
an animal as that could scarce hope to do more than raze the
lion's hide.---Suck the poison from his wound, one of you---the
venom is harmless on the lips, though fatal when it mingles with
the blood.''

  The yeomen looked on each other confusedly and with hesitation,
the apprehension of so strange a danger prevailing with
those who feared no other.

  ``How now, sirrahs,'' continued the King, ``are you dainty-lipped,
or do you fear death, that you dally thus?''

  ``Not the death of a man,'' said Long Allen, to whom the
King looked as he spoke, ``but methinks I would not die like a
poisoned rat for the sake of a black chattel there, that is bought
and sold in a market like a Martlemas ox.''

  ``His Grace speaks to men of sucking poison,'' muttered
another yeoman, ``as if he said, Go to, swallow a gooseberry!''

  ``Nay,'' said Richard, ``I never bade man do that which I
would not do myself.''

  And without farther ceremony, and in spite of the general
expostulations of those around, and the respectful opposition of
the Nubian himself, the King of England applied his lips to
the wound of the black slave, treating with ridicule all remonstrances,
and overpowering all resistance. He had no sooner intermitted
his singular occupation, than the Nubian started from
him, and, casting a scarf over his arm, intimated by gestures,
as firm in purpose as they were respectful in manner, his determination
not to permit the Monarch to renew so degrading an
employment. Long Allen also interposed, saying, that if it were
necessary to prevent the King engaging again in a treatment of
this kind, his own lips, tongue, and teeth were at the service of
the negro (as he called the Ethiopian), and that he would eat
him up bodily, rather than King Richard's mouth should again
approach him.

  Neville, who entered with other officers, added his remonstrances.

  ``Nay, nay, make not a needless halloo about a hart that the
hounds have lost, or a danger when it is over,'' said the King---
``the wound will be a trifle, for the blood is scarce drawn---an
angry cat had dealt a deeper scratch---and for me, I have but
to take a drachm of orvietan by way of precaution, though it is
needless.''

  Thus spoke Richard, a little ashamed, perhaps, of his own condescension,
though sanctioned both by humanity and gratitude.
But when Neville continued to make remonstrances on the peril
to his royal person, the King imposed silence on him.

  ``Peace, I prithee---make no more of it---I did it but to show
these ignorant prejudiced knaves how they might help each other
when these cowardly caitiffs come against us with sarbacanes
and poisoned shafts.---But,'' he added, ``take thee this Nubian
to thy quarters, Neville---I have changed my mind touching him
---let him be well cared for---But, hark in thine ear---see that
he escapes thee not---there is more in him than seems. Let
him have all liberty, so that he leave not the camp.---And you,
ye beef-devouring, wine-swilling English mastiffs, get ye to your
guard again, and be sure you keep it more warily. Think not
you are now in your own land of fair play, where men speak before
they strike, and shake hands ere they cut throats. Danger
in our land walks openly, and with his blade drawn, and defies
the foe whom he means to assault; but here, he challenges you
with a silk glove instead of a steel gauntlet, cuts your throat
with the feather of a turtle-dove, stabs you with the tongue of a
priest's brooch, or throttles you with the lace of my lady's
boddice. Go to---keep your eyes open and your mouths shut
---drink less and look sharper about you; or I will place your
huge stomachs on such short allowance, as would pinch that of
a patient Scotchman.''

  The yeomen, abashed and mortified, withdrew to their post,
and Neville was beginning to remonstrate with his master upon
the risk of passing over thus slightly their negligence upon their
duty, and the propriety of an example in a case so peculiarly
aggravated as the permitting one so suspicious as the marabout
to approach within dagger's length of his person, when Richard
interrupted him with, ``Speak not of it, Neville---wouldst thou
have me avenge a petty risk to myself more severely than the
loss of England's banner? It has been stolen---stolen by a thief,
or delivered up by a traitor, and no blood has been shed for it.
---My sable friend, thou art an expounder of mysteries, saith the
illustrious Soldan---now would I give thee thine own weight in
gold if, by raising one still blacker than thyself, or by what other
means thou wilt, thou couldst show me the thief who did mine
honour that wrong. What say'st thou? ha!''

  The youth seemed desirous to speak, but uttered only that
imperfect sound proper to his melancholy condition, then folded
his arms, looked on the King with an eye of intelligence, and
nodded in answer to his question.

  ``How!'' said Richard, with joyful impatience. ``Wilt thou
undertake to make discovery in this matter?''

  The Nubian slave repeated the same motion.

  ``But how shall we understand each other?'' said the King.
``Canst thou write, good fellow?''

  The slave again nodded in assent.

  ``Give him writing-tools,'' said the King. ``They were readier
in my father's tent than mine---but they be somewhere about, if
this scorching climate hath not dried up the ink.---Why, this
fellow is a jewel---a black diamond, Neville.''

  ``So please you, my liege,'' said Neville, ``if I might speak
my poor mind, it were ill dealing in this ware. This man must
be a wizard, and wizards deal with the Enemy, who hath most
interest to sow tares among the wheat, and bring dissension into
our councils, and''------

  ``Peace, Neville,'' said Richard. ``Hollo to your northern
hound when he is close on the haunch of the deer, and hope to
recall him, but seek not to stop Plantagenet when he hath hope
to retrieve his honour.''

  The slave, who during this discussion had been writing, in
which art he seemed skilful, now arose, and pressing what he
had written to his brow, prostrated himself as usual, ere he
delivered it into the King's hands. The scroll was in French,
although their intercourse had hitherto been conducted by
Richard in the Lingua Franca.

  ``To Richard, the conquering and invincible King of England,
this from the humblest of his slaves. Mysteries are the sealed
caskets of Heaven, but wisdom may devise means to open the
lock. Were your slave stationed where the leaders of the Christian
host were made to pass before him in order, doubt nothing,
that if he who did the injury whereof my King complains shall
be among the number, he may be made manifest in his iniquity,
though it be hidden under seven veils.''

  ``Now, by Saint George!'' said King Richard, ``thou hast
spoken most opportunely.---Neville, thou know'st, that when
we muster our troops to-morrow, the princes have agreed, that
to expiate the affront offered to England in the theft of her
Banner, the leaders should pass our new standard as it floats
on Saint George's Mount, and salute it with formal regard.
Believe me, the secret traitor will not dare to absent himself
from an expurgation so solemn, lest his very absence should be
matter of suspicion. There will we place our sable man of
counsel, and, if his art can detect the villain, leave me to deal
with him.''

  ``My liege,'' said Neville, with the frankness of an English
baron, ``beware what work you begin. Here is the concord of
our holy league unexpectedly renewed---will you, upon such
suspicion as a negro slave can instil, tear open wounds so lately
closed---or will you use the solemn procession, adopted for the
reparation of your honour, and establishment of unanimity
amongst the discording princes, as the means of again finding
out new cause of offence, or reviving ancient quarrels? It were
scarce too strong to say, this were a breach of the declaration
your Grace made to the assembled Council of the Crusade.''

  ``Neville,'' said the King, sternly interrupting him, ``thy
zeal makes thee presumptuous and unmannerly. Never did I
promise to abstain from taking whatever means were most promising,
to discover the infamous author of the attack on my
honour. Ere I had done so, I would have renounced my kingdom---
my life. All my declarations were under this necessary
and absolute qualification;---only, if Austria had stepped forth
and owned the injury like a man, I proffered, for the sake of
Christendom, to have forgiven _him._''

  ``But,'' continued the baron, anxiously, ``what hope that this
juggling slave of Saladin will not palter with your Grace?''

  ``Peace, Neville,'' said the King; ``thou think'st thyself
mighty wise, and art but a fool. Mind thou my charge touching
this fellow---there is more in him than thy Westmoreland
wit can fathom.---And thou, swart and silent, prepare to perform
the feat thou hast promised, and, by the word of a King,
thou shalt choose thine own recompense.---Lo, he writes again.''
The mute accordingly wrote and delivered to the King, with
the same form as before, another slip of paper, containing these
words.---``The will of the King is the law to his slave---nor
doth it become him to ask guerdon for discharge of his devoir.''

  ``_Guerdon_ and _devoir!_'' said the King, interrupting himself
as he read, and speaking to Neville in the English tongue with
some emphasis on the words,---``These Eastern people will profit
by the Crusaders---they are acquiring the language of chivalry!
---And see, Neville, how discomposed that fellow looks---were it
not for his colour, he would blush. I should not think it strange
if he understood what I say---they are perilous linguists.''

  ``The poor slave cannot endure your Grace's eye,'' said Neville;
``it is nothing more.''

  ``Well, but,'' continued the King, striking the paper with
his finger, as he proceeded, ``this bold scroll proceeds to say,
that our trusty mute is charged with a message from Saladin to
the Lady Edith Plantagenet, and craves means and opportunity
to deliver it. What think'st thou of a request so modest---ha!
Neville?''

  ``I cannot say,'' said Neville, ``how such freedom may relish
with your Grace; but the lease of the messenger's neck would
be a short one, who should carry such a request to the Soldan
on the part of your Majesty.''

  ``Nay, I thank Heaven that I covet none of his sunburnt
beauties,'' said Richard; ``and for punishing this fellow for
discharging his master's errand, and that when he has just
saved my life---methinks it were something too summary. I'll
tell thee, Neville, a secret---for, although our sable and mute
minister be present, he cannot, thou know'st, tell it over again,
even if he should chance to understand us---I tell thee, that for
this fortnight past, I have been under a strange spell, and I
would I were disenchanted. There has no sooner any one done
me good service, but lo you, he cancels his interest in me by
some deep injury; and, on the other hand, he who hath deserved
death at my hands for some treachery or some insult, is
sure to be the very person, of all others, who confers upon me
some obligation that overbalances his demerits, and renders
respite of his sentence a debt due from my honour. Thus, thou
seest, I am deprived of the best part of my royal function, since
I can neither punish men nor reward them. Until the influence
of this disqualifying planet be passed away, I will say nothing
concerning the request of this our sable attendant, save that it
is an unusually bold one, and that his best chance of finding
grace in our eyes will be, to endeavour to make the discovery
which he proposes to achieve in our behalf. Meanwhile, Neville,
do thou look well to him, and let him be honourably cared for---
And hark thee once more,'' he said, in a low whisper, ``seek
out yonder hermit of Engaddi, and bring him to me forthwith,
be he saint or savage, madman or sane. Let me see him
privately.''

  Neville retired from the royal tent, signing to the Nubian to
follow him, and much surprised at what he had seen and heard,
and especially at the unusual demeanour of the King. In general,
no task was so easy as to discover Richard's immediate course
of sentiment and feeling, though it might, in some cases, be
difficult to calculate its duration; for no weathercock obeyed the
changing wind more readily, than the King his gusts of passion.
But, on the present occasion, his manner seemed unusually constrained
and mysterious, nor was it easy to guess whether displeasure
or kindness predominated in his conduct towards his
new dependent, or in the looks with which, from time to time,
he regarded him. The ready service which the King had rendered
to counteract the bad effects of the Nubian's wound, might, seem
to balance the obligation conferred on him by the slave, when
he intercepted the blow of the assassin; but it seemed, as a much
longer account remained to be arranged between them, that the
Monarch was doubtful whether the settlement might leave him,
upon the whole, debtor or creditor, and that, therefore, he
assumed, in the meantime, a neutral demeanour, which might
suit with either character. As for the Nubian, by whatever
means he had acquired the art of writing the European languages,
the King remained convinced that the English tongue at least
was unknown to him, since, having watched him closely during
the last part of the interview, he conceived it impossible for any
one understanding a conversation, of which he was himself the
subject, to have so completely avoided the appearance of taking
an interest in it.
