




			CHAPTER TWENTIETH.

	When beauty leads the lion in her toils,
	Such are her charms, he dare not raise his mane
	Far less expand the terror of his fangs.
	So great Alcides made his club a distaff,
	And spun to please fair Omphal<e'>.
					Anonymous.

  Richard, the unsuspicious object of the dark treachery detailed
in the closing part of the last chapter, having effected, for the
present at least, the triumphant union of the Crusading princes,
in a resolution to prosecute the war with vigour, had it next at
heart to establish tranquillity in his own family; and, now that
he could judge more temperately, to inquire distinctly into the
circumstances leading to the loss of his banner, and the nature
and the extent of the connection betwixt his kinswoman Edith,
and the banished adventurer from Scotland.

  Accordingly, the Queen and her household were startled with
a visit from Sir Thomas de Vaux, requesting the present attendance
of the Lady Calista of Montfaucon, the Queen's principal
bower-woman, upon King Richard.

  ``What am I to say, madam?'' said the trembling attendant
to the Queen. ``He will slay us all.''

  ``Nay, fear not, madam,'' said De Vaux. ``His Majesty hath
spared the life of the Scottish knight, who was the chief offender,
and bestowed him upon the Moorish physician---he will not be
severe upon a lady, though faulty.''

  ``Devise some cunning tale, wench,'' said Berengaria. ``My
husband hath too little time to make inquiry into the truth.''

  ``Tell the tale as it really happened,'' said Edith, ``lest I tell
it for thee.''

  ``With humble permission of her Majesty,'' said De Vaux,
``I would say Lady Edith adviseth well; for although King
Richard is pleased to believe what it pleases your Grace to tell
him, yet I doubt his having the same deference for the Lady
Calista, and in this especial matter.''

  ``The Lord of Gilsland is right,'' said the Lady Calista, much
agitated at the thoughts of the investigation which was to take
place: ``and, besides, if I had presence of mind enough to forge
a plausible story, beshrew me if I think I should have the courage
to tell it.''

  In this candid humour, the Lady Calista was conducted by
De Vaux to the King, and made, as she had proposed, a full
confession of the decoy by which the unfortunate Knight of the
Leopard had been induced to desert his post; exculpating the
Lady Edith, who, she was aware, would not fail to exculpate
herself, and laying the full burden on the Queen, her mistress,
whose share of the frolic, she well knew, would appear the most
venial in the eyes of C<oe>ur de Lion. In truth, Richard was a
fond---almost an uxorious husband. The first burst of his wrath
had long since passed away, and he was not disposed severely to
censure what could not now be amended. The wily Lady Calista,
accustomed from her earliest childhood to fathom the intrigues
of a court, and watch the indications of a sovereign's will,
hastened back to the Queen with the speed of a lapwing, charged
with the King's commands that she should expect a speedy visit
from him; to which the bower-lady added a commentary founded
on her own observation, tending to show that Richard meant
just to preserve so much severity as might bring his royal consort
to repent of her frolic, and then to extend to her, and all
concerned, his gracious pardon.

  ``Sits the wind in that corner, wench?'' said the Queen,
much relieved by this intelligence; ``believe me, that, great
commander as he is, Richard will find it hard to circumvent us
in this matter; and that, as the Pyrenean shepherds are wont
to say in my native Navarre, many a one comes for wool and
goes back shorn.''

  Having possessed herself of all the information which Calista
could communicate, the royal Berengaria arrayed herself in her
most becoming dress, and awaited with confidence the arrival
of the heroic Richard.

  He arrived, and found himself in the situation of a prince
entering an offending province, in the confidence that his business
will only be to inflict rebuke, and receive submission, when
he unexpectedly finds it in a state of complete defiance and
insurrection. Berengaria well knew the power of her charms,
and the extent of Richard's affection, and felt assured that she
could make her own terms good, now that the first tremendous
explosion of his anger had expended itself without mischief.
Far from listening to the King's intended rebuke, as what the
levity of her conduct had justly deserved, she extenuated, nay,
defended, as a harmless frolic, that which she was accused of.
She denied, indeed, with many a pretty form of negation, that
she had directed Nectabanus absolutely to entice the knight
farther than the brink of the Mount on which he kept watch---
and indeed this was so far true, that she had not designed Sir
Kenneth to be introduced into her tent---and then, eloquent in
urging her own defence, the Queen was far more so in pressing
upon Richard the charge of unkindness in refusing her so poor
a boon as the life of an unfortunate knight, who, by her thoughtless
prank, had been brought within the danger of martial law.
She wept and sobbed while she enlarged on her husband's obduracy
on this score, as a rigour which had threatened to make
her unhappy for life, whenever she should reflect that she had
given, unthinkingly, the remote cause for such a tragedy. The
vision of the slaughtered victim would have haunted her dreams
---nay, for aught she knew, since such things often happened,
his actual spectre might have stood by her waking couch. To
all this misery of the mind was she exposed by the severity of
one, who, while he pretended to dote upon her slightest glance,
would not forego one act of poor revenge, though the issue was
to render her miserable.

  All this flow of female eloquence was accompanied with the
usual arguments of tears and sighs, and uttered with such tone
and action, as seemed to show that the Queen's resentment
arose neither from pride nor sullenness, but from feelings hurt
at finding her consequence with her husband less than she had
expected to possess.

  The good King Richard was considerably embarrassed. He
tried in vain to reason with one, whose very jealousy of his affection
rendered her incapable of listening to argument, nor could
he bring himself to use the restraint of lawful authority to a
creature so beautiful in the midst of her unreasonable displeasure.
He was therefore reduced to the defensive, endeavoured
gently to chide her suspicions, and soothe her displeasure, and
recalled to her mind that she need not look back upon the past
with recollections either of remorse or supernatural fear, since
Sir Kenneth was alive and well, and had been bestowed by him
upon the great Arabian physician, who, doubtless, of all men,
knew best how to keep him living. But this seemed the unkindest
cut of all, and the Queen's sorrow was renewed at the
idea of a Saracen---a mediciner---obtaining a boon for which,
with bare head, and on bended knee, she had petitioned her
husband in vain. At this new charge, Richard's patience began
rather to give way, and he said, in a serious tone of voice,
``Berengaria, the physician saved my life. If it is of value in
your eyes, you will not grudge him a higher recompense than
the only one I could prevail on him to accept.''

  The Queen was satisfied she had urged her coquettish displeasure
to the verge of safety.

  ``My Richard,'' she said, ``why brought you not that sage
to me, that England's Queen might show how she esteemed
him who could save from extinction the lamp of chivalry, the
glory of England, and the light of poor Berengaria's life and
hope?''

  In a word, the matrimonial dispute was ended; but, that
some penalty might be paid to justice, both King and Queen
accorded in laying the whole blame on the agent Nectabanus,
who (the Queen being by this time well weary of the poor
dwarf's humour) was, with his royal consort Guenevra, sentenced
to be banished from the court; and the unlucky dwarf
only escaped a supplementary whipping, from the Queen's
assurances that he had already sustained personal chastisement.
It was decreed farther, that as an envoy was shortly to be
despatched to Saladin, acquainting him with the resolution of
the Council to resume hostilities so soon as the truce was
ended, and as Richard proposed to send a valuable present to
the Soldan, in acknowledgment of the high benefit he had
derived from the services of El Hakim, the two unhappy creatures
should be added to it as curiosities, which, from their extremely
grotesque appearance, and the shattered state of their
intellect, were gifts that might well pass between sovereign and
sovereign.

  Richard had that day yet another female encounter to sustain;
but he advanced to it with comparative indifference, for
Edith, though beautiful, and highly esteemed by her royal relative
---nay, although she had from his unjust suspicions actually sustained
the injury of which Berengaria only affected to complain,
still was neither Richard's wife nor mistress, and he feared her
reproaches less, although founded in reason, than those of the
Queen, though unjust and fantastical. Having requested to
speak with her apart, he was ushered into her apartment, adjoining
that of the Queen, whose two female Coptish slaves remained
on their knees in the most remote corner during the interview.
A thin black veil extended its ample folds over the tall and
graceful form of the high-born maiden, and she wore not upon
her person any female ornament of what kind soever. She arose
and made a low reverence when Richard entered resumed her
seat at his command, and, when he sat down beside her, waited,
without uttering a syllable, until he should communicate his
pleasure.

  Richard, whose custom it was to be familiar with Edith, as
their relationship authorised, felt this reception chilling, and
opened the conversation with some embarrassment.

  ``Our fair cousin,'' he at length said, ``is angry with us;
and we own that strong circumstances have induced us, without
cause, to suspect her of conduct alien to what we have ever
known in her course of life. But while we walk in this misty
valley of humanity, men will mistake shadows for substances.
Can my fair cousin not forgive her somewhat vehement kinsman,
Richard?''

  ``Who can refuse forgiveness to _Richard,_'' answered Edith,
``provided Richard can obtain pardon of the _King?_''

  ``Come, my kinswoman,'' replied C<oe>ur de Lion, ``this is all
too solemn. By Our Lady, such a melancholy countenance,
and this ample sable veil, might make men think thou wert a
new-made widow, or had lost a betrothed lover, at least. Cheer
up---thou hast heard doubtless that there is no real cause for
woe---why then keep up the form of mourning?''

  ``For the departed honour of Plantagenet---for the glory
which hath left my father's house.''

  Richard frowned. ``Departed honour! glory which hath
left our house!'' he repeated, angrily; ``but my cousin Edith
is privileged. I have judged her too hastily, she has therefore
a right to deem of me too harshly. But tell me at least in
what I have faulted.''

  ``Plantagenet,'' said Edith, ``should have either pardoned an
offence, or punished it. It misbecomes him to assign free men,
Christians and brave knights, to the fetters of the infidels. It
becomes him not to compromise and barter, or to grant life under
the forfeiture of liberty. To have doomed the unfortunate to
death might have been severity, but had a show of justice; to
condemn him to slavery and exile, was barefaced tyranny.''

  ``I see, my fair cousin,'' said Richard, ``you are of those
pretty ones who think an absent lover as bad as none, or as a
dead one. Be patient; half-a-score of light horsemen may yet
follow and redeem the error, if thy gallant have in keeping any
secret which might render his death more convenient than his
banishment.''

  ``Peace with thy scurril jests!'' answered Edith, colouring
deeply---``Think rather, that for the indulgence of thy mood
thou hast lopped from this great enterprise one goodly limb,
deprived the Cross of one of its most brave supporters, and placed
a servant of the true God in the hands of the heathen; hast
given, too, to minds as suspicious as thou hast shown thine own
in this matter, some right to say that Richard C<oe>ur de Lion
banished the bravest soldier in his camp, lest his name in battle
might match his own.''

  ``I---I!'' exclaimed Richard, now indeed greatly moved---
``am I one to be jealous of renown?---I would he were here to
profess such equality! I would waive my rank and my crown,
and meet him, man-like, in the lists, that it might appear
whether Richard Plantagenet had room to fear or to envy the
prowess of mortal man. Come, Edith, thou think'st not as thou
say'st. Let not anger or grief for the absence of thy lover make
thee unjust to thy kinsman, who, notwithstanding all thy tetchiness,
values thy good report as high as that of any one living.''

  ``The absence of my lover?'' said the Lady Edith. ``But
yes---he may be well termed my lover, who hath paid so dear
for the title. Unworthy as I might be of such homage, I was
to him like a light, leading him forward in the noble path of
chivalry; but that I forgot my rank, or that he presumed beyond
his, is false, were a king to speak it.''

  ``My fair cousin,'' said Richard, ``do not put words in my
mouth which I have not spoken. I said not you had graced
this man beyond the favour which a good knight may earn,
even from a princess, whatever be his native condition. But, by
Our Lady, I know something of this love-gear---it begins with
mute respect and distant reverence; but, when opportunities
occur, familiarity increases, and so---But it skills not talking
with one who thinks herself wiser than all the world.''

  ``My kinsman's counsels I willingly listen to, when they
are such,'' said Edith, ``as convey no insult to my rank and
character.''

  ``Kings, my fair cousin, do not counsel, but rather command,''
said Richard.

  ``Soldans do indeed command,'' said Edith, ``but it is because
they have slaves to govern.''

  ``Come, you might learn to lay aside this scorn of Soldanrie,
when you hold so high of a Scot,'' said the King. ``I hold
Saladin to be truer to his word than this William of Scotland,
who must needs be called a Lion, forsooth---he hath foully
faulted towards me, in failing to send the auxiliary aid he promised.
Let me tell thee, Edith, thou may'st live to prefer a
true Turk to a false Scot.''

  ``No---never!'' answered Edith---``not should Richard himself
embrace the false religion, which he crossed the seas to
expel from Palestine.''

  ``Thou wilt have the last word,'' said Richard, ``and thou
shalt have it. Even think of me what thou wilt, pretty Edith.
I shall not forget that we are near and dear cousins.''

  So saying, he took his leave in fair fashion, but very little
satisfied with the result of his visit.

  It was the fourth day after Sir Kenneth had been dismissed
from the camp; and King Richard sat in his pavilion, enjoying
an evening breeze from the west, which, with unusual coolness
on her wings, seemed breathed from merry England for the
refreshment of her adventurous monarch, as he was gradually
recovering the full strength which was necessary to carry on
his gigantic projects. There was no one with him, De Vaux
having been sent to Ascalon to bring up reinforcements and
supplies of military munition, and most of his other attendants
being occupied in different departments, all preparing for the
re-opening of hostilities, and for a grand preparatory review of
the army of the Crusaders, which was to take place the next
day. The King sat, listening to the busy hum among the
soldiery, the clatter from the forges, where horse-shoes were
preparing, and from the tents of the armourers, who were
repairing harness---the voice of the soldiers, too, as they passed
and repassed, was loud and cheerful, carrying with its very tone
an assurance of high and excited courage, and an omen of
approaching victory. While Richard's ear drank in these
sounds with delight, and while he yielded himself to the visions
of conquest and of glory which they suggested, an equerry told
him that a messenger from Saladin waited without.

  ``Admit him instantly,'' said the King, ``and with due honour,
Josceline.''

  The English knight accordingly introduced a person, apparently
of no higher rank than a Nubian slave, whose appearance was
nevertheless highly interesting. He was of superb stature and
nobly formed, and his commanding features, although almost
jet-black, showed nothing of negro descent. He wore over his
coal-black locks a milk-white turban, and over his shoulders a
short mantle of the same colour, open in front and at the sleeves,
under which appeared a doublet of dressed leopard's skin reaching
within a handbreadth of the kneel. The rest of his muscular
limbs, both legs and arms, were bare, excepting that he had
sandals on his feet, and wore a collar and bracelets of silver.
A straight broadsword, with a handle of boxwood, and a sheath
covered with snake-skin, was suspended from his waist. In his
right hand he held a short javelin, with a broad, bright, steel
head, of a span in length, and in his left he led, by a leash of
twisted silk and gold, a large and noble stag-hound.

  The messenger prostrated himself, at the same time partially
uncovering his shoulders, in sign of humiliation, and having
touched the earth with his forehead, arose so far as to rest on
one knee, while he delivered to the King a silken napkin, enclosing
another of cloth of gold, within which was a letter from
Saladin in the original Arabic, with a translation into Norman-English,
which may be modernised thus:---

  ``Saladin, King of kings, to Melech Ric, the Lion of England.
Whereas, we are informed by thy last message, that thou hast
chosen war rather than peace, and our enmity rather than our
friendship, we account thee as one blinded in this matter, and
trust shortly to convince thee of thine error, by the help of our
invincible forces of the thousand tribes, when Mohammed, the
Prophet of God, and Allah, the God of the Prophet, shall judge
the controversy betwixt us. In what remains, we make noble
account of thee, and of the gifts which thou hast sent us, and
of the two dwarfs, singular in their deformity as Ysop, and
mirthful as the lute of Isaack. And in requital of these tokens
from the treasure-house of thy bounty, behold we have sent
thee a Nubian slave, named Zohauk, of whom judge not by his
complexion, according to the foolish ones of the earth, in respect
the dark-rinded fruit hath the most exquisite flavour. Know
that he is strong to execute the will of his master, as Rustan of
Zablestan; also he is wise to give counsel when thou shalt
learn to hold communication with him, for the Lord of Speech
hath been stricken with silence betwixt the ivory walls of his
palace. We commend him to thy care, hoping the hour may
not be distant when he may render thee good service. And
herewith we bid thee farewell; trusting that our most holy
Prophet may yet call thee to a sight, of the truth, failing which
illumination, our desire is, for the speedy restoration of thy royal
health, that Allah may judge between thee and us in a plain
field of battle.''

  And the missive was sanctioned by the signature and seal of
the Soldan.

  Richard surveyed the Nubian in silence as he stood before
him, his looks bent upon the ground, his arms folded on his
bosom, with the appearance of a black marble statue of the
most exquisite workmanship, waiting life from the touch of a
Prometheus. The King of England, who, as it was emphatically
said of his successor Henry the Eighth, loved to look upon =a
man,= was well pleased with the thewes, sinews, and symmetry of
him whom he now surveyed, and questioned him in the Lingua
Franca, ``Art thou a pagan?''

  The slave shook his head, and raising his finger to his brow,
crossed himself in token of his Christianity, then resumed his
posture of motionless humility.

  ``A Nubian Christian, doubtless,'' said Richard, ``and mutilated
of the organ of speech by these heathen dogs?''

  The mute again slowly shook his head in token of negative,
pointed with his forefinger to Heaven, and then laid it upon
his own lips.

  ``I understand thee,'' said Richard; ``thou dost suffer under
the infliction of God, not by the cruelty of man. Canst thou
clean an armour and belt, and buckle it in time of need?''

  The mute nodded, and stepping towards the coat of mail,
which hung, with the shield and helmet of the chivalrous
monarch, upon the pillar of the tent, he handled it with such
nicety of address, as sufficiently to show that he fully understood
the business of the armour-bearer.

  ``Thou art an apt, and wilt doubtless be a useful knave---
thou shalt wait in my chamber, and on my person,'' said the
Kin. ``to show how much I value the gift of the royal Soldan.
If thou hast no tongue, it follows thou canst carry no tales,
neither provoke me to be sudden by any unfit reply.''

  The Nubian again prostrated himself till his brow touched
the earth, then stood erect, at some paces distant, as waiting for
his new master's commands.

  ``Nay, thou shalt commence thy office presently,'' said
Richard, ``for I see a speck of rust darkening on that shield;
and when I shake it in the face of Saladin, it should be bright
and unsullied as the Soldan's honour and mine own.''

  A horn was winded without, and presently Sir Henry Neville
entered with a packet of despatches,---``From England, my
lord,'' he said, as he delivered it.

  ``From England---our own England!'' repeated Richard, in
a tone of melancholy enthusiasm---``Alas! they little think
how hard their Sovereign has been beset by sickness and sorrow---
faint friends and forward enemies.'' Then opening the
despatches, he said, hastily ``Ha! this comes from no peaceful
land---they too have their feuds.---Neville, begone---I must peruse
these tidings alone, and at leisure.''

  Neville withdrew accordingly, and Richard was soon absorbed
in the melancholy details which had been conveyed to him from
England, concerning the factions that were tearing to pieces his
native dominions---the disunion of his brothers, John and Geoffrey,
and the quarrels of both with the High Justiciary Longchamp,
Bishop of Ely---the oppressions practised by the nobles
upon the peasantry, and rebellion of the latter against their
masters, which had produced everywhere scenes of discord, and
in some instances the effusion of blood. Details of incidents
mortifying to his pride, and derogatory from his authority, were
intermingled with the earnest advice of his wisest and most
attached counsellors, that he should presently return to England,
as his presence offered the only hope of saving the kingdom from
all the horrors of civil discord, of which France and Scotland
were likely to avail themselves. Filled with the most painful
anxiety, Richard read, and again read, the ill-omened letters,
compared the intelligence which some of them contained with
the same facts as differently stated in others, and soon became
totally insensible to whatever was passing around him, although
seated, for the sake of coolness, close to the entrance of his tent,
and having the curtains withdrawn, so that he could see and be
seen by the guards and others who were stationed without.

  Deeper in the shadow of the pavilion, and busied with the
task his new master had imposed, sat the Nubian slave, with
his back rather turned towards the King. He had finished
adjusting and cleaning the hauberk and brigandine, and was
now busily employed on a broad pavesse, or buckler, of unusual
size, and covered with steel-plating, which Richard often used
in reconnoitring, or actually storming fortified places, as a more
effectual protection against missile weapons, than the narrow
triangular shield used on horseback. This pavesse bore neither
the royal lions of England, nor any other device, to attract the
observation of the defenders of the walls against which it was
advanced; the care, therefore, of the armourer was addressed to
causing its surface to shine as bright as crystal, in which he
seemed to be peculiarly successful. Beyond the Nubian, and
scarce visible from without, lay the large dog, which might be
termed his brother slave, and which, as if he felt awed by being
transferred to a royal owner, was couched close to the side of
the mute, with head and ears on the ground, and his limbs and
tail drawn close around and under him.

  While the Monarch and his new attendant were thus occupied,
another actor crept upon the scene, and mingled among
the group of English yeomen, about a score of whom, respecting
the unusually pensive posture and close occupation of their sovereign,
were, contrary to their wont, keeping a silent guard in
front of his tent. It was not, however, more vigilant than
usual. Some were playing at games of hazard with small
pebbles, others spoke together in whispers of the approaching
day of battle, and several lay asleep, their bulky limbs folded in
their green mantles.

  Amid these careless warders glided the puny form of a little
old Turk, poorly dressed like a marabout or santon of the desert,
a sort of enthusiasts, who sometimes ventured into the camp
of the Crusaders, though treated always with contumely, and
often with violence. Indeed, the luxury and profligate indulgence
of the Christian leaders had occasioned a motley concourse
in their tents, of musicians, courtezans, Jewish merchants,
Copts, Turks, and all the varied refuse of the Eastern nations;
so that the caftan and turban, though to drive both from the
Holy Land was the professed object of the expedition, were
nevertheless neither an uncommon nor an alarming sight in
the camp of the Crusaders. When, however, the little insignificant
figure we have described approached so nigh as to
receive some interruption from the warders, he dashed his
dusky green turban from his head, showed that his beard and
eyebrows were shaved like those of a professed buffoon, and
that the expression of his fantastic and writhen features, as well
as of his little black eyes, which glittered like jet, was that of a
crazed imagination.

  ``Dance, marabout,'' cried the soldiers, acquainted with the
manners of these wandering enthusiasts---``dance, or we will
scourge thee with our bowstrings, till thou spin as never top did
under schoolboy's lash.''---Thus shouted the reckless warders,
as much delighted at having a subject to tease, as a child when
he catches a butterfly, or a schoolboy upon discovering a bird's
nest.

  The marabout, as if happy to do their behests, bounded from
the earth, and spun his giddy round before them with singular
agility, which, when contrasted with his slight and wasted figure,
and diminutive appearance, made him resemble a withered leaf
twirled round and around at the pleasure of the winter's breeze.
His single lock of hair streamed upwards from his bald and
shaven head, as if some genie upheld him by it; and indeed it
seemed as if supernatural art were necessary to the execution of
the wild whirling dance, in which scarce the tiptoe of the performer
was seen to touch the ground. Amid the vagaries of his
performance, he flew here and there, from one spot to another,
still approaching, however, though almost imperceptibly, to the
entrance of the royal tent; so that, when at length he sunk
exhausted on the earth, after two or three bounds still higher
than those which he had yet executed, he was not above thirty
yards from the King's person.

  ``Give him water,'' said one yeoman; ``they always crave a
drink after their merry-go-round.''

  ``Aha, water, say'st thou, Long Allen?''---exclaimed another
archer, with a most scornful emphasis on the despised element;
``how wouldst like such beverage thyself, after such a morrice
dancing?''

  ``The devil a water-drop he gets here,'' said a third. ``We
will teach the light-footed old infidel to be a good Christian, and
drink wine of Cyprus.''

  ``Ay, ay,'' said a fourth; ``and in case he be restive, fetch
thou Dick Hunter's horn, that he drenches his mare withal.''

  A circle was instantly formed around the prostrate and
exhausted dervise, and while one tall yeoman raised his feeble
form from the ground, another presented to him a huge flagon
of wine. Incapable of speech, the old man shook his head, and
waved away from him with his hand the liquor forbidden by the
Prophet; but his tormentors were not thus to be appeased.

  ``The horn, the horn!'' exclaimed one. ``Little difference
between a Turk and a Turkish horse, and we will use him conforming.''

  ``By Saint George you will choke him!'' said Long Allen
``and, besides, it is a sin to throw away upon a heathen dog
as much wine as would serve a good Christian for a treble
night-cap.''

  ``Thou know'st not the nature of these Turks and pagans,
Long Allen,'' replied Henry Woodstall; ``I tell thee, man, that
this flagon of Cyprus will set his brains a-spinning, just in the
opposite direction that they went whirling in the dancing, and
so bring him, as it were, to himself again.---Choke? he will
no more choke on it than Ben's black bitch on the pound of
butter.''

  ``And for grudging it,'' said Tomalin Blacklees, ``why
should'st thou grudge the poor paynim devil a drop of drink on
earth, since thou know'st he is not to have a drop to cool the
tip of his tongue through a long eternity?''

  ``That were hard laws, look ye,'' said Long Allen, ``only for
being a Turk, as his father was before him. Had he been
Christian turned heathen, I grant you the hottest corner had
been good winter quarters for him.''

  ``Hold thy peace, Long Allen,'' said Henry Woodstall; ``I
tell thee that tongue of thine is not the shortest limb about thee,
and I prophesy that it will bring thee into disgrace with Father
Francis, as once about the black-eyed Syrian wench.---But here
comes the horn.---Be active a bit, man, wilt thou, and just force
open his teeth with the haft of thy dudgeon-dagger.''

  ``Hold, hold---he is conformable,'' said Tomalin; ``see, see,
he signs for the goblet---give him room, boys. _Oop sey es,_ quoth
the Dutchman---down it goes like lamb's-wool! Nay, they are
true topers when once they begin---your Turk never coughs in
his cup, or stints in his liquoring.''

  In fact, the dervise, or whatever he was, drank, or at least
seemed to drink, the large flagon to the very bottom at a single
pull; and when he took it from his lips, after the whole contents
were exhausted, only uttered, with a deep sigh, the words Allah
kerim, or God is merciful. There was a laugh among the yeomen
who witnessed this pottle-deep potation, so obstreperous, as to
rouse and disturb the King, who, raising his finger, said angrily,
``How, knaves, no respect, no observance?''

  All were at once hushed into silence, well acquainted with
the temper of Richard, which at some times admitted of much
military familiarity, and at others exacted the most precise respect,
although the latter humour was of much more rare occurrence.
Hastening to a more reverent distance from the royal
person, they attempted to drag along with them the marabout,
who, exhausted apparently by previous fatigue, or overpowered
by the potent draught he had just swallowed, resisted being
moved from the spot, both with struggles and groans.

  ``Leave him still, ye fools,'' whispered Long Allen to his
mates; ``by Saint Christopher, you will make our Dickon go
beside himself, and we shall have his dagger presently fly at
our costards. Leave him alone, in less than a minute he will
sleep like a dormouse.''

  At the same moment, the Monarch darted another impatient
glance to the spot, and all retreated in haste, leaving the dervise
on the ground, unable, as it seemed, to stir a single limb or joint
of his body. In a moment afterward, all was as still and quiet
as it had been before the intrusion.
