




			CHAPTER TENTH.

	And now I will unclasp a secret book,
	And, to your quick-conceiving discontent,
	I'll read you matter deep and dangerous.
					Henry IV. _Part I._

  The Marquis of Montserrat, and the Grand Master of the
Knights Templars, stood together in the front of the royal
pavilion, within which this singular scene had passed, and
beheld a strong guard of bills and bows drawn out to form a
circle around it, and keep at distance all which might disturb the
sleeping monarch. The soldiers wore the downcast, silent, and
sullen looks, with which they trail their arms at a funeral, and
stepped with such caution that you could not hear a buckler
ring, or a sword clatter, though so many men in armour were
moving around the tent. They lowered their weapons in deep
reverence, as the dignitaries passed through their files, but with
the same profound silence.

  ``There is a change of cheer among these island dogs,'' said
the Grand Master to Conrade, when they had passed Richard's
guards. ``What hoarse tumult and revel used to be before this
pavilion! nought but pitching the bar, hurling the ball, wrestling,
roaring of songs, clattering of wine-pots, and quaffing of flagons,
among these burly yeomen, as if they were holding some country
wake, with a Maypole in the midst of them, instead of a royal
standard.''

  ``Mastiffs are a faithful race,'' said Conrade; ``and the King
their master has won their love by being ready to wrestle, brawl,
or revel amongst the foremost of them whenever the humour
seized him.''

  ``He is totally compounded of humours,'' said the Grand
Master. ``Marked you the pledge he gave us, instead of a
prayer, over his grace-cup yonder?''

  ``He would have felt it a grace-cup, and a well-spiced one
too,'' said the Marquis, ``were Saladin like any other Turk that
ever wore turban, or turned him to Mecca at call of the Muezzin.
But he affects faith, and honour, and generosity,---as if it were
for an unbaptized dog like him to practise the virtuous bearing
of a Christian knight! It is said he hath applied to Richard
to be admitted within the pale of chivalry.''

  ``By Saint Bernard!'' exclaimed the Grand Master, ``it were
time then to throw off our belts and spurs, Sir Conrade, deface
our armorial bearings, and renounce our burgonets, if the highest
honour of Christianity were conferred on an unchristened Turk
of tenpence.''

  ``You rate the Soldan cheap,'' replied the Marquis; ``yet,
though he be a likely man, I have seen a better heathen sold
for forty pence at the bagnio.''

  They were now near their horses, which stood at some distance
from the royal tent, prancing among the gallant train of
esquires and pages by whom they were attended, when Conrade,
after a moment's pause, proposed that they should enjoy the
coolness of the evening breeze which had arisen, and, dismissing
their steeds and attendants, walk homewards to their own
quarters, through the lines of the extended Christian camp.
The Grand Master assented, and they proceeded to walk
together accordingly, avoiding, as if by mutual consent, the
more inhabited parts of the canvas city, and tracing the broad
esplanade which lay between the tents and the external defences,
where they could converse in private, and unmarked, save by
the sentinels, as they passed them.

  They spoke for a time upon the military points and preparations
for defence; but this sort of discourse, in which neither
seemed to take interest, at length died away, and there was a
long pause, which terminated by the Marquis of Montserrat
stopping short, like a man who has formed a sudden resolution,
and gazing for some moments on the dark inflexible countenance
of the Grand Master, he at length addressed him thus:---``Might
it consist with your valour and sanctity, reverend Sir Giles
Amaury, I would pray you for once to lay aside the dark vizor
which you wear, and to converse with a friend barefaced.''

  The Templar half smiled.

  ``There are light-coloured masks,'' he said, ``as well as dark
vizors, and the one conceals the natural features as completely
as the other.''

  ``Be it so,'' said the Marquis, putting his hand to his chin,
and withdrawing it with the action of one who unmasks himself;
``there lies my disguise. And now, what think you, as
touching the interests of your own Order, of the prospects of
this Crusade?''

  ``This is tearing the veil from _my_ thoughts rather than
exposing your own,'' said the Grand Master; ``yet I will reply
with a parable told to me by a santon of the desert.---`A certain
farmer prayed to Heaven for rain, and murmured when it fell
not at his need. To punish his impatience, Allah,' said the
santon, `sent the Euphrates upon his farm, and he was destroyed
with all his possessions, even by the granting of his
own wishes.'

  ``Most truly spoken,'' said the Marquis Conrade; ``would
that the ocean had swallowed up nineteen parts of the armaments
of these western princes! what remained would better
have served the purpose of the Christian nobles of Palestine, the
wretched remnant of the Latin kingdom of Jerusalem. Left
to ourselves, we might have bent to the storm, or, moderately
supported with money and troops, we might have compelled
Saladin to respect our valour, and grant us peace and protection
on easy terms. But from the extremity of danger with which
this powerful Crusade threatens the Soldan, we cannot suppose,
should it pass over, that the Saracen will suffer any one of us
to hold possessions or principalities in Syria, far less permit the
existence of the Christian military fraternities, from whom they
have experienced so much mischief.''

  ``Ay, but,'' said the Templar, ``these adventurous Crusaders
may succeed, and again plant the Cross on the bulwarks of
Zion.''

  ``And what will that advantage either the Order of the
Templars, or Conrade of Montserrat?'' said the Marquis.

  ``You it may advantage,'' replied the Grand Master. ``Conrade
of Montserrat might become Conrade King of Jerusalem.''

  ``That sounds like something,'' said the Marquis, ``and yet
it rings but hollow.---Godfrey of Bouillon might well choose the
crown of thorns for his emblem. Grand Master, I will confess
to you I have caught some attachment to the Eastern form of
government: A pure and simple monarchy should consist but of
king and subjects. Such is the simple and primitive structure
---a shepherd and his flock. All this internal chain of feudal
dependence is artificial and sophisticated, and I would rather
hold the baton of my poor marquisate with a firm gripe, and
wield it after my pleasure, than the sceptre of a monarch, to be
in effect restrained and curbed by the will of as many proud
feudal barons as hold land under the Assize of Jerusalem.<*> A

*   The _Assises de Jerusalem_ were the digest of feudal law, composed by
* Godfrey of Boulogne, for the government of the Latin kingdom of Palestine,
* when reconquered from the Saracens. ``It was composed with advice of
* the patriarch and barons, the clergy and laity, and is,'' says the historian
* Gibbon, ``a precious monument of feudatory jurisprudence, founded upon
* those principles of freedom which were essential to the system.''

King should tread freely, Grand Master, and should not be controlled
by here a ditch, and there a fence---here a feudal privilege,
and there a mail-clad baron, with his sword in his hand to maintain
it. To sum the whole, I am aware that Guy de Lusignan's
claims to the throne would be preferred to mine, if Richard
recovers, and has aught to say in the choice.''

  ``Enough,'' said the Grand Master; ``thou hast indeed convinced
me of thy sincerity. Others may hold the same opinions,
but few, save Conrade of Montserrat, dared frankly avow that
he desires not the restitution of the kingdom of Jerusalem, but
rather prefers being master of a portion of its fragments; like
the barbarous islanders who labour not for the deliverance of a
goodly vessel from the billows, expecting rather to enrich themselves
at the expense of the wreck.''

  ``Thou wilt not betray my counsel?'' said Conrade, looking
sharply and suspiciously. ``Know, for certain, that my tongue
shall never wrong my head, nor my hand forsake the defence
of either. Impeach me if thou wilt---I am prepared to defend
myself in the lists against the best Templar who ever laid lance
in rest.''

  ``Yet thou start'st somewhat suddenly for so bold a steed,''
said the Grand Master. ``However, I swear to thee by the
Holy Temple, which our Order is sworn to defend, that I will
keep counsel with thee as a true comrade.''

  ``By which Temple?'' said the Marquis of Montserrat, whose
love of sarcasm often outran his policy and discretion; ---
``swearest thou by that on the hill of Zion, which was built
by King Solomon, or by that symbolical, emblematical edifice,
which is said to be spoken of in the councils held in the vaults
of your Preceptories, as something which infers the aggrandisement
of thy valiant and venerable Order?''

  The Templar scowled upon him with an eye of death, but
answered calmly, ``By whatever Temple I swear, be assured,
Lord Marquis, my oath is sacred.---I would I knew how to bind
_thee_ by one of equal obligation.''

  ``I will swear truth to thee,'' said the Marquis, laughing,
``by the Earl's coronet, which I hope to convert, ere these wars
are over, into something better. It feels cold on my brow, that
same slight coronal; a duke's cap of maintenance were a better
protection against such a night-breeze as now blows, and a
king's crown more preferable still, being lined with comfortable
ermine and velvet. In a word, our interests bind us together;
for think not, Lord Grand Master, that, were these allied
Princes to regain Jerusalem, and place a king of their own
choosing there, they would suffer your Order, any more than
my poor Marquisate, to retain the independence which we now
hold. No, by Our Lady! In such cue the proud knights of
Saint John must again spread plasters, and dress plague-sores
in the hospitals; and you, most puissant and venerable Knights
of the Temple, must return to your condition of simple men-at-arms,
sleep three on a pallet, and mount two upon one horse,
as your present seal still expresses to have been your ancient
most simple custom.''

  ``The rank, privileges, and opulence of our Order prevent so
much degradation as you threaten,'' said the Templar, haughtily.

  ``These are your bane,'' said Conrade of Montserrat; ``and
you, as well as I, reverend Grand Master, know, that, were the
allied Princes to be successful in Palestine, it would be their
first point of policy to abate the independence of your Order,
which, but for the protection of our holy father the Pope, and
the necessity of employing your valour in the conquest of
Palestine, you would long since have experienced. Give them
complete success, and you will be flung aside, as the splinters
of a broken lance are tossed out of the tilt-yard.''

  ``There may be truth in what you say,'' said the Templar,
darkly smiling; ``but what were our hopes should the allies
withdraw their forces, and leave Palestine in the grasp of
Saladin?''

  ``Great and assured,'' replied Conrade; ``the Soldan would
give large provinces to maintain at his behest a body of well-appointed
Frankish lances. In Egypt, in Persia, an hundred
such auxiliaries, joined to his own light cavalry, would turn
the battle against the most fearful odds. This dependence
would be but for a time---perhaps during the life of this
enterprising Soldan---but in the East, empires arise like mushrooms.
Suppose him dead, and us strengthened with a constant
succession of fiery and adventurous spirits from Europe,
what might we not hope to achieve, uncontrolled by these
monarchs, whose dignity throws us at present into the shade
---and, were they to remain here, and succeed in this expedition,
would willingly consign us for ever to degradation and
dependence?''

  ``You say well, my Lord Marquis,'' said the Grand Master;
``and your words find an echo in my bosom. Yet must we be
cautious; Philip of France is wise as well as valiant.''

  ``True, and will be therefore the more easily diverted from
an expedition, to which, in a moment of enthusiasm, or urged
by his nobles, he rashly bound himself. He is jealous of King
Richard, his natural enemy, and longs to return to prosecute
plans of ambition nearer to Paris than Palestine. Any fair
pretence will serve him for withdrawing from a scene, in which
he is aware he is wasting the force of his kingdom.''

  ``And the Duke of Austria?'' said the Templar.

  ``Oh, touching the Duke,'' returned Conrade, ``his self-conceit.
and folly lead him to the same conclusions as do Philip's policy
and wisdom. He conceives himself, God help the while, ungratefully
treated, because men's mouths,---even those of his
own _minne-singers,_<*>---are filled with the praises of King Richard,

*   The German minstrels were so termed.

whom he fears and hates, and in whose harm he would rejoice,
like those unbred dastardly curs, who, if the foremost of the
pack is hurt by the gripe of the wolf, are much more likely to
assail the sufferer from behind, than to come to his assistance.
---But wherefore tell I this to thee, save to show that I am in
sincerity in desiring that this league be broken up, and the
country freed of these great monarchs with their hosts? and
thou well knowest, and hast thyself seen, how all the princes of
influence and power, one alone excepted, are eager to enter into
treaty with the Soldan.''

  ``I acknowledge it,'' said the Templar; ``he were blind that
had not seen this in their last deliberations. But lift yet thy
mask an inch higher, and tell me thy real reason for pressing
upon the Council that Northern Englishman, or Scot, or whatever
you call yonder Knight of the Leopard, to carry their proposals
for a treaty?''

  ``There was a policy in it,'' replied the Italian; ``his character
of native of Britain was sufficient to meet what Saladin
required, who knew him to belong to the band of Richard, while
his character of Scot, and certain other personal grudges which
I wot of, rendered it most unlikely that our envoy should, on
his return, hold any communication with the sick-bed of Richard,
to whom his presence was ever unacceptable.''

  ``Oh, too fine-spun policy,'' said the Grand Master; ``trust
me, that Italian spiders' webs will never bind this unshorn
Samson of the Isle---well if you can do it with new cords, and
those of the toughest. See you not that the envoy whom you
have selected so carefully, hath brought us, in this physician,
the means of restoring the lion-hearted, bull-necked Englishman,
to prosecute his Crusading enterprise; and so soon as he is able
once more to rush on, which of the princes dare hold back?---
They must follow him for very shame, although they would
march under the banner of Satan as soon.''

  ``Be content,'' said Conrade of Montserrat; ``ere this physician,
if he work by anything short of miraculous agency, can
accomplish Richard's cure, it may be possible to put some open
rupture betwixt the Frenchman, at least the Austrian, and his
allies of England, so that the breach shall be irreconcilable
and Richard may arise from his bed, perhaps to command his
own native troops, but never again, by his sole energy, to wield
the force of the whole Crusade.''

  ``Thou art a willing archer,'' said the Templar; ``but, Conrade
of Montserrat, thy bow is over slack to carry an arrow to
the mark.''

  He then stopt short, cast a suspicious glance to see that no
one overheard him, and taking Conrade by the hand, pressed
it eagerly as he looked the Italian in the face, and repeated
slowly,---``Richard arise from his bed, say'st thou?---Conrade,
he must never arise!''

  The Marquis of Montserrat started---``What!---spoke you
of Richard of England---of C<oe>ur de Lion---the champion of
Christendom?''

  His cheek turned pale, and his knees trembled as he spoke.
The Templar looked at him, with his iron visage contorted into
a smile of contempt.

  ``Know'st thou what thou look'st like, Sir Conrade, at this
moment? Not like the politic and valiant Marquis of Montserrat---
not like him who would direct the Council of Princes,
and determine the fate of empires---but like a novice, who,
stumbling upon a conjuration in his master's book of gramarye,
has raised the devil when he least thought of it, and now stands
terrified at the spirit which appears before him.''

  ``I grant you,'' said Conrade, recovering himself, ``that---
unless some other sure road could be discovered---thou hast
hinted at that which leads most direct to our purpose. But,
blessed Mary! we shall become the curse of all Europe, the
malediction of every one, from the Pope on his throne to the
very beggar at the church-gate, who, ragged and leprous, in
the last extremity of human wretchedness, shall bless himself
that he is neither Giles Amaury, nor Conrade of Montserrat.''

  ``If thou takest it thus,'' said the Grand Master, with the
same composure which characterised him all through this
remarkable dialogue, ``let us hold there has nothing passed
between us---that we have spoken in our sleep---have awakened,
and the vision is gone.''

  ``It never can depart,'' answered Conrade.

  ``Visions of ducal crowns and kingly diadems are, indeed,
somewhat tenacious of their place in the imagination,'' replied
the Grand Master.

  ``Well,'' answered Conrade, ``let me but first try to break
peace between Austria and England.''

  They parted.---Conrade remained standing still upon the
spot, and watching the flowing white cloak of the Templar,
as he stalked slowly away, and gradually disappeared amid the
fast-sinking darkness of the Oriental night. Proud, ambitious,
unscrupulous, and politic, the Marquis of Montserrat was yet
not cruel by nature. He was a voluptuary and an epicurean,
and, like many who profess this character, was averse, even
upon selfish motives, from inflicting pain, or witnessing acts of
cruelty; and he retained also a general sense of respect for his
own reputation, which sometimes supplies the want of the
better principles by which reputation is to be maintained.

  ``I have,'' he said, as his eyes still watched the point at
which he had seen the last slight wave of the Templar's
mantle,---``I have, in truth, raised the devil with a vengeance!
Who would have thought this stern ascetic Grand Master,
whose whole fortune and misfortune are merged in that of his
Order, would be willing to do more for its advancement than I
who labour for my own interest? To check this wild Crusade
was my motive, indeed, but I durst not think on the ready
mode which this determined priest has dared to suggest---yet
it is the surest---perhaps even the safest.''

  Such were the Marquis's meditations, when his muttered
soliloquy was broken by a voice from a little distance, which
proclaimed with the emphatic tone of a herald,---``Remember
the Holy Sepulchre!''

  The exhortation was echoed from post to post, for it was the
duty of the sentinels to raise this cry from time to time upon
their periodical watch, that the host of the Crusaders might
always have in their remembrance the purpose of their being
in arms. But though Conrade was familiar with the custom,
and had heard the warning voice on all former occasions as a
matter of habit; yet it came at the present moment so strongly
in contact with his own train of thought, that it seemed a voice
from Heaven warning him against the iniquity which his heart
meditated. He looked around anxiously, as if, like the patriarch
of old, though from very different circumstances, he was expecting
some ram caught in a thicket---some substitution for
the sacrifice, which his comrade proposed to offer, not to the
Supreme Being, but to the Moloch of their own ambition. As
he looked, the broad folds of the ensign of England, heavily
distending itself to the failing night-breeze, caught his eye.
It was displayed upon an artificial mound, nearly in the midst
of the camp, which perhaps of old some Hebrew chief or
champion had chosen as a memorial of his place of rest. If
so, the name was now forgotten, and the Crusaders had christened
it Saint George's Mount, because from that commanding
height the banner of England was supereminently displayed,
as if an emblem of sovereignty over the many distinguished,
noble, and even royal ensigns, which floated in lower situations.

  A quick intellect like that of Conrade catches ideas from the
glance of a moment. A single look on the standard seemed to
dispel the uncertainty of mind which had affected him. He
walked to his pavilion with the hasty and determined step of
one who has adopted a plan which he is resolved to achieve,
dismissed the almost princely train who waited to attend him,
and, as he committed himself to his couch, muttered his amended
resolution, that the milder means are to be tried before the
more desperate are resorted to.

  ``To-morrow,'' he said, ``I sit at the board of the Archduke
of Austria---we will see what can be done to advance
our purpose, before prosecuting the dark suggestions of this
Templar.''
