




			CHAPTER THIRTEENTH.

	    You talk of Gaiety and Innocence!
	The moment when the fatal fruit was eaten,
	They parted ne'er to meet again: and Malice
	Has ever since been playmate to light Gaiety,
	From the first moment when the smiling infant
	Destroys the flower or butterfly he toys with,
	To the last chuckle of the dying miser,
	Who on his deathbed laughs his last to hear
	His wealthy neighbour has become a bankrupt.
						Old Play.

  Sir Kenneth was left for some minutes alone, and in darkness.
Here was another interruption, which must prolong his
absence from his post, and he began almost to repent the
facility with which he had been induced to quit it. But to return
without seeing the Lady Edith, was now not to be thought
of. He had committed a breach of military discipline, and was
determined at least to prove the reality of the seductive expectations
which had tempted him to do so. Meanwhile, his situation
was unpleasant. There was no light to show him into
what sort of apartment he had been led---the Lady Edith was
in immediate attendance on the Queen of England---and the
discovery of his having introduced himself thus furtively into
the royal pavilion, might, were it discovered, lead to much and
dangerous suspicion. While he gave way to these unpleasant
reflections, and began almost to wish that he could achieve
his retreat unobserved, he heard a noise of female voices
laughing, whispering, and speaking, in an adjoining apartment,
from which, as the sounds gave him reason to judge, he could
only be separated by a canvas partition. Lamps were burning,
as he might perceive by the shadowy light which extended itself
even to his side of the veil which divided the tent, and he could
see shades of several figures sitting and moving in the adjoining
apartment. It cannot be termed discourtesy in Sir Kenneth,
that, situated as he was, he overheard a conversation, in which
he found himself deeply interested.

  ``Call her---call her, for Our Lady's sake,'' said the voice of
one of these laughing invisibles. ``Nectabanus, thou shalt be
made ambassador to Prester John's court, to show them how
wisely thou canst discharge thee of a mission.''

  The shrill tone of the dwarf was heard, yet so much subdued,
that Sir Kenneth could not understand what he said, except
that he spoke something of the means of merriment given to
the guard.

  ``But how shall we rid us of the spirit which Nectabanus
hath raised, my maidens?''

  ``Hear me, royal madam,'' said another voice; ``if the sage
and princely Nectabanus be not overzealous of his most transcendent
bride and empress, let us send her to get us rid of this
insolent knight-errant, who can be so easily persuaded that high-born
dames may need the use of his insolent and overweening
valour.''

  ``It were but justice, methinks,'' replied another, ``that the
Princess Guenevra should dismiss, by her courtesy, him whom
her husband's wisdom has been able to entice hither.''

  Struck to the heart with shame and resentment at what he
had heard, Sir Kenneth was about to attempt his escape from
the tent at all hazards, when what followed arrested his purpose.

  ``Nay, truly,'' said the first speaker, ``our cousin Edith must
first learn how this vaunted wight hath conducted himself, and
we must reserve the power of giving her ocular proof that he
hath failed in his duty. It may be a lesson will do good upon
her; for, credit me, Calista, I have sometimes thought she has
let this northern adventurer sit nearer her heart than prudence
would sanction.''

  One of the other voices was then heard to mutter something
of the Lady Edith's prudence and wisdom.

  ``Prudence, wench!'' was the reply---``It is mere pride, and
the desire to be thought more rigid than any of us. Nay, I
will not quit my advantage. You know well, that when she
has us at fault, no one can, in a civil way, lay your error before
you more precisely than can my Lady Edith.---But here she
comes.''

  A figure, as if entering the apartment, cast upon the partition
a shade, which glided along slowly until it mixed with those
which already clouded it. Despite of the bitter disappointment
which he had experienced---despite the insult and injury with
which it seemed he had been visited by the malice, or, at best,
by the idle humour of Queen Berengaria (for he already concluded
that she who spoke loudest, and in a commanding tone, was the
wife of Richard), the knight felt something so soothing to his
feelings in learning that Edith had been no partner to the fraud
practised on him, and so interesting to his curiosity in the scene
which was about to take place, that, instead of prosecuting his
more prudent purpose of an instant retreat, he looked anxiously,
on the contrary, for some rent or crevice, by means of which he
might be made eye as well as ear witness to what was to go forward.

  ``Surely,'' said he to himself, ``the Queen, who hath been
pleased for an idle frolic to endanger my reputation, and perhaps
my life, cannot complain if I avail myself of the chance which
fortune seems willing to afford me, to obtain knowledge of her
farther intentions.''

  It seemed, in the meanwhile, as if Edith were waiting for the
commands of the Queen, and as if the other were reluctant to
speak, for fear of being unable to command her laughter, and
that of her companions; for Sir Kenneth could only distinguish
a sound as of suppressed tittering and merriment.

  ``Your Majesty,'' said Edith, at last, ``seems in a merry
mood, though, methinks, the hour of night prompts a sleepy one.
I was well disposed bedward, when I had your Majesty's commands
to attend you.''

  ``I will not long delay you, cousin, from your repose,'' said
the Queen; ``though I fear you will sleep less soundly when I
tell you your wager is lost.''

  ``Nay, royal madam,'' said Edith, ``this surely is dwelling
on a jest which has rather been worn out. I laid no wager,
however it was your Majesty's pleasure to suppose, or to insist,
that I did so.''

  ``Nay, now, despite our pilgrimage, Satan is strong with you,
my gentle cousin, and prompts thee to leasing. Can you deny
that you gaged your ruby ring against my golden bracelet, that
yonder Knight of the Libbard, or how call you him, could not
be seduced from his post?''

  ``Your Majesty is too great for me to gainsay you,'' replied
Edith; ``but these ladies can, if they will, bear me witness, that
it was your Highness who proposed such a wager, and took the
ring from my finger, even while I was declaring that I did not
think it maidenly to gage anything on such a subject.''

  ``Nay, but, my Lady Edith,'' said another voice, ``you must
needs grant, under your favour, that you expressed yourself very
confident of the valour of that same Knight of the Leopard.''

  ``And if I did, minion,'' said Edith, angrily, ``is that a good
reason why thou shouldst put in thy word to flatter her Majesty's
humour? I spoke of that knight but as all men speak who have
seen him in the field, and had no more interest in defending
than thou in detracting from him. In a camp, what can women
speak of save soldiers and deeds of arms?''

  ``The noble Lady Edith,'' said a third voice, ``hath never
forgiven Calista and me, since we told your Majesty that she
dropped two rose-buds in the chapel.''

  ``If your Majesty,'' said Edith, in a tone which Sir Kenneth
could judge to be that of respectful remonstrance, ``have no other
commands for me than to hear the gibes of your waiting-women,
I must crave your permission to withdraw.''

  ``Silence, Florise,'' said the Queen, ``and let not our indulgence
lead you to forget the difference betwixt yourself and
the kinswoman of England.---But you, my dear cousin,'' she
continued, resuming her tone of raillery, ``how can you, who are
so good-natured, begrudge us poor wretches a few minutes'
laughing, when we have had so many days devoted to weeping
and gnashing of teeth?''

  ``Great be your mirth, royal lady,'' said Edith; ``yet would
I be content not to smile for the rest of my life, rather than''---
She stopped, apparently out of respect; but Sir Kenneth
could hear that she was in much agitation.

  ``Forgive me,'' said Berengaria, a thoughtless but good-humoured
princess of the House of Navarre,---``but what is
the great offence after all? A young knight has been wiled
hither---has stolen---or has _been_ stolen---from his post, which
no one will disturb in his absence, for the sake of a fair lady;
for, to do your champion justice, sweet one, the wisdom of
Nectabanus could conjure him hither in no name but yours.''

  ``Gracious Heaven! your Majesty does not say so?'' said
Edith, in a voice of alarm quite different from the agitation
she had previously evinced,---``you cannot say so, consistently
with respect for your own honour and for mine, your husband's
kinswoman!---Say you were jesting with me, my royal mistress,
and forgive me that I could, even for a moment, think it possible
you could be in earnest!''

  ``The Lady Edith,'' said the Queen, in a displeased tone of
voice, ``regrets the ring we have won of her---We will restore
the pledge to you, gentle cousin, only you must not grudge us
in turn a little triumph over the wisdom which has been so
often spread over us as a banner over a host.''

  ``A triumph!'' exclaimed Edith, indignantly; ``a triumph
---the triumph will be with the infidel, when he hears that the
Queen of England can make the reputation of her husband's
kinswoman the subject of a light frolic.''

  ``You are angry, fair cousin, at losing your favourite ring,''
said the Queen---``Come, since you grudge to pay your wager,
we will renounce our right; it was your name and that pledge
brought him hither, and we care not for the bait after the fish
is caught.''

  ``Madam,'' replied Edith, impatiently, ``you know well that
your Grace could not wish for anything of mine but it becomes
instantly yours. But I would give a bushel of rubies ere ring
or name of mine had been used to bring a brave man into a
fault, and perhaps to disgrace and punishment.''

  ``Oh, it is for the safety of our true knight that we fear!''
said the Queen. ``You rate our power too low, fair cousin,
when you speak of a life being lost for a frolic of ours. Oh,
Lady Edith, others have influence on the iron breasts of warriors
as well as you---the heart even of a lion is made of
flesh, not of stone; and, believe me, I have interest enough with
Richard to save this knight, in whose faith Lady Edith is so
deeply concerned, from the penalty of disobeying his royal
commands.''

  ``For the love of the blessed Cross, most royal lady,'' said
Edith---and Sir Kenneth, with feelings which it were hard to
unravel, heard her prostrate herself at the Queen's feet,---``for
the love of our blessed lady, and of every holy saint in the
calendar, beware what you do! You know not King Richard---
you have been but shortly wedded to him---your breath might
as well combat the west wind when it is wildest, as your words
persuade my royal kinsman to pardon a military offence. Oh!
for God's sake, dismiss this gentleman, if indeed you have lured
him hither! I could almost be content to rest with the shame
of having invited him, did I know that he was returned again
where his duty calls him!''

  ``Arise, cousin, arise,'' said Queen Berengaria, ``and be
assured all will be better than you think. Rise, dear Edith; I
am sorry I have played my foolery with a knight in whom you
take such deep interest---Nay, wring not thy hands---I will
believe thou carest not for him---believe anything rather than
see thee look so wretchedly miserable---I tell thee I will take the
blame on myself with King Richard in behalf of thy fair northern
friend---thine acquaintance, I would say, since thou own'st
him not as a friend.---Nay, look not so reproachfully-We --will
send Nectabanus to dismiss this Knight of the Standard to his
post; and we ourselves will grace him on some future day, to
make amends for his wild-goose chase. He is, I warrant, but
lying perdue in some neighbouring tent.''

  ``By my crown of lilies, and my sceptre of a specially good
water-reed,'' said Nectabanus, ``your Majesty is mistaken---he
is nearer at hand than you wot---he lieth ensconced there
behind that canvas partition.''

  ``And within hearing of each word we have said!'' exclaimed
the Queen, in her turn violently surprised and agitated---``Out,
monster of folly and malignity!''

  As she uttered these words, Nectabanus fled from the pavilion
with a yell of such a nature, as leaves it still doubtful whether
Berengaria had confined her rebuke to words, or added some
more emphatic expression of her displeasure.

  ``What can now be done?'' said the Queen to Edith, in a
whisper of undisguised uneasiness.

  ``That which must,'' said Edith, firmly. ``We must see this
gentleman, and place ourselves in his mercy.''

  So saying, she began hastily to undo a curtain, which at one
place covered an entrance or communication.

  ``For Heaven's sake, forbear---consider,'' said the Queen,
``my apartment---our dress---the hour---my honour!''

  But ere she could detail her remonstrances, the curtain fell,
and there was no division any longer betwixt the armed knight
and the party of ladies. The warmth of an Eastern night
occasioned the undress of Queen Berengaria and her household
to be rather more simple, and unstudied than their station, and
the presence of a male spectator of rank, required. This the
Queen remembered, and with a loud shriek fled from the apartment
where Sir Kenneth was disclosed to view in a compartment
of the ample pavilion, now no longer separated from that in
which they stood. The grief and agitation of the Lady Edith,
as well as the deep interest she felt in a hasty explanation with
the Scottish knight, perhaps occasioned her forgetting, that her
locks were more dishevelled, and her person less heedfully
covered, than was the wont of high-born damsels, in an age
which was not, after all, the most prudish or scrupulous period
of the ancient time. A thin loose garment of pink-coloured silk
made the principal part of her vestments, with Oriental slippers,
into which she had hastily thrust her bare feet, and a scarf
hurriedly and loosely thrown about her shoulders. Her head
had no other covering than the veil of rich and dishevelled locks
falling round it on every side, that half hid a countenance, which
a mingled sense of modesty, and of resentment, and other deep
and agitating feelings, had covered with crimson.

  But although Edith felt her situation with all that delicacy
which is her sex's greatest charm, it did not seem that for a
moment she placed her own bashfulness in comparison with the
duty, which, as she thought, she owed to him, who had been
led into error and danger on her account. She drew, indeed,
her scarf more closely over her neck and bosom, and she hastily
laid from her hand a lamp, which shed too much lustre over
her figure; but, while Sir Kenneth stood motionless on the
same spot in which he was first discovered, she rather stepped
towards than retired from him, as she exclaimed, ``Hasten to
your post, valiant knight!---you are deceived in being trained
hither---ask no questions.''

  ``I need ask none,'' said the knight, sinking upon one knee,
with the reverential devotion of a saint at the altar, and bending
his eyes on the ground, lest his looks should increase the
lady's embarrassment.

  ``Have you heard all?'' said Edith, impatiently---``Gracious
saints! then wherefore wait you here, when each minute that
passes is loaded with dishonour?''

  ``I have heard that I am dishonoured, lady, and I have
heard it from you,'' answered Kenneth. ``What reck I how
soon punishment follows? I have but one petition to you, and
then I seek, among the sabres of the infidels, whether dishonour
may not be washed out with blood.''

  ``Do not so, neither,'' said the lady. ``Be wise---dally not
here---all may yet be well, if you will but use despatch.''

  ``I wait but for your forgiveness,'' said the knight, still
kneeling, ``for my presumption in believing my poor services
could have been required or valued by you.''

  ``I do forgive you---Oh, I have nothing to forgive!---I have
been the means of injuring you---But oh, begone!---I will forgive
---I will value you---that is, as I value every brave Crusader
---if you will but begone!''

  ``Receive first this precious yet fatal pledge,'' said the knight,
tendering the ring to Edith, who now showed gestures of
impatience.

  ``Oh, no, no,'' she said, declining to receive it. ``Keep it---
keep it as a mark of my regard---my regret, I would say. Oh,
begone, if not for your own sake, for mine!''

  Almost recompensed for the loss even of honour, which her
voice had denounced to him, by the interest which she seemed
to testify in his safety, Sir Kenneth rose from his knee, and,
casting a momentary glance on Edith, bowed low and seemed
about to withdraw. At the same instant, that maidenly bashfulness,
which the energy of Edith's feelings had till then
triumphed over, became conqueror in its turn, and she hastened
from the apartment, extinguishing her lamp as she went, and
leaving, in Sir Kenneth's thoughts, both mental and natural
gloom behind her.

  She must be obeyed, was the first distinct idea which waked
him from his reverie, and he hastened to the place by which he
had entered the pavilion. To pass under the canvas in the
manner he had entered required time and attention, and he made
a readier aperture by slitting the canvas wall with his poniard.
When in the free air, he felt rather stupified and overpowered
by a conflict of sensations, than able to ascertain what was the
real import of the whole. He was obliged to spur himself to
action, by recollecting that the commands of the Lady Edith had
required haste. Even then, engaged as he was amongst tent-ropes
and tents, he was compelled to move with caution until he
should regain the path or avenue, aside from which the dwarf
had led him, in order to escape the observation of the guards;
before the Queen's pavilion; and he was obliged also to move
slowly, and with precaution, to avoid giving an alarm, either
by falling, or by the clashing of his armour. A thin cloud had
obscured the moon, too, at the very instant of his leaving the
tent, and Sir Kenneth had to struggle with this inconvenience at
a moment when the dizziness of his head, and the fulness of his
heart, scarce left him powers of intelligence sufficient to direct
his motions.

  But at once sounds came upon his ear which instantly recalled
him to the full energy of his faculties. These proceeded from
the Mount of Saint George. He heard first a single fierce, angry,
and savage bark, which was immediately followed by a yell of
agony. No deer ever bounded with a wilder start at the voice
of Roswal, than did Sir Kenneth at what he feared was the
death-cry of that noble hound, from whom no ordinary injury
could have extracted even the slightest acknowledgment of pain.
He surmounted the space which divided him from the avenue,
and having attained it, began to run towards the mount, although
loaded with his mail, faster than most men could have accompanied
him even if unarmed, relaxed not his pace for the steep
sides of the artificial mound, and in a few minutes stood on the
platform upon its summit.

  The moon broke through the cloud at this moment, and showed
him that the standard of England was vanished, that the spear
on which it floated lay broken on the ground, and beside it was
his faithful hound, apparently in the agonies of death.

