

	

	THE TALISMAN

		A TALE OF THE CRUSADERS


		BY SIR WALTER SCOTT, Bart.




	INTRODUCTION TO THE TALISMAN.


  The ``Betrothed'' did not greatly please one or two
friends, who thought that it did not well correspond
to the general title of ``The Crusaders.'' They
urged, therefore, that without direct allusion to the
manners of the Eastern tribes, and to the romantic
conflicts of the period, the title of a ``Tale of the
Crusaders'' would resemble the play-bill which is said
to have announced the tragedy of Hamlet, the character of the
Prince of Denmark being left out. On the other hand, I felt
the difficulty of giving a vivid picture of a part of the world with
which I was almost totally unacquainted, unless by early recollections
of the ``Arabian Nights' Entertainments;'' and not only did
I labour under the incapacity of ignorance, in which, as far as
regards Eastern manners, I was as thickly wrapped as an Egyptian
in his fog; but my contemporaries were, many of them, as much
enlightened upon the subject, as if they had been inhabitants of the
favoured land of Goshen. The love of travelling had pervaded all
ranks, and carried the subjects of Britain into all quarters of the
world. Greece, so attractive by its remains of art, by its struggles
for freedom against a Mahomedan tyrant, by its very name, where
every fountain had its classical legend;---Palestine, endeared to the
imagination by yet more sacred remembrances, had been of late surveyed
by British eyes, and described by recent travellers. Had I,
therefore, attempted the difficult task of substituting manners of my
own invention, instead of the genuine costume of the East, almost
every traveller I met, who had extended his route beyond what was
anciently called ``The Grand Tour,'' had acquired a right, by ocular
inspection, to chastise me for my presumption. Every member of the
Travellers' Club, who could pretend to have thrown his shoe over
Edom, was, by having done so, constituted my lawful critic and
corrector. It occurred, therefore, that where the author of Anastasius,<*>

*  [Thomas Hope.]

as well as he of Hadji Baba,<*> had described the manners and vices

*  [James Morier.]

of the Eastern nations, not only with fidelity, but with the humour
of Le Sage and the ludicrous power of Fielding himself, one who was
a perfect stranger to the subject must necessarily produce an unfavourable
contrast. The Poet Laureate also, in the charming tale of
``Thalaba,'' had shown how extensive might be the researches of a
person of acquirements and talent, by dint of investigation alone, into
the ancient doctrines, history, and manners of the Eastern countries,
in which we are probably to look for the cradle of mankind; Moore,
in his ``Lallah Rookh,'' had successfully trod the same path; in
which, too, Byron, joining ocular experience to extensive reading, had
written some of his most attractive poems. In a word, the Eastern
themes had been already so successfully handled by those who were
acknowledged to be masters of their craft, that I was diffident of
making the attempt.

  These were powerful objections, nor did they lose force when they
became the subject of anxious reflection, although they did not finally
prevail. The arguments on the other side were, that though I had
no hope of rivalling the contemporaries whom I have mentioned, yet
it occurred to me as possible to acquit myself of the task I was
engaged in, without entering into competition with them.

  The period relating more immediately to the Crusades, which I at
last fixed upon, was that at which the warlike character of Richard
I, wild and generous, a pattern of chivalry, with all its extravagant
virtues, and its no less absurd errors, was opposed to that of Saladin,
in which the Christian and English monarch showed all the cruelty
and violence of an Eastern Sultan; and Saladin, on the other hand,
displayed the deep policy and prudence of a European sovereign,
whilst each contended which should excel the other in the knightly
qualities of bravery and generosity. This singular contrast afforded,
as the Author conceived, materials for a work of fiction possessing
peculiar interest. One of the inferior characters introduced, was a
supposed relation of Richard C<oe>ur de Lion; a violation of the truth
of history, which gave offence to Mr. Mills, the author of the History
of Chivalry and the Crusades, who was not, it may be presumed,
aware that romantic fiction naturally includes the power of such
invention, which is indeed one of the requisites of the art.

  Prince David of Scotland, who was actually in the host, and
was the hero of some very romantic adventures on his way home,
was also pressed into my service, and constitutes one of my _dramatis
person<ae>._

  It is true I had already brought upon the field Him of the Lion
Heart. But it was in a more private capacity than he was here to
be exhibited in the Talisman; then as a disguised knight, now in
the avowed character of a conquering monarch; so that I doubted
not a name so dear to Englishmen as that of King Richard I. might
contribute to their amusement for more than once.<*>

*   [Mr. J. G. Lockhart informs us that ``the brightness of the Talisman dazzled
* the eyes of the public as to the defects of its twin story the Betrothed; and that a
* new burst of applause attended the brilliant procession of Scott's Saladin and his
* C<oe>ur de Lion.'']


  I had access to all which antiquity believed, whether of reality or
fable, on the subject of that magnificent warrior, who was the proudest
boast of Europe and their chivalry, and with whose dreadful name
the Saracens, according to a historian of their own country, were wont
to rebuke their startled horses. ``Do you think,'' said they, ``that
King Richard is on the track, that you stray so wildly from it!''
The most curious register of the history of King Richard, is an
ancient romance, translated originally from the Norman; and at
first certainly having a pretence to be termed a work of chivalry, but
latterly becoming stuffed with the most astonishing and monstrous
fables. There is, perhaps, no metrical romance upon record, where,
along with curious and genuine history, are mingled more absurd
and exaggerated incidents. We have placed in the Appendix to this
Introduction (see end of Volume) the passage of the romance in
which Richard figures as an Ogre, or literal cannibal.

  A principal incident in the story, is that from which the title is
derived. Of all people who ever lived, the Persians wore perhaps most
remarkable for their unshaken credulity in amulets, spells, periapts,
and similar charms, framed, it was said, under the influence of
particular planets, and bestowing high medical powers, as well as the
means of advancing men's fortunes in various manners. A story of
this kind, relating to a Crusader of eminence, is often told in the
West of Scotland, and the relic alluded to is still in existence, and
even yet held in veneration.

  Sir Simon Lockhart of Lee and Cartland made a considerable
figure in the reigns of Robert the Bruce and of his son David. He
was one of the chief of that band of Scottish chivalry, who accompanied
James, the Good Lord Douglas, on his expedition to the Holy Land,
with the heart of King Robert Bruce. Douglas, impatient to get at
the Saracens, entered into war with those of Spain, and was killed
there. Lockhart proceeded to the Holy Land with such Scottish
knights as had escaped the fate of their leader, and assisted for some
time in the wars against the Saracens.

  The following adventure is said by tradition to have befallen
him:---

  He made prisoner in battle an Emir of considerable wealth and
consequence. The aged mother of the captive came to the Christian
camp, to redeem her son from his state of captivity. Lockhart is
said to have fixed the price at which his prisoner should ransom
himself; and the lady, pulling out a large embroidered purse, proceeded
to tell down the ransom, like a mother who pays little respect
to gold in comparison of her son's liberty. In this operation, a pebble
inserted in a coin, some say of the Lower Empire, fell out of the
purse, and the Saracen matron testified so much haste to recover it,
as gave the Scottish knight a high idea of its value, when compared
with gold or silver. ``I will not consent,'' he said, ``to grant your
son's liberty, unless that amulet be added to his ransom.'' The lady
not only consented to this, but explained to Sir Simon Lockhart the
mode in which the Talisman was to be used, and the uses to which
it might be put. The water in which it was dipt, operated as a
styptic, as a febrifuge, and possessed several other properties as a
medical talisman.

  Sir Simon Lockhart, after much experience of the wonders which
it wrought, brought it to his own country, and left it to his heirs, by
whom, and by Clydesdale in general, it was, and is still, distinguished
by the name of the Lee-penny, from the name of his native
seat of Lee.

  The most remarkable part of its history, perhaps, was, that it so
especially escaped condemnation when the Church of Scotland chose to
impeach many other cures which savoured of the miraculous, as occasioned
by sorcery, and censured the appeal to them, ``excepting only
that to the amulet, called the Lee-penny, to which it had pleased God
to annex certain healing virtues which the Church did not presume
to condemn.'' It still, as has been said, exists, and its powers are
sometimes resorted to. Of late, they have been chiefly restricted to
the cure of persons bitten by mad dogs; and as the illness in such
cases frequently arises from imagination, there can be no reason for
doubting that water which has been poured on the Lee-penny furnishes
a congenial cure.<*>

*   [=The Lee-penny.=---At a meeting of the Scottish Society of Antiquaries (8th
* April 1861), an interesting communication ``On some Scottish Magical Charm-Stones,
* or Curing-Stones,'' was read by the late Professor Sir James Y. Simpson,
* Bart., when the _Lee-penny_ was among the articles exhibited. In his paper the
* eminent writer observes, that ``In the present century this ancient medical charm-stone
* has acquired a world-wide reputation as the original of the `Talisman' of
* Sir Walter Scott, though latterly its therapeutic reputation has greatly declined,
* and almost entirely ceased.''---See the _Proceedings,_ vol. iv. p. 223.]


  Such is the tradition concerning the Talisman, which the Author
has taken the liberty to vary in applying it to his own purposes.

  Considerable liberties have also been taken with the truth of history,
both with respect to Conrade of Montserrat's life, as well as his death.
That Conrade, however, was reckoned the enemy of Richard, is agreed
both in history and romance. The general opinion of the terms
upon which they stood may be guessed from the proposal of the
Saracens that the Marquis of Montserrat should be invested with
certain parts of Syria, which they were to yield to the Christians.
Richard, according to the romance which bears his name, ``could
no longer repress his fury. The Marquis, he said, was a traitor,
who had robbed the Knights Hospitallers of sixty thousand pounds,
the present of his father, Henry; that he was a renegade, whose
treachery had occasioned the loss of Acre; and he concluded by a
solemn oath, that he would cause him to be drawn to pieces by wild
horses if he should ever venture to pollute the Christian camp by his
presence. Philip attempted to intercede in favour of the Marquis,
and throwing down his glove, offered to become a pledge for his fidelity
to the Christians; but his offer was rejected, and he was obliged to
give way to Richard's impetuosity.''---_History of Chivalry._

  Conrade of Montserrat makes a considerable figure in those wars,
and was at length put to death by one of the followers of the Sheik,
or Old Man of the Mountain; nor did Richard remain free of the
suspicion of having instigated his death.

  It may be said, in general, that most of the incidents introduced
in the following tale are fictitious; and that reality, where it exists,
is only retained in the characters of the piece.

     Abbotsford,  1st July  1832.

