




		NOTES TO THE TALISMAN.



  Note A.---Lord of Gilsland.

  He was a historical hero, faithfully attached, as is here expressed, to
King Richard, and is noticed with distinction in the romance mentioned in
the Introduction. At the beginning of the romance, mention is made of a
tournament, in which the king returns three times with a fresh suit of
armour, which acted as a disguise; and at each appearance, some knight of
great prowess had a sharp encounter with him. When Richard returned
the second time, the following is Mr. Ellis's account of his proceedings:---
``He now mounted a bay horse, assumed a suit of armour painted red,
and a helmet, the crest of which was a red hound, with a long tail which
reached to the earth; an emblem intended to convey his indignation against
the heathen hounds who defiled the Holy Land, and his determination to
attempt their destruction. Having sufficiently signalised himself in his
new disguise, he rode into the ranks for the purpose of selecting a more
formidable adversary; and, delivering his spear to his squire, took his
mace, and assaulted Sir Thomas de Multon, a knight whose prowess was
deservedly held in the highest estimation. Sir Thomas, apparently not at
all disordered by a blow which would have felled a common adversary,
calmly advised him to go and amuse himself elsewhere; but Richard, having
aimed at him a second and more violent stroke, by which his helmet
was nearly crushed, he returned it with such vigour that the king lost his
stirrups, and, recovering himself with some difficulty, rode off with all speed
into the forest.''---Ellis's _Specimens,_ pp. 193, 194.


  Note B.---Death of Grand Master of the Templars.

  The manner of the death of the supposed Grand Master of the Templars
was taken from the real tragedy enacted by Saladin, upon the person of
Arnold or Reginald de Chatillon. This person, a soldier of fortune, had
seized a castle on the verge of the desert, from whence he made plundering
excursions, and insulted and abused the pilgrims who were on their journey
to Mecca. It was chiefly on his account that Saladin declared war against
Guy de Lusignan, the last Latin King of the Holy Land. The Christian
monarch was defeated by Saladin with the loss of thirty thousand men, and
having been made prisoner, with Chatillon and others, was conducted before
the Soldan. The victor presented to his exhausted captive a cup of sherbet,
cooled in snow. Lusignan having drunk, was about to hand the cup to
Chatillon, when the Sultan interfered. ``Your person,'' he said, ``my royal
prisoner, is sacred, but the cup of Saladin must not be profaned by a blasphemous
robber and ruffian.'' So saying, he slew the captive knight by a
blow of his scimitar.---See Gibbon's _History._

