




BOOK II - THE MOAT HOUSE





CHAPTER I - DICK ASKS QUESTIONS







The Moat House stood not far from the rough forest road.

Externally, it was a compact rectangle of red stone, flanked at

each corner by a round tower, pierced for archery and battlemented

at the top.  Within, it enclosed a narrow court.  The moat was

perhaps twelve feet wide, crossed by a single drawbridge.  It was

supplied with water by a trench, leading to a forest pool and

commanded, through its whole length, from the battlements of the

two southern towers.  Except that one or two tall and thick trees

had been suffered to remain within half a bowshot of the walls, the

house was in a good posture for defence.



In the court, Dick found a part of the garrison, busy with

preparations for defence, and gloomily discussing the chances of a

siege.  Some were making arrows, some sharpening swords that had

long been disused; but even as they worked, they shook their heads.



Twelve of Sir Daniel's party had escaped the battle, run the

gauntlet through the wood, and come alive to the Moat House.  But

out of this dozen, three had been gravely wounded:  two at

Risingham in the disorder of the rout, one by John Amend-All's

marksmen as he crossed the forest.  This raised the force of the

garrison, counting Hatch, Sir Daniel, and young Shelton, to twenty-

two effective men.  And more might be continually expected to

arrive.  The danger lay not therefore in the lack of men.



It was the terror of the Black Arrow that oppressed the spirits of

the garrison.  For their open foes of the party of York, in these

most changing times, they felt but a far-away concern.  "The

world," as people said in those days, "might change again" before

harm came.  But for their neighbours in the wood, they trembled.

It was not Sir Daniel alone who was a mark for hatred.  His men,

conscious of impunity, had carried themselves cruelly through all

the country.  Harsh commands had been harshly executed; and of the

little band that now sat talking in the court, there was not one

but had been guilty of some act of oppression or barbarity.  And

now, by the fortune of war, Sir Daniel had become powerless to

protect his instruments; now, by the issue of some hours of battle,

at which many of them had not been present, they had all become

punishable traitors to the State, outside the buckler of the law, a

shrunken company in a poor fortress that was hardly tenable, and

exposed upon all sides to the just resentment of their victims.

Nor had there been lacking grisly advertisements of what they might

expect.



At different periods of the evening and the night, no fewer than

seven riderless horses had come neighing in terror to the gate.

Two were from Selden's troop; five belonged to men who had ridden

with Sir Daniel to the field.  Lastly, a little before dawn, a

spearman had come staggering to the moat side, pierced by three

arrows; even as they carried him in, his spirit had departed; but

by the words that he uttered in his agony, he must have been the

last survivor of a considerable company of men.



Hatch himself showed, under his sun-brown, the pallour of anxiety;

and when he had taken Dick aside and learned the fate of Selden, he

fell on a stone bench and fairly wept.  The others, from where they

sat on stools or doorsteps in the sunny angle of the court, looked

at him with wonder and alarm, but none ventured to inquire the

cause of his emotion.



"Nay, Master Shelton," said Hatch, at last - "nay, but what said I?

We shall all go.  Selden was a man of his hands; he was like a

brother to me.  Well, he has gone second; well, we shall all

follow!  For what said their knave rhyme? - 'A black arrow in each

black heart.'  Was it not so it went?  Appleyard, Selden, Smith,

old Humphrey gone; and there lieth poor John Carter, crying, poor

sinner, for the priest."



Dick gave ear.  Out of a low window, hard by where they were

talking, groans and murmurs came to his ear.



"Lieth he there?" he asked.



"Ay, in the second porter's chamber," answered Hatch.  "We could

not bear him further, soul and body were so bitterly at odds.  At

every step we lifted him, he thought to wend.  But now, methinks,

it is the soul that suffereth.  Ever for the priest he crieth, and

Sir Oliver, I wot not why, still cometh not.  'Twill be a long

shrift; but poor Appleyard and poor Selden, they had none."



Dick stooped to the window and looked in.  The little cell was low

and dark, but he could make out the wounded soldier lying moaning

on his pallet.



"Carter, poor friend, how goeth it?" he asked.



"Master Shelton," returned the man, in an excited whisper, "for the

dear light of heaven, bring the priest.  Alack, I am sped; I am

brought very low down; my hurt is to the death.  Ye may do me no

more service; this shall be the last.  Now, for my poor soul's

interest, and as a loyal gentleman, bestir you; for I have that

matter on my conscience that shall drag me deep."



He groaned, and Dick heard the grating of his teeth, whether in

pain or terror.



Just then Sir Daniel appeared upon the threshold of the hall.  He

had a letter in one hand.



"Lads," he said, "we have had a shog, we have had a tumble;

wherefore, then, deny it?  Rather it imputeth to get speedily again

to saddle.  This old Harry the Sixt has had the undermost.  Wash

we, then, our hands of him.  I have a good friend that rideth next

the duke, the Lord of Wensleydale.  Well, I have writ a letter to

my friend, praying his good lordship, and offering large

satisfaction for the past and reasonable surety for the future.

Doubt not but he will lend a favourable ear.  A prayer without

gifts is like a song without music:  I surfeit him with promises,

boys - I spare not to promise.  What, then, is lacking?  Nay, a

great thing - wherefore should I deceive you? - a great thing and a

difficult:  a messenger to bear it.  The woods - y' are not

ignorant of that - lie thick with our ill-willers.  Haste is most

needful; but without sleight and caution all is naught.  Which,

then, of this company will take me this letter, bear me it to my

Lord of Wensleydale, and bring me the answer back?"



One man instantly arose.



"I will, an't like you," said he.  "I will even risk my carcase."



"Nay, Dicky Bowyer, not so," returned the knight.  "It likes me

not.  Y' are sly indeed, but not speedy.  Ye were a laggard ever."



"An't be so, Sir Daniel, here am I," cried another.



"The saints forfend!" said the knight.  "Y' are speedy, but not

sly.  Ye would blunder me headforemost into John Amend-All's camp.

I thank you both for your good courage; but, in sooth, it may not

be."



Then Hatch offered himself, and he also was refused.



"I want you here, good Bennet; y' are my right hand, indeed,"

returned the knight; and then several coming forward in a group,

Sir Daniel at length selected one and gave him the letter.



"Now," he said, "upon your good speed and better discretion we do

all depend.  Bring me a good answer back, and before three weeks, I

will have purged my forest of these vagabonds that brave us to our

faces.  But mark it well, Throgmorton:  the matter is not easy.  Ye

must steal forth under night, and go like a fox; and how ye are to

cross Till I know not, neither by the bridge nor ferry."



"I can swim," returned Throgmorton.  "I will come soundly, fear

not."



"Well, friend, get ye to the buttery," replied Sir Daniel.  "Ye

shall swim first of all in nut-brown ale."  And with that he turned

back into the hall.



"Sir Daniel hath a wise tongue," said Hatch, aside, to Dick.  "See,

now, where many a lesser man had glossed the matter over, he

speaketh it out plainly to his company.  Here is a danger, 'a

saith, and here difficulty; and jesteth in the very saying.  Nay,

by Saint Barbary, he is a born captain!  Not a man but he is some

deal heartened up!  See how they fall again to work."



This praise of Sir Daniel put a thought in the lad's head.



"Bennet," he said, "how came my father by his end?"



"Ask me not that," replied Hatch.  "I had no hand nor knowledge in

it; furthermore, I will even be silent, Master Dick.  For look you,

in a man's own business there he may speak; but of hearsay matters

and of common talk, not so.  Ask me Sir Oliver - ay, or Carter, if

ye will; not me."



And Hatch set off to make the rounds, leaving Dick in a muse.



"Wherefore would he not tell me?" thought the lad.  "And wherefore

named he Carter?  Carter - nay, then Carter had a hand in it,

perchance."



He entered the house, and passing some little way along a flagged

and vaulted passage, came to the door of the cell where the hurt

man lay groaning.  At his entrance Carter started eagerly.



"Have ye brought the priest?" he cried.



"Not yet awhile," returned Dick.  "Y' 'ave a word to tell me first.

How came my father, Harry Shelton, by his death?"



The man's face altered instantly.



"I know not," he replied, doggedly.



"Nay, ye know well," returned Dick.  "Seek not to put me by."



"I tell you I know not," repeated Carter.



"Then," said Dick, "ye shall die unshriven.  Here am I, and here

shall stay.  There shall no priest come near you, rest assured.

For of what avail is penitence, an ye have no mind to right those

wrongs ye had a hand in? and without penitence, confession is but

mockery."



"Ye say what ye mean not, Master Dick," said Carter, composedly.

"It is ill threatening the dying, and becometh you (to speak truth)

little.  And for as little as it commends you, it shall serve you

less.  Stay, an ye please.  Ye will condemn my soul - ye shall

learn nothing!  There is my last word to you."  And the wounded man

turned upon the other side.



Now, Dick, to say truth, had spoken hastily, and was ashamed of his

threat.  But he made one more effort.



"Carter," he said, "mistake me not.  I know ye were but an

instrument in the hands of others; a churl must obey his lord; I

would not bear heavily on such an one.  But I begin to learn upon

many sides that this great duty lieth on my youth and ignorance, to

avenge my father.  Prithee, then, good Carter, set aside the memory

of my threatenings, and in pure goodwill and honest penitence give

me a word of help."



The wounded man lay silent; nor, say what Dick pleased, could he

extract another word from him.



"Well," said Dick, "I will go call the priest to you as ye desired;

for howsoever ye be in fault to me or mine, I would not be

willingly in fault to any, least of all to one upon the last

change."



Again the old soldier heard him without speech or motion; even his

groans he had suppressed; and as Dick turned and left the room, he

was filled with admiration for that rugged fortitude.



"And yet," he thought, "of what use is courage without wit?  Had

his hands been clean, he would have spoken; his silence did confess

the secret louder than words.  Nay, upon all sides, proof floweth

on me.  Sir Daniel, he or his men, hath done this thing."



Dick paused in the stone passage with a heavy heart.  At that hour,

in the ebb of Sir Daniel's fortune, when he was beleaguered by the

archers of the Black Arrow and proscribed by the victorious

Yorkists, was Dick, also, to turn upon the man who had nourished

and taught him, who had severely punished, indeed, but yet

unwearyingly protected his youth?  The necessity, if it should

prove to be one, was cruel.



"Pray Heaven he be innocent!" he said.



And then steps sounded on the flagging, and Sir Oliver came gravely

towards the lad.



"One seeketh you earnestly," said Dick.



"I am upon the way, good Richard," said the priest.  "It is this

poor Carter.  Alack, he is beyond cure."



"And yet his soul is sicker than his body," answered Dick.



"Have ye seen him?" asked Sir Oliver, with a manifest start.



"I do but come from him," replied Dick.



"What said he? what said he?" snapped the priest, with

extraordinary eagerness.



"He but cried for you the more piteously, Sir Oliver.  It were well

done to go the faster, for his hurt is grievous," returned the lad.



"I am straight for him," was the reply.  "Well, we have all our

sins.  We must all come to our latter day, good Richard."



"Ay, sir; and it were well if we all came fairly," answered Dick.



The priest dropped his eyes, and with an inaudible benediction

hurried on.



"He, too!" thought Dick - "he, that taught me in piety!  Nay, then,

what a world is this, if all that care for me be blood-guilty of my

father's death?  Vengeance!  Alas! what a sore fate is mine, if I

must be avenged upon my friends!"



The thought put Matcham in his head.  He smiled at the remembrance

of his strange companion, and then wondered where he was.  Ever

since they had come together to the doors of the Moat House the

younger lad had disappeared, and Dick began to weary for a word

with him.



About an hour after, mass being somewhat hastily run through by Sir

Oliver, the company gathered in the hall for dinner.  It was a

long, low apartment, strewn with green rushes, and the walls hung

with arras in a design of savage men and questing bloodhounds; here

and there hung spears and bows and bucklers; a fire blazed in the

big chimney; there were arras-covered benches round the wall, and

in the midst the table, fairly spread, awaited the arrival of the

diners.  Neither Sir Daniel nor his lady made their appearance.

Sir Oliver himself was absent, and here again there was no word of

Matcham.  Dick began to grow alarmed, to recall his companion's

melancholy forebodings, and to wonder to himself if any foul play

had befallen him in that house.



After dinner he found Goody Hatch, who was hurrying to my Lady

Brackley.



"Goody," he said, "where is Master Matcham, I prithee?  I saw ye go

in with him when we arrived."



The old woman laughed aloud.



"Ah, Master Dick," she said, "y' have a famous bright eye in your

head, to be sure!" and laughed again.



"Nay, but where is he, indeed?" persisted Dick.



"Ye will never see him more," she returned - "never.  It is sure."



"An I do not," returned the lad, "I will know the reason why.  He

came not hither of his full free will; such as I am, I am his best

protector, and I will see him justly used.  There be too many

mysteries; I do begin to weary of the game!"



But as Dick was speaking, a heavy hand fell on his shoulder.  It

was Bennet Hatch that had come unperceived behind him.  With a jerk

of his thumb, the retainer dismissed his wife.



"Friend Dick," he said, as soon as they were alone, "are ye a moon-

struck natural?  An ye leave not certain things in peace, ye were

better in the salt sea than here in Tunstall Moat House.  Y' have

questioned me; y' have baited Carter; y' have frighted the Jack-

priest with hints.  Bear ye more wisely, fool; and even now, when

Sir Daniel calleth you, show me a smooth face for the love of

wisdom.  Y' are to be sharply questioned.  Look to your answers."



"Hatch," returned Dick, "in all this I smell a guilty conscience."



"An ye go not the wiser, ye will soon smell blood," replied Bennet.

"I do but warn you.  And here cometh one to call you."



And indeed, at that very moment, a messenger came across the court

to summon Dick into the presence of Sir Daniel.

