




CHAPTER XXIX

Brussels



Mr. Jos had hired a pair of horses for his open carriage,

with which cattle, and the smart London vehicle, he made

a very tolerable figure in the drives about Brussels.

George purchased a horse for his private riding, and

he and Captain Dobbin would often accompany the

carriage in which Jos and his sister took daily excursions

of pleasure.  They went out that day in the park for their

accustomed diversion, and there, sure enough, George's

remark with regard to the arrival of Rawdon Crawley and

his wife proved to be correct.  In the midst of a little

troop of horsemen, consisting of some of the very greatest

persons in Brussels, Rebecca was seen in the prettiest

and tightest of riding-habits, mounted on a beautiful

little Arab, which she rode to perfection (having acquired

the art at Queen's Crawley, where the Baronet, Mr.

Pitt, and Rawdon himself had given her many lessons),

and by the side of the gallant General Tufto.



"Sure it's the Juke himself," cried Mrs. Major O'Dowd

to Jos, who began to blush violently; "and that's Lord

Uxbridge on the bay.  How elegant he looks!  Me brother,

Molloy Malony, is as like him as two pays."



Rebecca did not make for the carriage; but as soon

as she perceived her old acquaintance Amelia seated in

it, acknowledged her presence by a gracious nod and

smile, and by kissing and shaking her fingers playfully

in the direction of the vehicle.  Then she resumed her

conversation with General Tufto, who asked "who the

fat officer was in the gold-laced cap?" on which Becky

replied, "that he was an officer in the East Indian service."

But Rawdon Crawley rode out of the ranks of his

company, and came up and shook hands heartily with

Amelia, and said to Jos, "Well, old boy, how are you?"

and stared in Mrs. O'Dowd's face and at.the black cock's

feathers until she began to think she had made a

conquest of him.



George, who had been delayed behind, rode up almost

immediately with Dobbin, and they touched their caps to

the august personages, among whom Osborne at once

perceived Mrs. Crawley.  He was delighted to see Rawdon

leaning over his carriage familiarly and talking to Amelia,

and met the aide-de-camp's cordial greeting with more

than corresponding warmth.  The nods between Rawdon

and Dobbin were of the very faintest specimens of

politeness.



Crawley told George where they were stopping with

General Tufto at the Hotel du Parc, and George made

his friend promise to come speedily to Osborne's own

residence.  "Sorry I hadn't seen you three days ago,"

George said.  "Had a dinner at the Restaurateur's--rather a

nice thing.  Lord Bareacres, and the Countess, and Lady

Blanche, were good enough to dine with us--wish we'd

had you." Having thus let his friend know his claims to be

a man of fashion, Osborne parted from Rawdon, who

followed the august squadron down an alley into which

they cantered, while George and Dobbin resumed their

places, one on each side of Amelia's carriage.



"How well the Juke looked," Mrs. O'Dowd remarked.

"The Wellesleys and Malonys are related; but, of course,

poor I would never dream of introjuicing myself unless

his Grace thought proper to remember our family-tie."



"He's a great soldier," Jos said, much more at ease

now the great man was gone.  "Was there ever a battle

won like Salamanca?  Hey, Dobbin?  But where was it he

learnt his art?  In India, my boy!  The jungle's the school

for a general, mark me that.  I knew him myself, too,

Mrs. O'Dowd:  we both of us danced the same evening

with Miss Cutler, daughter of Cutler of the Artillery, and

a devilish fine girl, at Dumdum."



The apparition of the great personages held them

all in talk during the drive; and at dinner; and until the

hour came when they were all to go to the Opera.



It was almost like Old England.  The house was filled

with familiar British faces, and those toilettes for which

the British female has long been celebrated.  Mrs.

O'Dowd's was not the least splendid amongst these, and

she had a curl on her forehead, and a set of Irish diamonds

and Cairngorms, which outshone all the decorations

in the house, in her notion.  Her presence used to

excruciate Osborne; but go she would upon all parties of

pleasure on which she heard her young friends were bent.

It never entered into her thought but that they must be

charmed with her company.



"She's been useful to you, my dear," George said to

his wife, whom he could leave alone with less scruple

when she had this society.  "But what a comfort it is that

Rebecca's come:  you will have her for a friend, and we

may get rid now of this damn'd Irishwoman."  To this

Amelia did not answer, yes or no:  and how do we know

what her thoughts were?



The coup d'oeil of the Brussels opera-house did not

strike Mrs. O'Dowd as being so fine as the theatre in

Fishamble Street, Dublin, nor was French music at all

equal, in her opinion, to the melodies of her native country.

She favoured her friends with these and other opinions

in a very loud tone of voice, and tossed about a

great clattering fan she sported, with the most splendid

complacency.



"Who is that wonderful woman with Amelia, Rawdon,

love?" said a lady in an opposite box (who, almost always

civil to her husband in private, was more fond than

ever of him in company).



"Don't you see that creature with a yellow thing in

her turban, and a red satin gown, and a great watch?"



"Near the pretty little woman in white?" asked a

middle-aged gentleman seated by the querist's side, with

orders in his button, and several under-waistcoats, and

a great, choky, white stock.



"That pretty woman in white is Amelia, General:  you

are remarking all the pretty women, you naughty man."



"Only one, begad, in the world!" said the General, delighted,

and the lady gave him a tap with a large bouquet

which she had.



"Bedad it's him," said Mrs. O'Dowd; "and that's the

very bokay he bought in the Marshy aux Flures!" and

when Rebecca, having caught her friend's eye, performed

the little hand-kissing operation once more, Mrs. Major

O'D., taking the compliment to herself, returned the salute

with a gracious smile, which sent that unfortunate

Dobbin shrieking out of the box again.



At the end of the act, George was out of the box in a

moment, and he was even going to pay his respects to

Rebecca in her loge.  He met Crawley in the lobby, however,

where they exchanged a few sentences upon the

occurrences of the last fortnight.



"You found my cheque all right at the agent's?

George said, with a knowing air.



"All right, my boy," Rawdon answered.  "Happy to give

you your revenge.  Governor come round?"



"Not yet," said George, "but he will; and you know I've

some private fortune through my mother.  Has Aunty

relented?"



"Sent me twenty pound, damned old screw.  When shall

we have a meet?  The General dines out on Tuesday.

Can't you come Tuesday?  I say, make Sedley cut off his

moustache.  What the devil does a civilian mean with a

moustache and those infernal frogs to his coat!  By-bye.

Try and come on Tuesday"; and Rawdon was going-off

with two brilliant young gentlemen of fashion, who were,

like himself, on the staff of a general officer.



George was only half pleased to be asked to dinner on

that particular day when the General was not to dine.  "I

will go in and pay my respects to your wife," said he; at

which Rawdon said, "Hm, as you please," looking very

glum, and at which the two young officers exchanged

knowing glances.  George parted from them and strutted

down the lobby to the General's box, the number of which

he had carefully counted.



"Entrez," said a clear little voice, and our friend found

himself in Rebecca's presence; who jumped up, clapped

her hands together, and held out both of them to George,

so charmed was she to see him.  The General, with the

orders in his button, stared at the newcomer with a sulky

scowl, as much as to say, who the devil are you?



"My dear Captain George!" cried little Rebecca in an

ecstasy.  "How good of you to come.  The General and I

were moping together tete-a-tete.  General, this is my

Captain George of whom you heard me talk."



"Indeed," said the General, with a very small bow; "of

what regiment is Captain George?"



George mentioned the --th:  how he wished he could

have said it was a crack cavalry corps.



"Come home lately from the West Indies, I believe.

Not seen much service in the late war.  Quartered here,

Captain George?"--the General went on with killing

haughtiness.



"Not Captain George, you stupid man; Captain Osborne,"

Rebecca said.  The General all the while was looking

savagely from one to the other.



"Captain Osborne, indeed! Any relation to the L--

Osbornes?"



"We bear the same arms," George said, as indeed was

the fact; Mr. Osborne having consulted with a herald in

Long Acre, and picked the L-- arms out of the peerage,

when he set up his carriage fifteen years before.  The

General made no reply to this announcement; but took

up his opera-glass--the double-barrelled lorgnon was not

invented in those days--and pretended to examine the

house; but Rebecca saw that his disengaged eye was

working round in her direction, and shooting out

bloodshot glances at her and George.



She redoubled in cordiality.  "How is dearest Amelia?

But I needn't ask: how pretty she looks!  And who is that

nice good-natured looking creature with her--a flame of

yours?  O, you wicked men!  And there is Mr. Sedley

eating ice, I declare: how he seems to enjoy it!  General, why

have we not had any ices?"



"Shall I go and fetch you some?" said the General,

bursting with wrath.



"Let ME go, I entreat you," George said.



"No, I will go to Amelia's box.  Dear, sweet girl!  Give

me your arm, Captain George"; and so saying, and with a

nod to the General, she tripped into the lobby.  She gave

George the queerest, knowingest look, when they were

together, a look which might have been interpreted,

"Don't you see the state of affairs, and what a fool I'm

making of him?"  But he did not perceive it.  He was

thinking of his own plans, and lost in pompous admiration

of his own irresistible powers of pleasing.



The curses to which the General gave a low utterance,

as soon as Rebecca and her conqueror had quitted him,

were so deep, that I am sure no compositor would

venture to print them were they written down.  They came

from the General's heart; and a wonderful thing it is to

think that the human heart is capable of generating such

produce, and can throw out, as occasion demands, such

a supply of lust and fury, rage and hatred.



Amelia's gentle eyes, too, had been fixed anxiously on

the pair, whose conduct had so chafed the jealous General;

but when Rebecca entered her box, she flew to her

friend with an affectionate rapture which showed itself, in

spite of the publicity of the place; for she embraced her

dearest friend in the presence of the whole house, at least

in full view of the General's glass, now brought to bear

upon the Osborne party.  Mrs. Rawdon saluted Jos, too,

with the kindliest greeting: she admired Mrs. O'Dowd's

large Cairngorm brooch and superb Irish diamonds, and

wouldn't believe that they were not from Golconda direct.

She bustled, she chattered, she turned and twisted,

and smiled upon one, and smirked on another, all in full

view of the jealous opera-glass opposite.  And when the

time for the ballet came (in which there was no dancer

that went through her grimaces or performed her comedy

of action better), she skipped back to her own box, leaning

on Captain Dobbin's arm this time.  No, she would

not have George's: he must stay and talk to his dearest,

best, little Amelia.



"What a humbug that woman is!" honest old Dobbin

mumbled to George, when he came back from Rebecca's

box, whither he had conducted her in perfect silence, and

with a countenance as glum as an undertaker's.  "She

writhes and twists about like a snake.  All the time she

was here, didn't you see, George, how she was acting at

the General over the way?"



"Humbug--acting!  Hang it, she's the nicest little

woman in England," George replied, showing his white

teeth, and giving his ambrosial whiskers a twirl.  "You

ain't a man of the world, Dobbin.  Dammy, look at her

now, she's talked over Tufto in no time.  Look how he's

laughing!  Gad, what a shoulder she has!  Emmy, why

didn't you have a bouquet?  Everybody has a bouquet."



"Faith, then, why didn't you BOY one?" Mrs. O'Dowd

said; and both Amelia and William Dobbin thanked her

for this timely observation.  But beyond this neither of

the ladies rallied.  Amelia was overpowered by the flash

and the dazzle and the fashionable talk of her worldly rival.

Even the O'Dowd was silent and subdued after Becky's

brilliant apparition, and scarcely said a word more about

Glenmalony all the evening.



"When do you intend to give up play, George, as you

have promised me, any time these hundred years?" Dobbin

said to his friend a few days after the night at the

Opera.  "When do you intend to give up sermonising?"

was the other's reply.  "What the deuce, man, are you

alarmed about?  We play low; I won last night.  You

don't suppose Crawley cheats?  With fair play it comes

to pretty much the same thing at the year's end."



"But I don't think he could pay if he lost," Dobbin

said; and his advice met with the success which advice

usually commands.  Osborne and Crawley were repeatedly

together now.  General Tufto dined abroad almost constantly.

George was always welcome in the apartments

(very close indeed to those of the General) which the

aide-de-camp and his wife occupied in the hotel.



Amelia's manners were such when she and George visited

Crawley and his wife at these quarters, that they had

very nearly come to their first quarrel; that is, George

scolded his wife violently for her evident unwillingness to

go, and the high and mighty manner in which she comported

herself towards Mrs. Crawley, her old friend; and

Amelia did not say one single word in reply; but with her

husband's eye upon her, and Rebecca scanning her as she

felt, was, if possible, more bashful and awkward on the

second visit which she paid to Mrs. Rawdon, than on her

first call.



Rebecca was doubly affectionate, of course, and would

not take notice, in the least, of her friend's coolness.  "I

think Emmy has become prouder since her father's name

was in the--since Mr. Sedley's MISFORTUNES," Rebecca

said, softening the phrase charitably for George's ear.



"Upon my word, I thought when we were at Brighton

she was doing me the honour to be jealous of me; and

now I suppose she is scandalised because Rawdon, and I,

and the General live together.  Why, my dear creature,

how could we, with our means, live at all, but for a friend

to share expenses?  And do you suppose that Rawdon is

not big enough to take care of my honour?  But I'm very

much obliged to Emmy, very," Mrs. Rawdon said.



"Pooh, jealousy!" answered George, "all women are

jealous."



"And all men too.  Weren't you jealous of General

Tufto, and the General of you, on the night of the Opera?

Why, he was ready to eat me for going with you to visit

that foolish little wife of yours; as if I care a pin for

either of you," Crawley's wife said, with a pert toss of

her head.  "Will you dine here?  The dragon dines with the

Commander-in-Chief.  Great news is stirring.  They say

the French have crossed the frontier.  We shall have a

quiet dinner."



George accepted the invitation, although his wife was a

little ailing.  They were now not quite six weeks married.

Another woman was laughing or sneering at her expense,

and he not angry.  He was not even angry with himself,

this good-natured fellow.  It is a shame, he owned to himself;

but hang it, if a pretty woman WILL throw herself in

your way, why, what can a fellow do, you know?  I AM

rather free about women, he had often said, smiling and

nodding knowingly to Stubble and Spooney, and other

comrades of the mess-table; and they rather respected

him than otherwise for this prowess.  Next to conquering

in war, conquering in love has been a source of pride,

time out of mind, amongst men in Vanity Fair, or how

should schoolboys brag of their amours, or Don Juan be

popular?



So Mr. Osborne, having a firm conviction in his own

mind that he was a woman-killer and destined to conquer,

did not run counter to his fate, but yielded himself

up to it quite complacently.  And as Emmy did not say

much or plague him with her jealousy, but merely became

unhappy and pined over it miserably in secret, he chose

to fancy that she was not suspicious of what all his

acquaintance were perfectly aware--namely, that he was

carrying on a desperate flirtation with Mrs. Crawley.  He

rode with her whenever she was free.  He pretended

regimental business to Amelia (by which falsehood she was

not in the least deceived), and consigning his wife to

solitude or her brother's society, passed his evenings in

the Crawleys' company; losing money to the husband and

flattering himself that the wife was dying of love for him.

It is very likely that this worthy couple never absolutely

conspired and agreed together in so many words:  the one

to cajole the young gentleman, whilst the other won his

money at cards: but they understood each other perfectly

well, and Rawdon let Osborne come and go with entire

good humour.



George was so occupied with his new acquaintances

that he and William Dobbin were by no means so much

together as formerly.  George avoided him in public and

in the regiment, and, as we see, did not like those

sermons which his senior was disposed to inflict upon him.

If some parts of his conduct made Captain Dobbin

exceedingly grave and cool; of what use was it to tell George

that, though his whiskers were large, and his own

opinion of his knowingness great, he was as green as a

schoolboy? that Rawdon was making a victim of him as he had

done of many before, and as soon as he had used him

would fling him off with scorn?  He would not listen:  and

so, as Dobbin, upon those days when he visited the

0sborne house, seldom had the advantage of meeting his

old friend, much painful and unavailing talk between

them was spared.  Our friend George was in the full career

of the pleasures of Vanity Fair.



There never was, since the days of Darius, such a brilliant

train of camp-followers as hung round the Duke of

Wellington's army in the Low Countries, in 1815; and

led it dancing and feasting, as it were, up to the very

brink of battle.  A certain ball which a noble Duchess

gave at Brussels on the 15th of June in the above-named

year is historical.  All Brussels had been in a state of

excitement about it, and I have heard from ladies who

were in that town at the period, that the talk and interest

of persons of their own sex regarding the ball was much

greater even than in respect of the enemy in their front.

The struggles, intrigues, and prayers to get tickets were

such as only English ladies will employ, in order to gain

admission to the society of the great of their own nation.



Jos and Mrs. O'Dowd, who were panting to be asked,

strove in vain to procure tickets; but others of our friends

were more lucky.  For instance, through the interest of

my Lord Bareacres, and as a set-off for the dinner at the

restaurateur's, George got a card for Captain and Mrs.

Osborne; which circumstance greatly elated him.  Dobbin,

who was a friend of the General commanding the division

in which their regiment was, came laughing one

day to Mrs. Osborne, and displayed a similar invitation,

which made Jos envious, and George wonder how the

deuce he should be getting into society.  Mr. and Mrs.

Rawdon, finally, were of course invited; as became the

friends of a General commanding a cavalry brigade.



On the appointed night, George, having commanded

new dresses and ornaments of all sorts for Amelia, drove

to the famous ball, where his wife did not know a single

soul.  After looking about for Lady Bareacres, who cut

him, thinking the card was quite enough--and after

placing Amelia on a bench, he left her to her own

cogitations there, thinking, on his own part, that he had

behaved very handsomely in getting her new clothes, and

bringing her to the ball, where she was free to amuse

herself as she liked.  Her thoughts were not of the

pleasantest, and nobody except honest Dobbin came to

disturb them.



Whilst her appearance was an utter failure (as her

husband felt with a sort of rage), Mrs. Rawdon Crawley's

debut was, on the contrary, very brilliant.  She arrived

very late.  Her face was radiant; her dress perfection.  In

the midst of the great persons assembled, and the eye-

glasses directed to her, Rebecca seemed to be as cool

and collected as when she used to marshal Miss Pinkerton's

little girls to church.  Numbers of the men she knew

already, and the dandies thronged round her.  As for the

ladies, it was whispered among them that Rawdon had

run away with her from out of a convent, and that she

was a relation of the Montmorency family.  She spoke

French so perfectly that there might be some truth in

this report, and it was agreed that her manners were

fine, and her air distingue.  Fifty would-be partners

thronged round her at once, and pressed to have the

honour to dance with her.  But she said she was engaged,

and only going to dance very little; and made her way at

once to the place where Emmy sate quite unnoticed, and

dismally unhappy.  And so, to finish the poor child at

once, Mrs. Rawdon ran and greeted affectionately her

dearest Amelia, and began forthwith to patronise her.

She found fault with her friend's dress, and her

hairdresser, and wondered how she could be so chaussee,

and vowed that she must send her corsetiere the next

morning.  She vowed that it was a delightful ball; that

there was everybody that every one knew, and only a

VERY few nobodies in the whole room.  It is a fact, that

in a fortnight, and after three dinners in general society,

this young woman had got up the genteel jargon so well,

that a native could not speak it better; and it was only

from her French being so good, that you could know she

was not a born woman of fashion.



George, who had left Emmy on her bench on entering

the ball-room, very soon found his way back when

Rebecca was by her dear friend's side.  Becky was just

lecturing Mrs. Osborne upon the follies which her

husband was committing.  "For God's sake, stop him from

gambling, my dear," she said, "or he will ruin himself.

He and Rawdon are playing at cards every night, and you

know he is very poor, and Rawdon will win every shilling

from him if he does not take care.  Why don't you prevent

him, you little careless creature?  Why don't you

come to us of an evening, instead of moping at home

with that Captain Dobbin?  I dare say he is tres aimable;

but how could one love a man with feet of such size?

Your husband's feet are darlings--Here he comes.  Where

have you been, wretch?  Here is Emmy crying her eyes

out for you.  Are you coming to fetch me for the quadrille?"

And she left her bouquet and shawl by Amelia's

side, and tripped off with George to dance.  Women only

know how to wound so.  There is a poison on the tips of

their little shafts, which stings a thousand times more

than a man's blunter weapon.  Our poor Emmy, who had

never hated, never sneered all her life, was powerless in

the hands of her remorseless little enemy.



George danced with Rebecca twice or thrice--how many

times Amelia scarcely knew.  She sat quite unnoticed in

her corner, except when Rawdon came up with some

words of clumsy conversation:  and later in the evening,

when Captain Dobbin made so bold as to bring her

refreshments and sit beside her.  He did not like to ask her

why she was so sad; but as a pretext for the tears which

were filling in her eyes, she told him that Mrs. Crawley

had alarmed her by telling her that George would go on

playing.



"It is curious, when a man is bent upon play, by what

clumsy rogues he will allow himself to be cheated,"

Dobbin said; and Emmy said, "Indeed." She was thinking of

something else.  It was not the loss of the money that

grieved her.



At last George came back for Rebecca's shawl and

flowers.  She was going away.  She did not even

condescend to come back and say good-bye to Amelia.  The

poor girl let her husband come and go without saying a

word, and her head fell on her breast.  Dobbin had been

called away, and was whispering deep in conversation

with the General of the division, his friend, and had not

seen this last parting.  George went away then with the

bouquet; but when he gave it to the owner, there lay a

note, coiled like a snake among the flowers.  Rebecca's

eye caught it at once.  She had been used to deal with

notes in early life.  She put out her hand and took the

nosegay.  He saw by her eyes as they met, that she was

aware what she should find there.  Her husband hurried her

away, still too intent upon his own thoughts, seemingly,

to take note of any marks of recognition which might

pass between his friend and his wife.  These were,

however, but trifling.  Rebecca gave George her hand with one

of her usual quick knowing glances, and made a curtsey

and walked away.  George bowed over the hand, said

nothing in reply to a remark of Crawley's, did not hear it

even, his brain was so throbbing with triumph and

excitement, and allowed them to go away without a word.



His wife saw the one part at least of the bouquet-scene.

It was quite natural that George should come at Rebecca's

request to get her her scarf and flowers:  it was no

more than he had done twenty times before in the course

of the last few days; but now it was too much for her.

"William," she said, suddenly clinging to Dobbin, who was

near her, "you've always been very kind to me--I'm--

I'm not well.  Take me home."  She did not know she called

him by his Christian name, as George was accustomed to

do.  He went away with her quickly.  Her lodgings were

hard by; and they threaded through the crowd without,

where everything seemed to be more astir than even in the

ball-room within.



George had been angry twice or thrice at finding his

wife up on his return from the parties which he

frequented:  so she went straight to bed now; but although

she did not sleep, and although the din and clatter, and

the galloping of horsemen were incessant, she never heard

any of these noises, having quite other disturbances to

keep her awake.



Osborne meanwhile, wild with elation, went off to a

play-table, and began to bet frantically.  He won repeatedly.
 "Everything succeeds with me to-night," he said.

But his luck at play even did not cure him of his restlessness,

and he started up after awhile, pocketing his winnings,

and went to a buffet, where he drank off many

bumpers of wine.



Here, as he was rattling away to the people around,

laughing loudly and wild with spirits, Dobbin found him.

He had been to the card-tables to look there for his

friend.  Dobbin looked as pale and grave as his comrade

was flushed and jovial.



''Hullo, Dob!  Come and drink, old Dob!  The Duke's

wine is famous.  Give me some more, you sir"; and he

held out a trembling glass for the liquor.



"Come out, George," said Dobbin, still gravely; "don't

drink."



"Drink!  there's nothing like it.  Drink yourself, and

light up your lantern jaws, old boy.  Here's to you."



Dobbin went up and whispered something to him, at

which George, giving a start and a wild hurray, tossed off

his glass, clapped it on the table, and walked away

speedily on his friend's arm.  "The enemy has passed the

Sambre," William said, "and our left is already engaged.

Come away.  We are to march in three hours."



Away went George, his nerves quivering with excitement

at the news so long looked for, so sudden when it

came.  What were love and intrigue now?  He thought

about a thousand things but these in his rapid walk to his

quarters--his past life and future chances--the fate which

might be before him--the wife, the child perhaps, from

whom unseen he might be about to part.  Oh, how he

wished that night's work undone!  and that with a clear

conscience at least he might say farewell to the tender

and guileless being by whose love he had set such little

store!



He thought over his brief married life.  In those few

weeks he had frightfully dissipated his little capital.  How

wild and reckless he had been!  Should any mischance

befall him:  what was then left for her?  How unworthy he

was of her.  Why had he married her?  He was not fit for

marriage.  Why had he disobeyed his father, who had been

always so generous to him?  Hope, remorse, ambition,

tenderness, and selfish regret filled his heart.  He sate

down and wrote to his father, remembering what he had

said once before, when he was engaged to fight a duel.

Dawn faintly streaked the sky as he closed this farewell

letter.  He sealed it, and kissed the superscription.  He

thought how he had deserted that generous father, and of

the thousand kindnesses which the stern old man had

done him.



He had looked into Amelia's bedroom when he entered;

she lay quiet, and her eyes seemed closed, and he

was glad that she was asleep.  On arriving at his quarters

from the ball, he had found his regimental servant already

making preparations for his departure:  the man

had understood his signal to be still, and these arrangements

were very quickly and silently made.  Should he go

in and wake Amelia, he thought, or leave a note for her

brother to break the news of departure to her?  He went

in to look at her once again.



She had been awake when he first entered her room,

but had kept her eyes closed, so that even her wakefulness

should not seem to reproach him.  But when he had

returned, so soon after herself, too, this timid little heart

had felt more at ease, and turning towards him as he

stept softly out of the room, she had fallen into a light

sleep.  George came in and looked at her again, entering

still more softly.  By the pale night-lamp he could see her

sweet, pale face--the purple eyelids were fringed and

closed, and one round arm, smooth and white, lay outside

of the coverlet.  Good God!  how pure she was; how

gentle, how tender, and how friendless!  and he, how

selfish, brutal, and black with crime!  Heart-stained, and

shame-stricken, he stood at the bed's foot, and looked at

the sleeping girl.  How dared he--who was he, to pray for

one so spotless!  God bless her!  God bless her!  He came to

the bedside, and looked at the hand, the little soft hand,

lying asleep; and he bent over the pillow noiselessly

towards the gentle pale face.



Two fair arms closed tenderly round his neck as he

stooped down.  "I am awake, George," the poor child said,

with a sob fit to break the little heart that nestled so

closely by his own.  She was awake, poor soul, and to

railings and the beadle: who, if she walked ever so short

a distance to buy a ribbon in Southampton Row, was

followed by Black Sambo with an enormous cane: who

was always cared for, dressed, put to bed, and watched

over by ever so many guardian angels, with and without

wages?  Bon Dieu, I say, is it not hard that the fateful

rush of the great Imperial struggle can't take place without

affecting a poor little harmless girl of eighteen, who

is occupied in billing and cooing, or working muslin

collars in Russell Square?  You too, kindly, homely flower!

--is the great roaring war tempest coming to sweep you

down, here, although cowering under the shelter of

Holborn?  Yes; Napoleon is flinging his last stake, and poor

little Emmy Sedley's happiness forms, somehow, part of it.

  

In the first place, her father's fortune was swept down

with that fatal news.  All his speculations had of late gone

wrong with the luckless old gentleman.  Ventures had

failed; merchants had broken; funds had risen when he

calculated they would fall.  What need to particularize?

If success is rare and slow, everybody knows how quick

and easy ruin is.  Old Sedley had kept his own sad counsel.

Everything seemed to go on as usual in the quiet,

opulent house; the good-natured mistress pursuing, quite

unsuspiciously, her bustling idleness, and daily easy

avocations; the daughter absorbed still in one selfish, tender

thought, and quite regardless of all the world besides,

when that final crash came, under which the worthy

family fell.

  

One night Mrs. Sedley was writing cards for a party;

the Osbornes had given one, and she must not be

behindhand; John Sedley, who had come home very late from

the City, sate silent at the chimney side, while his wife

was prattling to him; Emmy had gone up to her room

ailing and low-spirited.  "She's not happy," the mother

went on.  "George Osborne neglects her.  I've no patience

with the airs of those people.  The girls have not been in

the house these three weeks; and George has been twice

in town without coming.  Edward Dale saw him at the

Opera.  Edward would marry her I'm sure: and there's

Captain Dobbin who, I think, would--only I hate all

army men.  Such a dandy as George has become.  With

his military airs, indeed!  We must show some folks that

we're as good as they.  Only give Edward Dale any

encouragement, and you'll see.  We must have a party, Mr.

S.  Why don't you speak, John?  Shall I say Tuesday fortnight?

Why don't you answer? Good God, John, what has happened?"

  

John Sedley sprang up out of his chair to meet his

wife, who ran to him.  He seized her in his arms, and

said with a hasty voice, "We're ruined, Mary.  We've

got the world to begin over again, dear.  It's best that you

should know all, and at once."  As he spoke, he trembled

in every limb, and almost fell.  He thought the news would

have overpowered his wife--his wife, to whom he had

never said a hard word.  But it was he that was the most

moved, sudden as the shock was to her.  When he sank

back into his seat, it was the wife that took the office of

consoler.  She took his trembling hand, and kissed it, and

put it round her neck: she called him her John--her dear

John--her old man--her kind old man; she poured out a

hundred words of incoherent love and tenderness; her

faithful voice and simple caresses wrought this sad heart

up to an inexpressible delight and anguish, and cheered

and solaced his over-burdened soul.

  

Only once in the course of the long night as they sate

together, and poor Sedley opened his pent-up soul, and

told the story of his losses and embarrassments--the

treason of some of his oldest friends, the manly kindness

of some, from whom he never could have expected it--in

a general confession--only once did the faithful wife give

way to emotion.

  

"My God, my God, it will break Emmy's heart," she

said.

  

The father had forgotten the poor girl.  She was lying,

awake and unhappy, overhead.  In the midst of friends,

home, and kind parents, she was alone.  To how many

people can any one tell all?  Who will be open where there

is no sympathy, or has call to speak to those who never

can understand?  Our gentle Amelia was thus solitary.  She

had no confidante, so to speak, ever since she had anything

to confide.  She could not tell the old mother her

doubts and cares; the would-be sisters seemed every day

more strange to her.  And she had misgivings and fears

which she dared not acknowledge to herself, though she

was always secretly brooding over them.



Her heart tried to persist in asserting that George

Osborne was worthy and faithful to her, though she knew

otherwise.  How many a thing had she said, and got no

echo from him.  How many suspicions of selfishness and

indifference had she to encounter and obstinately

overcome.  To whom could the poor little martyr tell these

daily struggles and tortures?  Her hero himself only half

understood her.  She did not dare to own that the man she

loved was her inferior; or to feel that she had given her

heart away too soon.  Given once, the pure bashful

maiden was too modest, too tender, too trustful, too

weak, too much woman to recall it.  We are Turks with

the affections of our women; and have made them

subscribe to our doctrine too.  We let their bodies go abroad

liberally enough, with smiles and ringlets and pink

bonnets to disguise them instead of veils and yakmaks.  But

their souls must be seen by only one man, and they obey

not unwillingly, and consent to remain at home as our

slaves--ministering to us and doing drudgery for us.



So imprisoned and tortured was this gentle little heart,

when in the month of March, Anno Domini 1815,

Napoleon landed at Cannes, and Louis XVIII fled, and all

Europe was in alarm, and the funds fell, and old John

Sedley was ruined.



We are not going to follow the worthy old stockbroker

through those last pangs and agonies of ruin through

which he passed before his commercial demise befell.

They declared him at the Stock Exchange; he was

absent from his house of business: his bills were protested:

his act of bankruptcy formal.  The house and furniture of

Russell Square were seized and sold up, and he and his

family were thrust away, as we have seen, to hide their

heads where they might.



John Sedley had not the heart to review the domestic

establishment who have appeared now and anon in our

pages and of whom he was now forced by poverty to

take leave.  The wages of those worthy people were

discharged with that punctuality which men frequently show

who only owe in great sums--they were sorry to leave

good places--but they did not break their hearts at parting

from their adored master and mistress.  Amelia's maid

was profuse in condolences, but went off quite resigned

to better herself in a genteeler quarter of the town.  Black

Sambo, with the infatuation of his profession, determined

on setting up a public-house.  Honest old Mrs. Blenkinsop

indeed, who had seen the birth of Jos and Amelia, and

the wooing of John Sedley and his wife, was for staying

by them without wages, having amassed a considerable

sum in their service: and she accompanied the fallen

people into their new and humble place of refuge, where

she tended them and grumbled against them for a while.



Of all Sedley's opponents in his debates with his creditors

which now ensued, and harassed the feelings of the

humiliated old gentleman so severely, that in six weeks he

oldened more than he had done for fifteen years before--

the most determined and obstinate seemed to be John

Osborne, his old friend and neighbour--John Osborne,

whom he had set up in life--who was under a hundred

obligations to him--and whose son was to marry Sedley's

daughter.  Any one of these circumstances would account

for the bitterness of Osborne's opposition.



When one man has been under very remarkable

obligations to another, with whom he subsequently quarrels,

a common sense of decency, as it were, makes of the

former a much severer enemy than a mere stranger

would be.  To account for your own hard-heartedness and

ingratitude in such a case, you are bound to prove the

other party's crime.  It is not that you are selfish, brutal,

and angry at the failure of a speculation--no, no--it is

that your partner has led you into it by the basest treachery

and with the most sinister motives.  From a mere

sense of consistency, a persecutor is bound to show that

the fallen man is a villain--otherwise he, the persecutor,

is a wretch himself.



And as a general rule, which may make all creditors

who are inclined to be severe pretty comfortable in their

minds, no men embarrassed are altogether honest, very

likely.  They conceal something; they exaggerate chances

of good luck; hide away the real state of affairs; say that

things are flourishing when they are hopeless, keep a

smiling face (a dreary smile it is) upon the verge of

bankruptcy--are ready to lay hold of any pretext for

delay or of any money, so as to stave off the inevitable

ruin a few days longer.  "Down with such dishonesty,"

says the creditor in triumph, and reviles his sinking

enemy.  "You fool, why do you catch at a straw?" calm

good sense says to the man that is drowning.  "You villain,

why do you shrink from plunging into the irretrievable

Gazette?" says prosperity to the poor devil battling in

that black gulf.  Who has not remarked the readiness with

which the closest of friends and honestest of men suspect

and accuse each other of cheating when they fall out

on money matters? Everybody does it.  Everybody is right,

I suppose, and the world is a rogue.



Then Osborne had the intolerable sense of former

benefits to goad and irritate him: these are always a

cause of hostility aggravated.  Finally, he had to break off

the match between Sedley's daughter and his son; and

as it had gone very far indeed, and as the poor girl's

happiness and perhaps character were compromised, it was

necessary to show the strongest reasons for the rupture,

and for John Osborne to prove John Sedley to be a very

bad character indeed.



At the meetings of creditors, then, he comported himself

with a savageness and scorn towards Sedley, which

almost succeeded in breaking the heart of that ruined

bankrupt man.  On George's intercourse with Amelia he

put an instant veto--menacing the youth with maledictions

if he broke his commands, and vilipending the

poor innocent girl as the basest and most artful of vixens.

One of the great conditions of anger and hatred is, that

you must tell and believe lies against the hated object, in

order, as we said, to be consistent.



When the great crash came--the announcement of

ruin, and the departure from Russell Square, and the

declaration that all was over between her and George--all

over between her and love, her and happiness, her and

faith in the world--a brutal letter from John Osborne

told her in a few curt lines that her father's conduct had

been of such a nature that all engagements between the

families were at an end--when the final award came, it

did not shock her so much as her parents, as her mother

rather expected (for John Sedley himself was entirely

prostrate in the ruins of his own affairs and shattered

honour).  Amelia took the news very palely and calmly.

It was only the confirmation of the dark presages which

had long gone before.  It was the mere reading of the

sentence--of the crime she had long ago been guilty--the

crime of loving wrongly, too violently, against reason.

She told no more of her thoughts now than she had

before.  She seemed scarcely more unhappy now when

convinced all hope was over, than before when she felt but

dared not confess that it was gone.  So she changed from

the large house to the small one without any mark or

difference; remained in her little room for the most part;

pined silently; and died away day by day.  I do not mean

to say that all females are so.  My dear Miss Bullock, I

do not think your heart would break in this way.  You are

a strong-minded young woman with proper principles.

I do not venture to say that mine would; it has suffered,

and, it must be confessed, survived.  But there are some

souls thus gently constituted, thus frail, and delicate, and

tender.



Whenever old John Sedley thought of the affair

between George and Amelia, or alluded to it, it was with

bitterness almost as great as Mr. Osborne himself had

shown.  He cursed Osborne and his family as heartless,

wicked, and ungrateful.  No power on earth, he swore,

would induce him to marry his daughter to the son of

such a villain, and he ordered Emmy to banish George

from her mind, and to return all the presents and letters

which she had ever had from him.



She promised acquiescence, and tried to obey.  She put

up the two or three trinkets: and, as for the letters, she

drew them out of the place.where she kept them; and

read them over--as if she did not know them by heart

already: but she could not part with them.  That effort

was too much for her; she placed them back in her

bosom again--as you have seen a woman nurse a child

that is dead.  Young Amelia felt that she would die or lose

her senses outright, if torn away from this last consolation.

How she used to blush and lighten up when those

letters came!  How she used to trip away with a beating

heart, so that she might read unseen!  If they were cold,

yet how perversely this fond little soul interpreted them

into warmth.  If they were short or selfish, what excuses

she found for the writer!



It was over these few worthless papers that she brooded

and brooded.  She lived in her past life--every letter

seemed to recall some circumstance of it.  How well she

remembered them all!  His looks and tones, his dress,

what he said and how--these relics and remembrances

of dead affection were all that were left her in the world.

And the business of her life, was--to watch the corpse

of Love.



To death she looked with inexpressible longing.  Then,

she thought, I shall always be able to follow him.  I am not

praising her conduct or setting her up as a model for

Miss Bullock to imitate.  Miss B. knows how to regulate

her feelings better than this poor little creature.  Miss B.

would never have committed herself as that imprudent

Amelia had done; pledged her love irretrievably;

confessed her heart away, and got back nothing--only a

brittle promise which was snapt and worthless in a

moment.  A long engagement is a partnership which one

party is free to keep or to break, but which involves all

the capital of the other.



Be cautious then, young ladies; be wary how you

engage.  Be shy of loving frankly; never tell all you feel, or

(a better way still), feel very little.  See the consequences

of being prematurely honest and confiding, and mistrust

yourselves and everybody.  Get yourselves married as they

do in France, where the lawyers are the bridesmaids and

confidantes.  At any rate, never have any feelings which

may make you uncomfortable, or make any promises

which you cannot at any required moment command and

withdraw.  That is the way to get on, and be respected,

and have a virtuous character in Vanity Fair.



If Amelia could have heard the comments regarding

her which were made in the circle from which her father's

ruin had just driven her, she would have seen what her

own crimes were, and how entirely her character was

jeopardised.  Such criminal imprudence Mrs. Smith never

knew of; such horrid familiarities Mrs. Brown had

always condemned, and the end might be a warning to HER

daughters.  "Captain Osborne, of course, could not marry

a bankrupt's daughter," the Misses Dobbin said.  "It was

quite enough to have been swindled by the father.  As for

that little Amelia, her folly had really passed all--"



"All what?" Captain Dobbin roared out.  "Haven't they

been engaged ever since they were children?  Wasn't it

as good as a marriage?  Dare any soul on earth breathe a

word against the sweetest, the purest, the tenderest, the

most angelical of young women?"



"La, William, don't be so highty-tighty with US.  We're

not men.  We can't fight you," Miss Jane said.  "We've said

nothing against Miss Sedley: but that her conduct

throughout was MOST IMPRUDENT, not to call it by any

worse name; and that her parents are people who

certainly merit their misfortunes."



"Hadn't you better, now that Miss Sedley is free,

propose for her yourself, William?" Miss Ann asked

sarcastically.  "It would be a most eligible family

connection.  He!  he!"



"I marry her!" Dobbin said, blushing very much, and

talking quick.  "If you are so ready, young ladies, to chop

and change, do you suppose that she is?  Laugh and sneer

at that angel.  She can't hear it; and she's miserable and

unfortunate, and deserves to be laughed at.  Go on

joking, Ann.  You're the wit of the family, and the others

like to hear it."



"I must tell you again we're not in a barrack, William,"

Miss Ann remarked.



"In a barrack, by Jove--I wish anybody in a barrack

would say what you do," cried out this uproused British

lion.  "I should like to hear a man breathe a word against

her, by Jupiter.  But men don't talk in this way, Ann: it's

only women, who get together and hiss, and shriek, and

cackle.  There, get away--don't begin to cry.  I only said

you were a couple of geese," Will Dobbin said, perceiving

Miss Ann's pink eyes were beginning to moisten as

usual.  "Well, you're not geese, you're swans--anything

you like, only do, do leave Miss Sedley alone."



Anything like William's infatuation about that silly little

flirting, ogling thing was never known, the mamma

and sisters agreed together in thinking: and they trembled

lest, her engagement being off with Osborne, she should

take up immediately her other admirer and Captain.

In which forebodings these worthy young women no

doubt judged according to the best of their experience; or

rather (for as yet they had had no opportunities of

marrying or of jilting) according to their own notions of

right and wrong.



"It is a mercy, Mamma, that the regiment is ordered

abroad," the girls said.  "THIS danger, at any rate, is

spared our brother."



Such, indeed, was the fact; and so it is that the French

Emperor comes in to perform a part in this domestic

comedy of Vanity Fair which we are now playing, and

which would never have been enacted without the

intervention of this august mute personage.  It was he

that ruined the Bourbons and Mr. John Sedley.  It was

he whose arrival in his capital called up all France in

arms to defend him there; and all Europe to oust him.

While the French nation and army were swearing fidelity

round the eagles in the Champ de Mars, four mighty

European hosts were getting in motion for the great

chasse a l'aigle; and one of these was a British army, of

which two heroes of ours, Captain Dobbin and Captain

Osborne, formed a portion.



The news of Napoleon's escape and landing was

received by the gallant --th with a fiery delight and

enthusiasm, which everybody can understand who knows

that famous corps.  From the colonel to the smallest

drummer in the regiment, all were filled with hope and

ambition and patriotic fury; and thanked the French Emperor

as for a personal kindness in coming to disturb the peace

of Europe.  Now was the time the --th had so long

panted for, to show their comrades in arms that they

could fight as well as the Peninsular veterans, and that

all the pluck and valour of the --th had not been killed

by the West Indies and the yellow fever.  Stubble and

Spooney looked to get their companies without purchase.

Before the end of the campaign (which she resolved

to share), Mrs. Major O'Dowd hoped to write

herself Mrs. Colonel O'Dowd, C.B.  Our two friends

(Dobbin and Osborne) were quite as much excited as the

rest: and each in his way--Mr. Dobbin very quietly, Mr.

Osborne very loudly and energetically--was bent upon

doing his duty, and gaining his share of honour and

distinction.



The agitation thrilling through the country and army

in consequence of this news was so great, that private

matters were little heeded: and hence probably George

Osborne, just gazetted to his company, busy with preparations

for the march, which must come inevitably, and

panting for further promotion--was not so much affected

by other incidents which would have interested him at a

more quiet period.  He was not, it must be confessed,

very much cast down by good old Mr. Sedley's catastrophe.

He tried his new uniform, which became him

very handsomely, on the day when the first meeting of

the creditors of the unfortunate gentleman took place.

His father told him of the wicked, rascally, shameful

conduct of the bankrupt, reminded him of what he had

said about Amelia, and that their connection was broken

off for ever; and gave him that evening a good sum of

money to pay for the new clothes and epaulets in which

he looked so well.  Money was always useful to this free-

handed young fellow, and he took it without many words.

The bills were up in the Sedley house, where he had

passed so many, many happy hours.  He could see

them as he walked from home that night (to the Old

Slaughters', where he put up when in town) shining white

in the moon.  That comfortable home was shut, then, upon

Amelia and her parents: where had they taken refuge?

The thought of their ruin affected him not a little.  He

was very melancholy that night in the coffee-room at

the Slaughters'; and drank a good deal, as his comrades

remarked there.



Dobbin came in presently, cautioned him about the

drink, which he only took, he said, because he was

deuced low; but when his friend began to put to him

clumsy inquiries, and asked him for news in a significant

manner, Osborne declined entering into conversation with

him, avowing, however, that he was devilish disturbed

and unhappy.



Three days afterwards, Dobbin found Osborne in his

room at the barracks--his head on the table, a number

of papers about, the young Captain evidently in a state

of great despondency.  "She--she's sent me back some

things I gave her--some damned trinkets.  Look here!"

There was a little packet directed in the well-known hand

to Captain George Osborne, and some things lying about

--a ring, a silver knife he had bought, as a boy, for her

at a fair; a gold chain, and a locket with hair in it.  "It's

all over," said he, with a groan of sickening remorse.

"Look, Will, you may read it if you like."



There was a little letter of a few lines, to which he

pointed, which said:





My papa has ordered me to return to you these

presents, which you made in happier days to me; and I

am to write to you for the last time.  I think, I know you

feel as much as I do the blow which has come upon us.

It is I that absolve you from an engagement which is

impossible in our present misery.  I am sure you had no

share in it, or in the cruel suspicions of Mr. Osborne,

which are the hardest of all our griefs to bear.  Farewell.

Farewell.  I pray God to strengthen me to bear this and

other calamities, and to bless you always.     A.



I shall often play upon the piano--your piano.  It was

like you to send it.



Dobbin was very soft-hearted.  The sight of women

and children in pain always used to melt him.  The idea

of Amelia broken-hearted and lonely tore that good-

natured soul with anguish.  And he broke out into an

emotion, which anybody who likes may consider unmanly.

He swore that Amelia was an angel, to which Osborne

said aye with all his heart.  He, too, had been reviewing

the history of their lives--and had seen her from her

childhood to her present age, so sweet, so innocent,

so charmingly simple, and artlessly fond and tender.



What a pang it was to lose all that: to have had it and

not prized it!  A thousand homely scenes and recollections

crowded on him--in which he always saw her good

and beautiful.  And for himself, he blushed with remorse

and shame, as the remembrance of his own selfishness

and indifference contrasted with that perfect purity.  For

a while, glory, war, everything was forgotten, and the

pair of friends talked about her only.



"Where are they?" Osborne asked, after a long talk,

and a long pause--and, in truth, with no little shame at

thinking that he had taken no steps to follow her.  "Where

are they? There's no address to the note."



Dobbin knew.  He had not merely sent the piano; but

had written a note to Mrs. Sedley, and asked permission

to come and see her--and he had seen her, and Amelia

too, yesterday, before he came down to Chatham; and,

what is more, he had brought that farewell letter and

packet which had so moved them.



The good-natured fellow had found Mrs. Sedley only

too willing to receive him, and greatly agitated by the

arrival of the piano, which, as she conjectured, MUST have

come from George, and was a signal of amity on his

part.  Captain Dobbin did not correct this error of the

worthy lady, but listened to all her story of complaints

and misfortunes with great sympathy--condoled with

her losses and privations, and agreed in reprehending the

cruel conduct of Mr. Osborne towards his first benefactor. 

When she had eased her overflowing bosom somewhat,

and poured forth many of her sorrows, he had the

courage to ask actually to see Amelia, who was above in

her room as usual, and whom her mother led trembling

downstairs.



Her appearance was so ghastly, and her look of despair

so pathetic, that honest William Dobbin was frightened

as he beheld it; and read the most fatal forebodings in

that pale fixed face.  After sitting in his company a minute

or two, she put the packet into his hand, and said,

"Take this to Captain Osborne, if you please, and--and I

hope he's quite well--and it was very kind of you to

come and see us--and we like our new house very much.

And I--I think I'll go upstairs, Mamma, for I'm not very

strong." And with this, and a curtsey and a smile, the

poor child went her way.  The mother, as she led her up,

cast back looks of anguish towards Dobbin.  The good

fellow wanted no such appeal.  He loved her himself too

fondly for that.  Inexpressible grief, and pity, and terror

pursued him, and he came away as if he was a criminal

after seeing her.



When Osborne heard that his friend had found her,

he made hot and anxious inquiries regarding the poor

child.  How was she?  How did she look?  What did she

say?  His comrade took his hand, and looked him in the

face.



"George, she's dying," William Dobbin said--and could

speak no more.



There was a buxom Irish servant-girl, who performed

all the duties of the little house where the Sedley family

had found refuge: and this girl had in vain, on many

previous days, striven to give Amelia aid or consolation.

Emmy was much too sad to answer, or even to be aware

of the attempts the other was making in her favour.



Four hours after the talk between Dobbin and Osborne,

this servant-maid came into Amelia's room, where she

sate as usual, brooding silently over her letters--her

little treasures.  The girl, smiling, and looking arch and

happy, made many trials to attract poor Emmy's

attention, who, however, took no heed of her.



"Miss Emmy," said the girl.



"I'm coming," Emmy said, not looking round.



"There's a message," the maid went on.  "There's

something--somebody--sure, here's a new letter for you--

don't be reading them old ones any more." And she gave

her a letter, which Emmy took, and read.



"I must see you," the letter said.  "Dearest Emmy--

dearest love--dearest wife, come to me."



George and her mother were outside, waiting until she

had read the letter.
