





CHAPTER VI.



OF THE SHADOW THAT CAME BETWEEN THE MAN IN GREY AND THE LADY OF THE

LOVE-LIT EYES.



"There's nothing missing," said my mother, "so far as I can find out.

Depend upon it, that's the explanation:  she has got frightened and

has run away.



"But what was there to frighten her?" said my father, pausing with a

decanter in one hand and the bottle in the other.



"It was the idea of the thing," replied my mother.  "She has never

been used to waiting at table.  She was actually crying about it only

last night."



"But what's to be done?" said my father.  "They will be here in less

than an hour."



"There will be no dinner for them," said my mother, "unless I put on

an apron and bring it up myself."



"Where does she live?" asked my father.



"At Ilford," answered my mother.



"We must make a joke of it," said my father.



My mother, sitting down, began to cry.  It had been a trying week for

my mother.  A party to dinner--to a real dinner, beginning with

anchovies and ending with ices from the confectioner's; if only they

would remain ices and not, giving way to unaccustomed influences,

present themselves as cold custard--was an extraordinary departure

from the even tenor of our narrow domestic way; indeed, I recollect

none previous.  First there had been the house to clean and rearrange

almost from top to bottom; endless small purchases to be made of

articles that Need never misses, but which Ostentation, if ever you

let her sneering nose inside the door, at once demands.  Then the

kitchen range--it goes without saying:  one might imagine them all

members of a stove union, controlled by some agitating old boiler out

of work--had taken the opportunity to strike, refusing to bake another

dish except under permanently improved conditions, necessitating weary

days with plumbers.  Fat cookery books, long neglected on their shelf,

had been consulted, argued with and abused; experiments made, failures

sighed over, successes noted; cost calculated anxiously; means and

ways adjusted, hope finally achieved, shadowed by fear.



And now with victory practically won, to have the reward thus dashed

from her hand at the last moment!  Downstairs in the kitchen would be

the dinner, waiting for the guests; upstairs round the glittering

table would be the assembled guests, waiting for their dinner.  But

between the two yawned an impassable gulf.  The bridge, without a word

of warning, had bolted--was probably by this time well on its way to

Ilford.  There was excuse for my mother's tears.



"Isn't it possible to get somebody else?" asked my father.



"Impossible, in the time," said my mother.  "I had been training her

for the whole week.  We had rehearsed it perfectly."



"Have it in the kitchen," suggested my aunt, who was folding napkins

to look like ships, which they didn't in the least, "and call it a

picnic."  Really it seemed the only practical solution.



There came a light knock at the front door.



"It can't be anybody yet, surely," exclaimed my father in alarm,

making for his coat.



"It's Barbara, I expect," explained my mother.  "She promised to come

round and help me dress.  But now, of course, I shan't want her."  My

mother's nature was pessimistic.



But with the words Barbara ran into the room, for I had taken it upon

myself to admit her, knowing that shadows slipped out through the

window when Barbara came in at the door--in those days, I mean.



She kissed them all three, though it seemed but one movement, she was

so quick.  And at once they saw the humour of the thing.



"There's going to be no dinner," laughed my father.  "We are going to

look surprised and pretend that it was yesterday.  It will be fun to

see their faces."



"There will be a very nice dinner," smiled my mother, "but it will be

in the kitchen, and there's no way of getting it upstairs."  And they

explained to her the situation.



She stood for an instant, her sweet face the gravest in the group.

Then a light broke upon it.



"I'll get you someone," she said.



"My dear, you don't even know the neighbourhood," began my mother.

But Barbara had snatched the latchkey from its nail and was gone.



With her disappearance, shadow fell again upon us.  "If there were

only an hotel in this beastly neighbourhood," said my father.



"You must entertain them by yourself, Luke," said my mother; "and I

must wait--that's all."



"Don't be absurd, Maggie," cried my father, getting angry.  "Can't

cook bring it in?"



"No one can cook a dinner and serve it, too," answered my mother,

impatiently.  "Besides, she's not presentable."



"What about Fan?" whispered my father.



My mother merely looked.  It was sufficient.



"Paul?" suggested my father.



"Thank you," retorted my mother.  "I don't choose to have my son

turned into a footman, if you do."



"Well, hadn't you better go and dress?" was my father's next remark.



"It won't take me long to put on an apron," was my mother's reply.



"I was looking forward to seeing you in that new frock," said my

father.  In the case of another, one might have attributed such a

speech to tact; in the case of my father, one felt it was a happy

accident.



My mother confessed--speaking with a certain indulgence, as one does

of one's own follies when past--that she herself also had looked

forward to seeing herself therein.  Threatening discord melted into

mutual sympathy.



"I so wanted everything to be all right, for your sake, Luke," said my

mother; "I know you were hoping it would help on the business."



"I was only thinking of you, Maggie, dear," answered my father.  "You

are my business."



"I know, dear," said my mother.  "It is hard."



The key turned in the lock, and we all stood quiet to listen.



"She's come back alone," said my mother.  "I knew it was hopeless."



The door opened.



"Please, ma'am," said the new parlour-maid, "will I do?"



She stood there, framed by the lintel, in the daintiest of aprons, the

daintiest of caps upon her golden hair; and every objection she swept

aside with the wind of her merry wilfulness.  No one ever had their

way with her, nor wanted it.



"You shall be footman," she ordered, turning to me--but this time my

mother only laughed.  "Wait here till I come down again."  Then to my

mother:  "Now, ma'am, are you ready?"



It was the first time I had seen my mother, or, indeed, any other

flesh and blood woman, in evening dress, and to tell the truth I was a

little shocked.  Nay, more than a little, and showed it, I suppose;

for my mother flushed and drew her shawl over the gleaming whiteness

of her shoulders, pleading coldness.  But Barbara cried out against

this, saying it was a sin such beauty should be hid; and my father,

filching a shawl with a quick hand, so dextrously indeed as to suggest

some previous practice in the feat, dropped on one knee--as though the

world were some sweet picture book--and raised my mother's hand with

grave reverence to his lips; and Barbara, standing behind my mother's

chair, insisted on my following suit, saying the Queen was receiving.

So I knelt also, glancing up shyly as towards the gracious face of

some fair lady hitherto unknown, thus Catching my first glimpse of the

philosophy of clothes.



My memory lingers upon this scene by contrast with the sad, changed

days that swiftly followed, when my mother's eyes would flash towards

my father angry gleams, and her voice ring cruel and hard; though the

moment he was gone her lips would tremble and her eyes grow soft again

and fill with tears; when my father would sit with averted face and

sullen lips tight pressed, or worse, would open them only to pour

forth a rapid flood of savage speech; and fling out of the room,

slamming the door behind him, and I would find him hours afterwards,

sitting alone in the dark, with bowed head between his hands.



Wretched, I would lie awake, hearing through the flimsy walls their

passionate tones, now rising high, now fiercely forced into cold

whispers; and then their words to each other sounded even crueller.



In their estrangement from each other, so new to them, both clung

closer to me, though they would tell me nothing, nor should I have

understood if they had.  When my mother was sobbing softly, her arms

clasping me tighter and tighter with each quivering throb, then I

hated my father, who I felt had inflicted this sorrow upon her.  Yet

when my father drew me down upon his knee, and I looked into his kind

eyes so full of pain, then I felt angry with my mother, remembering

her bitter tongue.



It seemed to me as though some cruel, unseen thing had crept into the

house to stand ever between them, so that they might never look into

each other's loving eyes but only into the eyes of this evil shadow.

The idea grew upon me until at times I could almost detect its outline

in the air, feel a chillness as it passed me.  It trod silently

through the pokey rooms, always alert to thrust its grinning face

before them.  Now beside my mother it would whisper in her ear; and

the next moment, stealing across to my father, answer for him with his

voice, but strangely different.  I used to think I could hear it

laughing to itself as it stepped back into enfolding space.



To this day I seem to see it, ever following with noiseless footsteps

man and woman, waiting patiently its opportunity to thrust its face

between them.  So that I can read no love tale, but, glancing round, I

see its mocking eyes behind my shoulder, reading also, with a silent

laugh.  So that never can I meet with boy and girl, whispering in the

twilight, but I see it lurking amid the half lights, just behind them,

creeping after them with stealthy tread, as hand in hand they pass me

in quiet ways.



Shall any of us escape, or lies the road of all through this dark

valley of the shadow of dead love?  Is it Love's ordeal? testing the

feeble-hearted from the strong in faith, who shall find each other yet

again, the darkness passed?



Of the dinner itself, until time of dessert, I can give no consecutive

account, for as footman, under the orders of this enthusiastic

parlour-maid, my place was no sinecure, and but few opportunities of

observation through the crack of the door were afforded me.  All that

was clear to me was that the chief guest was a Mr. Teidelmann--or

Tiedelmann, I cannot now remember which--a snuffy, mumbling old frump,

with whose name then, however, I was familiar by reason of seeing it

so often in huge letters, though with a Co. added, on dreary long

blank walls, bordering the Limehouse reach.  He sat at my mother's

right hand; and I wondered, noticing him so ugly and so foolish

seeming, how she could be so interested in him, shouting much and

often to him; for added to his other disattractions he was very deaf,

which necessitated his putting his hand up to his ear at every other

observation made to him, crying querulously:  "Eh, what?  What are you

talking about?  Say it again,"--smiling upon him and paying close

attention to his every want.  Even old Hasluck, opposite to him, and

who, though pleasant enough in his careless way, was far from being a

slave to politeness, roared himself purple, praising some new

disinfectant of which this same Teidelmann appeared to be the

proprietor.



"My wife swears by it," bellowed Hasluck, leaning across the table.



"Our drains!" chimed in Mrs. Hasluck, who was a homely soul; "well,

you'd hardly know there was any in the house since I've took to using

it."



"What are they talking about?" asked Teidelmann, appealing to my

mother.  "What's he say his wife does?"



"Your disinfectant," explained my mother; "Mrs. Hasluck swears by it."



"Who?"



"Mrs. Hasluck."



"Does she?  Delighted to hear it," grunted the old gentleman,

evidently bored.



"Nothing like it for a sick-room," persisted Hasluck; "might almost

call it a scent."



"Makes one quite anxious to be ill," remarked my aunt, addressing no

one in particular.



"Reminds me of cocoanuts," continued Hasluck.



Its proprietor appeared not to hear, but Hasluck was determined his

flattery should not be lost.



"I say it reminds me of cocoanuts."  He screamed it this time.



"Oh, does it?" was the reply.



"Doesn't it you?"



"Can't say it does," answered Teidelmann.  "As a matter of fact, don't

know much about it myself.  Never use it."



Old Teidelmann went on with his dinner, but Hasluck was still full of

the subject.



"Take my advice," he shouted, "and buy a bottle."



"Buy a what?"



"A bottle," roared the other, with an effort palpably beyond his

strength.



"What's he say?  What's he talking about now?" asked Teidelmann, again

appealing to my mother.



"He says you ought to buy a bottle," again explained my mother.



"What of?"



"Of your own disinfectant."



"Silly fool!"



Whether he intended the remark to be heard and thus to close the topic

(which it did), or whether, as deaf people are apt to, merely

misjudged the audibility of an intended sotto vocalism, I cannot say.

I only know that outside in the passage I heard the words distinctly,

and therefore assume they reached round the table also.



A lull in the conversation followed, but Hasluck was not thin-skinned,

and the next thing I distinguished was his cheery laugh.



"He's quite right," was Hasluck's comment; "that's what I am

undoubtedly.  Because I can't talk about anything but shop myself, I

think everybody else is the same sort of fool."



But he was doing himself an injustice, for on my next arrival in the

passage he was again shouting across the table, and this time

Teidelmann was evidently interested.



"Well, if you could spare the time, I'd be more obliged than I can

tell you," Hasluck was saying.  "I know absolutely nothing about

pictures myself, and Pearsall says you are one of the best judges in

Europe."



"He ought to know," chuckled old Teidelmann.  "He's tried often enough

to palm off rubbish onto me."



"That last purchase of yours must have been a good thing for young--"

Hasluck mentioned the name of a painter since world famous; "been the

making of him, I should say."



"I gave him two thousand for the six," replied Teidelmann, "and

they'll sell for twenty thousand."



"But you'll never sell them?" exclaimed my father.



"No," grunted old Teidelmann, "but my widow will."  There came a soft,

low laugh from a corner of the table I could not see.



"It's Anderson's great disappointment," followed a languid, caressing

voice (the musical laugh translated into prose, it seemed), "that he

has never been able to educate me to a proper appreciation of art.

He'll pay thousands of pounds for a child in rags or a badly dressed

Madonna.  Such a waste of money, it appears to me."



"But you would pay thousands for a diamond to hang upon your neck,"

argued my father's voice.



"It would enhance the beauty of my neck," replied the musical voice.



"An even more absolute waste of money," was my father's answer, spoken

low.  And I heard again the musical, soft laugh.



"Who is she?" I asked Barbara.



"The second Mrs. Teidelmann," whispered Barbara.  "She is quite a

swell.  Married him for his money--I don't like her myself, but she's

very beautiful."



"As beautiful as you?" I asked incredulously.  We were sitting on the

stairs, sharing a jelly.



"Oh, me!" answered Barbara.  "I'm only a child.  Nobody takes any

notice of me--except other kids, like you."  For some reason she

appeared out of conceit with herself, which was not her usual state of

mind.



"But everybody thinks you beautiful," I maintained.



"Who?" she asked quickly.



"Dr. Hal," I answered.



We were with our backs to the light, so that I could not see her face.



"What did he say?" she asked, and her voice had more of contentment in

it.



I could not remember his exact words, but about the sense of them I

was positive.



"Ask him what he thinks of me, as if you wanted to know yourself,"

Barbara instructed me, "and don't forget what he says this time.  I'm

curious."  And though it seemed to me a foolish command--for what

could he say of her more than I myself could tell her--I never

questioned Barbara's wishes.



Yet if I am right in thinking that jealousy of Mrs. Teidelmann may

have clouded for a moment Barbara's sunny nature, surely there was no

reason for this, seeing that no one attracted greater attention

throughout the dinner than the parlour-maid.



"Where ever did you get her from?" asked Mrs. Florret, Barbara having

just descended the kitchen stairs.



"A neat-handed Phillis," commented Dr. Florret with approval.



"I'll take good care she never waits at my table," laughed the wife of

our minister, the Rev. Cottle, a broad-built, breezy-voiced woman,

mother of eleven, eight of them boys.



"To tell the truth," said my mother, "she's only here temporarily."



"As a matter of fact," said my father, "we have to thank Mrs. Hasluck

for her."



"Don't leave me out of it," laughed Hasluck; "can't let the old girl

take all the credit."



Later my father absent-mindedly addressed her as "My dear," at which

Mrs. Cottle shot a swift glance towards my mother; and before that

incident could have been forgotten, Hasluck, when no one was looking,

pinched her elbow, which would not have mattered had not the

unexpectedness of it drawn from her an involuntary "augh," upon which,

for the reputation of the house, and the dinner being then towards its

end; my mother deemed it better to take the whole company into her

confidence.  Naturally the story gained for Barbara still greater

admiration, so that when with the dessert, discarding the apron but

still wearing the dainty cap, which showed wisdom, she and the footman

took their places among the guests, she was even more than before the

centre of attention and remark.



"It was very nice of you," said Mrs. Cottle, thus completing the

circle of compliments, "and, as I always tell my girls, that is better

than being beautiful."



"Kind hearts," added Dr. Florret, summing up the case, "are more than

coronets."  Dr. Florret had ever ready for the occasion the correct

quotation, but from him, somehow, it never irritated; rather it fell

upon the ear as a necessary rounding and completing of the theme; like

the Amen in church.



Only to my aunt would further observations have occurred.



"When I was a girl," said my aunt, breaking suddenly upon the passing

silence, "I used to look into the glass and say to myself:  'Fanny,

you've got to be amiable,' and I was amiable," added my aunt,

challenging contradiction with a look; "nobody can say that I wasn't,

for years."



"It didn't pay?" suggested Hasluck.



"It attracted," replied my aunt, "no attention whatever."



Hasluck had changed places with my mother, and having after many

experiments learned the correct pitch for conversation with old

Teidelmann, talked with him as much aside as the circumstances of the

case would permit.  Hasluck never wasted time on anything else than

business.  It was in his opera box on the first night of Verdi's Aida

(I am speaking of course of days then to come) that he arranged the

details of his celebrated deal in guano; and even his very religion,

so I have been told and can believe, he varied to suit the enterprise

of the moment, once during the protracted preliminaries of a cocoa

scheme becoming converted to Quakerism.



But for the most of us interest lay in a discussion between Washburn

and Florret concerning the superior advantages attaching to residence

in the East End.



As a rule, incorrect opinion found itself unable to exist in Dr.

Florret's presence.  As no bird, it is said, can continue its song

once looked at by an owl, so all originality grew silent under the

cold stare of his disapproving eye.  But Dr. "Fighting Hal" was no

gentle warbler of thought.  Vehement, direct, indifferent, he swept

through all polite argument as a strong wind through a murmuring wood,

carrying his partisans with him further than they meant to go, and

quite unable to turn back; leaving his opponents clinging

desperately--upside down, anyhow--to their perches, angry, their

feathers much ruffled.



"Life!" flung out Washburn--Dr. Florret had just laid down

unimpeachable rules for the conduct of all mankind on all

occasions--"what do you respectable folk know of life?  You are not

men and women, you are marionettes.  You don't move to your natural

emotions implanted by God; you dance according to the latest book of

etiquette.  You live and love, laugh and weep and sin by rule.  Only

one moment do you come face to face with life; that is in the moment

when you die, leaving the other puppets to be dressed in black and

make believe to cry."



It was a favourite subject of denunciation with him, the artificiality

of us all.



"Little doll," he had once called me, and I had resented the term.



"That's all you are, little Paul," he had persisted, "a good little

hard-working doll, that does what it's made to do, and thinks what

it's made to think.  We are all dolls.  Your father is a

gallant-hearted, soft-headed little doll; your mother the sweetest and

primmest of dolls.  And I'm a silly, dissatisfied doll that longs to

be a man, but hasn't the pluck.  We are only dolls, little Paul."



"He's a trifle--a trifle whimsical on some subjects," explained my

father, on my repeating this conversation.



"There are a certain class of men," explained my mother--"you will

meet with them more as you grow up--who talk for talking's sake.  They

don't know what they mean.  And nobody else does either."



"But what would you have?" argued Dr. Florret, "that every man should

do that which is right in his own eyes?"



"Far better than, like the old man in the fable, he should do what

every other fool thinks right," retorted Washburn.  "The other day I

called to see whether a patient of mine was still alive or not.  His

wife was washing clothes in the front room.  'How's your husband?' I

asked.  'I think he's dead,' replied the woman.  Then, without leaving

off her work, 'Jim,' she shouted, 'are you there?'  No answer came

from the inner room.  'He's a goner,' she said, wringing out a

stocking."



"But surely," said Dr. Florret, "you don't admire a woman for being

indifferent to the death of her husband?"



"I don't admire her for that," replied Washburn, "and I don't blame

her.  I didn't make the world and I'm not responsible for it.  What I

do admire her for is not pretending a grief she didn't feel.  In

Berkeley Square she'd have met me at the door with an agonised face

and a handkerchief to her eyes.



"Assume a virtue, if you have it not," murmured Dr. Florret.



"Go on," said Washburn.  "How does it run?  'That monster, custom, who

all sense doth eat, of devil's habit, is angel yet in this, that to

the use of actions fair and good he gives a frock that aptly is put

on.'  So was the lion's skin by the ass, but it showed him only the

more an ass.  Here asses go about as asses, but there are lions also.

I had a woman under my hands only a little while ago.  I could have

cured her easily.  Why she got worse every day instead of better I

could not understand.  Then by accident learned the truth:  instead of

helping me she was doing all she could to kill herself.  'I must,

Doctor,' she cried.  'I must. I have promised.  If I get well he will

only leave me, and if I die now he has sworn to be good to the

children.'  Here, I tell you, they live--think their thoughts, work

their will, kill those they hate, die for those they love; savages if

you like, but savage men and women, not bloodless dolls."



"I prefer the dolls," concluded Dr. Florret.



"I admit they are pretty," answered Washburn.



"I remember," said my father, "the first masked ball I ever went to

when I was a student in Paris.  It struck me just as you say, Hal;

everybody was so exactly alike.  I was glad to get out into the street

and see faces."



"But I thought they always unmasked at midnight," said the second Mrs.

Teidelmann in her soft, languid tones.



"I did not wait," explained my father.



"That was a pity," she replied.  "I should have been interested to see

what they were like, underneath."



"I might have been disappointed," answered my father.  "I agree with

Dr. Florret that sometimes the mask is an improvement."



Barbara was right.  She was a beautiful woman, with a face that would

have been singularly winning if one could have avoided the hard cold

eyes ever restless behind the half-closed lids.



Always she was very kind to me.  Moreover, since the disappearance of

Cissy she was the first to bestow again upon me a good opinion of my

small self.  My mother praised me when I was good, which to her was

the one thing needful; but few of us, I fear, child or grown-up, take

much pride in our solid virtues, finding them generally hindrances to

our desires:  like the oyster's pearl, of more comfort to the world

than to ourselves.  If others there were who admired me, very

guardedly must they have kept the secret I would so gladly have shared

with them.  But this new friend of ours--or had I not better at once

say enemy--made me feel when in her presence a person of importance.

How it was accomplished I cannot explain.  No word of flattery nor

even of mere approval ever passed her lips.  Her charm to me was not

that she admired me, but that she led me by some mysterious process to

admire myself.



And yet in spite of this and many lesser kindnesses she showed to me,

I never really liked her; but rather feared her, dreading always the

sudden raising of those ever half-closed eyelids.



She sat next to my father at the corner of the table, her chin resting

on her long white hands, her sweet lips parted, and as often as his

eyes were turned away from her, her soft low voice would draw them

back again.  Once she laid her hand on his, laughing the while at some

light jest of his, and I saw that he flushed; and following his quick

glance, saw that my mother's eyes were watching also.



I have spoken of my father only as he then appeared to me, a child--an

older chum with many lines about his mobile mouth, the tumbled hair

edged round with grey; but looking back with older eyes, I see him a

slightly stooping, yet still tall and graceful man, with the face of a

poet--the face I mean a poet ought to possess but rarely does, nature

apparently abhorring the obvious--with the shy eyes of a boy, and a

voice tender as a woman's.  Never the dingiest little drab that

entered the kitchen but adored him, speaking always of "the master" in

tones of fond proprietorship, for to the most slatternly his "orders"

had ever the air of requests for favours.  Women, I so often read, can

care for only masterful men.  But may there not be variety in women as

in other species?  Or perhaps--if the suggestion be not

over-daring--the many writers, deeming themselves authorities upon

this subject of woman, may in this one particular have erred?  I only

know my father spoke to few women whose eyes did not brighten.  Yet

hardly should I call him a masterful man.



"I think it's all right," whispered Hasluck to my father in the

passage--they were the last to go.  "What does she think of it, eh?"



"I think she'll be with us," answered my father.



"Nothing like food for bringing people together," said Hasluck.

"Good-night."



The door closed, but Something had crept into the house.  It stood

between my father and mother.  It followed them silently up the narrow

creaking stairs.

