





CHAPTER IX.



OF THE FASHIONING OF PAUL.



Loves of my youth, whither are ye vanished?  Tubby of the golden

locks; Langley of the dented nose; Shamus stout of heart but faint of

limb, easy enough to "down," but utterly impossible to make to cry:

"I give you best;" Neal the thin; and Dicky, "dicky Dick" the fat;

Ballett of the weeping eye; Beau Bunnie lord of many ties, who always

fought in black kid gloves; all ye others, ye whose names I cannot

recollect, though I well remember ye were very dear to me, whither are

ye vanished, where haunt your creeping ghosts?  Had one told me then

there would come a day I should never see again your merry faces,

never hear your wild, shrill whoop of greeting, never feel again the

warm clasp of your inky fingers, never fight again nor quarrel with

you, never hate you, never love you, could I then have borne the

thought, I wonder?



Once, methinks, not long ago, I saw you, Tubby, you with whom so often

I discovered the North Pole, probed the problem of the sources of the

Nile, (Have you forgotten, Tubby, our secret camping ground beside the

lonely waters of the Regent's Park canal, where discussing our frugal

meal of toasted elephant's tongue--by the uninitiated mistakable for

jumbles--there would break upon our trained hunters' ear the hungry

lion or tiger's distant roar, mingled with the melancholy, long-drawn

growling of the Polar Bear, growing ever in volume and impatience

until half-past four precisely; and we would snatch our rifles, and

with stealthy tread and every sense alert make our way through the

jungle--until stopped by the spiked fencing round the Zoological

Gardens?) I feel sure it was you, in spite of your side whiskers and

the greyness and the thinness of your once clustering golden locks.

You were hurrying down Throgmorton Street chained to a small black

bag.  I should have stopped you, but that I had no time to spare,

having to catch a train at Liverpool Street and to get shaved on the

way.  I wonder if you recognised me:  you looked at me a little hard,

I thought.  Gallant, kindly hearted Shamus, you who fought once for

half an hour to save a frog from being skinned; they tell me you are

now an Income Tax assessor; a man, it is reported, with power of

disbelief unusual among even Inland Revenue circles; of little faith,

lacking in the charity that thinketh no evil.  May Providence direct

you to other districts than to mine.



So Time, Nature's handy-man, bustles to and fro about the many rooms,

making all things tidy, covers with sweet earth the burnt volcanoes,

turns to use the debris of the ages, smoothes again the ground above

the dead, heals again the beech bark marred by lovers.



In the beginning I was far from being a favourite with my schoolmates,

and this was the first time trouble came to dwell with me.  Later, we

men and women generally succeed in convincing ourselves that whatever

else we may have missed in life, popularity in a greater or less

degree we have at all events secured, for without it altogether few of

us, I think, would care to face existence.  But where the child

suffers keener than the man is in finding himself exposed to the cold

truth without the protecting clothes of self-deception.  My ostracism

was painfully plain to me, and, as was my nature, I brooded upon it in

silence.



"Can you run?" asked of me one day a most important personage whose

name I have forgotten.  He was head of the Lower Fourth, a tall youth

with a nose like a beak, and the manner of one born to authority.  He

was the son of a draper in the Edgware Road, and his father failing,

he had to be content for a niche in life with a lower clerkship in the

Civil Service.  But to us youngsters he always appeared a Duke of

Wellington in embryo, and under other circumstances might, perhaps,

have become one.



"Yes," I answered.  As a matter of fact it was my one accomplishment,

and rumour of it maybe had reached him.



"Run round the playground twice at your fastest," he commanded; "let

me see you."



I clinched my fists and charged off.  How grateful I was to him for

having spoken to me, the outcast of the class, thus publicly, I could

only show by my exertions to please him.  When I drew up before him I

was panting hard, but I could see that he was satisfied.



"Why don't the fellows like you?" he asked bluntly.



If only I could have stepped out of my shyness, spoken my real

thoughts!  "0 Lord of the Lower Fourth!  You upon whom success--the

only success in life worth having--has fallen as from the laps of the

gods!  You to whom all Lower Fourth hearts turn! tell me the secret of

this popularity.  How may I acquire it?  No price can be too great for

me to pay for it.  Vain little egoist that I am, it is the sum of my

desires, and will be till the long years have taught me wisdom.  The

want of it embitters all my days.  Why does silence fall upon their

chattering groups when I draw near?  Why do they drive me from their

games?  What is it shuts me out from them, repels them from me?  I

creep into the corners and shed scalding tears of shame.  I watch with

envious eyes and ears all you to whom the wondrous gift is given.

What is your secret?  Is it Tommy's swagger?  Then I will swagger,

too, with anxious heart, with mingled fear and hope.  But why--why,

seeing that in Tommy they admire it, do they wait for me with

imitations of cock-a-doodle-do, strut beside me mimicking a pouter

pigeon?  Is it Dicky's playfulness?--Dicky, who runs away with their

balls, snatches their caps from off their heads, springs upon their

backs when they are least expecting it?



Why should Dicky's reward be laughter, and mine a bloody nose and a

widened, deepened circle of dislike?  I am no heavier than Dicky; if

anything a pound or two lighter.  Is it Billy's friendliness?  I too

would fling my arms about their necks; but from me they angrily wrench

themselves free.  Is indifference the best plan?  I walk apart with

step I try so hard to render careless; but none follows, no little

friendly arm is slipped through mine.  Should one seek to win one's

way by kind offices?  Ah, if one could!  How I would fag for them.  I

could do their sums for them--I am good at sums--write their

impositions for them, gladly take upon myself their punishments, would

they but return my service with a little love and--more important

still--a little admiration."



But all I could find to say was, sulkily:  "They do like me, some of

them."  I dared not, aloud, acknowledge the truth.



"Don't tell lies," he answered; "you know they don't--none of them."

And I hung my head.



"I'll tell you what I'll do," he continued in his lordly way; "I'll

give you a chance.  We're starting hare and hounds next Saturday; you

can be a hare.  You needn't tell anybody.  Just turn up on Saturday

and I'll see to it.  Mind, you'll have to run like the devil."



He walked away without waiting for my answer, leaving me to meet Joy

running towards me with outstretched hands.  The great moment comes to

all of us; to the politician, when the Party whip slips from

confabulation with the Front Bench to congratulate him, smiling, on

his really admirable little speech; to the youthful dramatist, reading

in his bed-sitting-room the managerial note asking him to call that

morning at eleven; to the subaltern, beckoned to the stirrup of his

chief--the moment when the sun breaks through the morning mists, and

the world lies stretched before us, our way clear.



Obeying orders, I gave no hint in school of the great fortune that had

come to me; but hurrying home, I exploded in the passage before the

front door could be closed behind me.



"I am to be a hare because I run so fast. Anybody can be a hound, but

there's only two hares, and they all want me.  And can I have a

jersey?  We begin next Saturday.  He saw me run.  I ran twice round

the playground.  He said I was splendid!  Of course, it's a great

honour to be a hare.  We start from Hampstead Heath.  And may I have a

pair of shoes?"



The jersey and the shoes my mother and I purchased that very day, for

the fear was upon me that unless we hastened, the last blue and white

striped jersey in London might be sold, and the market be empty of

running shoes.  That evening, before getting into bed, I dressed

myself in full costume to admire myself before the glass; and from

then till the end of the week, to the terror of my mother, I practised

leaping over chairs, and my method of descending stairs was perilous

and roundabout.  But, as I explained to them, the credit of the Lower

Fourth was at stake, and banisters and legs equally of small account

as compared with fame and honour; and my father, nodding his head,

supported me with manly argument; but my mother added to her prayers

another line.



Saturday came.  The members of the hunt were mostly boys who lived in

the neighbourhood; so the arrangement was that at half-past two we

should meet at the turnpike gate outside the Spaniards.  I brought my

lunch with me and ate it in Regent's Park, and then took the 'bus to

the Heath.  One by one the others came up.  Beyond mere glances, none

of them took any notice of me.  I was wearing my ordinary clothes over

my jersey.  I knew they thought I had come merely to see them start,

and I hugged to myself the dream of the surprise that was in store for

them, and of which I should be the hero.  He came, one of the last,

our leader and chief, and I sidled up behind him and waited, while he

busied himself organising and constructing.



"But we've only got one hare," cried one of them.  "We ought to have

two, you know, in case one gets blown."



"We've got two," answered the Duke.  "Think I don't know what I'm

about?  Young Kelver's going to be the other one."



Silence fell upon the meet.



"Oh, I say, we don't want him," at last broke in a voice.  "He's a

muff."



"He can run," explained the Duke.



"Let him run home," came another voice, which was greeted with

laughter.



"You'll run home in a minute yourself," threatened the Duke, "if I

have any of your cheek.  Who's captain here--you or me?  Now, young

'un, are you ready?"



I had commenced unbuttoning my jacket, but my hands fell to my side.

"I don't want to come," I answered, "if they don't want me."



"He'll get his feet wet," suggested the boy who had spoken first.

"Don't spoil him, he's his mother's pet."



"Are you coming or are you not?" shouted the Duke, seeing me still

motionless.  But the tears were coming into my eyes and would not go

back.  I turned my face away without speaking.



"All right, stop then," cried the Duke, who, like all authoritative

people, was impatient above all things of hesitation.  "Here, Keefe,

you take the bag and be off.  It'll be dark before we start."



My substitute snatched eagerly at the chance, and away went the hares,

while I, still keeping my face hid, moved slowly off.



"Cry-baby!" shouted a sharp-eyed youngster.



"Let him alone," growled the Duke; and I went on to where the cedars

grew.



I heard them start off a few minutes later with a whoop.  How could I

go home, confess my disappointment, my shame?  My father would be

expecting me with many questions, my mother waiting for me with hot

water and blankets.  What explanation could I give that would not

betray my miserable secret?



It was a chill, dismal afternoon, the Heath deserted, a thin rain

commencing.  I slipped off my shirt and jacket, and rolling them under

my arm, trotted off alone, hare and hounds combined in one small

carcass, to chase myself sadly by myself.



I see it still, that pathetically ridiculous little figure, jogging

doggedly over the dank fields.  Mile after mile it runs, the little

idiot; jumping--sometimes falling into the muddy ditches:  it seems

anxious rather than otherwise to get itself into a mess; scrambling

through the dripping hedges; swarming over tarry fence and slimy

paling.  On, on it pants--through Bishop's Wood, by tangled Churchyard

Bottom, where now the railway shrieks; down sloppy lanes, bordering

Muswell Hill, where now stand rows of jerry-built, prim villas.  At

intervals it stops an instant to dab its eyes with its dingy little

rag of a handkerchief, to rearrange the bundle under its arm, its

chief anxiety to keep well out of sight of chance wanderers, to dodge

farmhouses, to dart across highroads when nobody is looking.  And so

tear-smeared and mud-bespattered up the long rise of darkening Crouch

End Lane, where to-night the electric light blazes from a hundred

shops, and dead beat into the Seven Sisters Road station, there to

tear off its soaked jersey; and then home to Poplar, with shameless

account of the jolly afternoon that it has spent, of the admiration

and the praise that it has won.



You poor, pitiful little brat!  Popularity? it is a shadow.  Turn your

eyes towards it, and it shall ever run before you, escaping you.  Turn

your back upon it, walk joyously towards the living sun, and it shall

follow you.  Am I not right?  Why, then, do you look at me, your

little face twisted into that quizzical grin?



When one takes service with Deceit, one signs a contract that one may

not break but under penalty.  Maybe it was good for my health, those

lonely runs; but oh, they were dreary!  By a process of argument not

uncommon I persuaded myself that truth was a matter of mere words,

that so long as I had actually gone over the ground I described I was

not lying.  To further satisfy my conscience, I bought a big satchel

and scattered from it torn-up paper as I ran.



"And they never catch you?" asked my mother.



"Oh, no, never; they never even get within sight of me."



"Be careful, dear," would advise my mother; "don't overstrain

yourself."  But I could see that she was proud of me.



And after awhile imagination came to my help, so that often I could

hear behind me the sound of pursuing feet, catch through gaps in the

trees a sight of a merry, host upon my trail, and would redouble my

speed.



Thus, but for Dan, my loneliness would have been unbearable.  His

friendship was always there for me to creep to, the shadow of a great

rock in a weary land.  To this day one may always know Dan's politics:

they are those of the Party out of power.  Always without question one

may know the cause that he will champion, the unpopular cause; the man

he will defend, the man who is down.



"You are such an un-understandable chap," complained a fellow Clubman

to him once in my hearing.  "I sometimes ask myself if you have any

opinions at all."



"I hate a crowd," was Dan's only confession of faith.



He never claimed anything from me in return for his affection; he was

there for me to hold to when I wanted him.  When, baffled in all my

attempts to win the affections of others, I returned to him for

comfort, he gave it me, without even relieving himself of friendly

advice.  When at length childish success came to me and I needed him

less, he was neither hurt nor surprised.  Other people--their

thoughts, their actions, even when these concerned himself--never

troubled him.  He loved to bestow, but as to response was strangely

indifferent; indeed, if anything, it bored him.  His nature appeared

to be that of the fountain, which fulfils itself by giving, but is

unable to receive.



My popularity came to me unexpectedly after I had given up hoping for

it; surprising me, annoying me.  Gradually it dawned upon me that my

company was being sought.



"Come along, Kelver," would say the spokesman of one group; "we're

going part of your way home.  You can walk with us."



Maybe I would go with them, but more often, before we reached the

gate, the delight of my society would be claimed by a rival troop.



"He's coming with us this afternoon.  He promised."



"No, he didn't."



"Yes, he did."



"Well, he ain't, anyhow.  See?"



"Oh, isn't he?  Who says he isn't?"



"I do."



"Punch his head, Dick!"



"Yes, you do, Jimmy Blake, and I'll punch yours.  Come, Kelver."



I might have been some Queen of Beauty offered as prize for knightly

contest. Indeed, more than once the argument concluded thus

primitively, I being carried off in triumph by the victorious party.



For a period it remained a mystery to me, until I asked explanation of

Norval--we called him "Norval," he being one George Grampian:  it was

our wit.  From taking joy in teasing me, Norval had suddenly become

one of my greatest admirers.  This by itself was difficult enough to

understand.  He was in the second eleven, and after Dan the best

fighter in the lower school.  If I could understand Norval's change of

attitude all would be plain to me; so when next time, bounding upon me

in the cloakroom and slipping his arm into mine, he clamoured for my

company to Camden Town, I put the question to him bluntly.



"Why should I walk home with you?  Why do you want me?"



"Because we like you."



"But why do you like me?"



"Why!  Why, because you're such a funny chap.  You say such funny

things."



It struck me like a slap in the face.  I had thought to reach

popularity upon the ladder of heroic qualities.  In all the school

books I had read, Leonard or Marmaduke (we had a Marmaduke in the

Lower Fifth--they called him Marmalade:  in the school books these

disasters are not contemplated), won love and admiration by reason of

integrity of character, nobility of sentiment, goodness of heart,

brilliance of intellect; combined maybe with a certain amount of

agility, instinct in the direction of bowling, or aptitude for

jumping; but such only by the way.  Not one of them had ever said a

funny thing, either consciously or unconsciously.



"Don't be disagreeable, Kelver.  Come with us and we will let you into

the team as an extra.  I'll teach you batting."



So I was to be their Fool--I, dreamer of knightly dreams, aspirant to

hero's fame!  I craved their wonder; I had won their laughter.  I had

prayed for popularity; it had been granted to me--in this guise.  Were

the gods still the heartless practical jokers poor Midas had found

them?



Had my vanity been less I should have flung their gift back in their

faces.  But my thirst for approbation was too intense.  I had to

choose:  Cut capers and be followed, or walk in dignity, ignored.  I

chose to cut the capers.  As time wore on I found myself striving to

cut them quicker, quainter, thinking out funny stories, preparing

ingenuous impromptus, twisting all ideas into odd expression.



I had my reward.  Before long my company was desired by all the

school.  But I was never content.  I would rather have been the

Captain of their football club, even his deputy Vice; would have given

all my meed of laughter for stuttering Jerry's one round of applause

when in our match against Highbury he knocked up his century, and so

won the victory for us by just three.



Till the end I never quite abandoned hope of exchanging my vine leaves

for the laurels.  I would rise an hour earlier in the morning to

practise throwing at broomsticks set up in waste places.  At another

time, the sport coming into temporary fashion, I wearied body and mind

for weeks in vain attempts to acquire skill on stilts.  That even fat

Tubby could out-distance me upon them saddened my life for months.



A lad there was, a Sixth Form boy, one Wakeham by name, if I remember

rightly, who greatly envied me my gift of being able to amuse.  He was

of the age when the other sex begins to be of importance to a fellow,

and the desire had come to him to be regarded as a star of wit among

the social circles of Gospel Oak.  Need I say that by nature he was a

ponderously dull boy.



One afternoon I happened to be the centre of a small group in the

playground.  I had been holding forth and they had been laughing.

Whether I had delivered myself of anything really entertaining or not

I cannot say.  It made no difference; they had got into the habit of

laughing when I talked.  Sometimes I would say quite serious things on

purpose; they would laugh just the same.  Wakeham was among them, his

eyes fixed on me, watching me as boys watch a conjurer in the hope of

finding out "how he does it."  Later in the afternoon he slipped his

arm through mine, and drew me away into an empty corner of the ground.



"I say, Kelver," he broke out, the moment we were beyond hearing, "you

really are funny!"



It gave me no pleasure.  If he had told me that he admired my bowling

I might not have believed him, but should have loved him for it.



"So are you," I answered savagely, "only you don't know it."



"No, I'm not," he replied.  "Wish I was.  I say, Kelver"--he glanced

round to see that no one was within earshot--"do you think you could

teach me to be funny?"



I was about to reply with conviction in the negative when an idea

occurred to me.  Wakeham was famous among us for one thing; he could,

inserting two fingers in his mouth, produce a whistle capable of

confusing dogs a quarter of a mile off, and of causing people near at

hand to jump from six to eighteen inches into the air.



This accomplishment of his I envied him as keenly as he envied me

mine.  I did not admire it; I could not see the use of it.  Generally

speaking, it called forth irritation rather than affection.  A

purple-faced old gentleman, close to whose ear he once performed,

promptly cuffed his head for it; and for so doing was commended by the

whole street as a public benefactor.  Drivers of vehicles would

respond by flicking at him, occasionally with success.  Even youth,

from whom sympathy might have been expected, appeared impelled, if

anything happened to be at all handy, to take it up and throw it at

him.  My own social circle would, I knew, regard it as a vulgar

accomplishment, and even Wakeham himself dared not perform it in the

hearing of his own classmates.  That any human being should have

desired to acquire it seems incomprehensible.  Yet for weeks in secret

I had wrestled to produce the hideous sound.  Why?  For three reasons,

so far as I can analyse this youngster of whom I am writing:



Firstly, here was a means of attracting attention; secondly, it was

something that somebody else could do and that he couldn't; thirdly,

it was a thing for which he evidently had no natural aptitude

whatever, and therefore a thing to acquire which his soul yearned the

more.  Had a boy come across his path, clever at walking on his hands

with his heels in the air, Master Paul Kelver would in all probability

have broken his neck in attempts to copy and excel.  I make no

apologies for the brat:  I merely present him as a study for the

amusement of a world of wiser boys--and men.



I struck a bargain with young Wakeham; I undertook to teach him to be

funny in return for his teaching me this costermonger's whistle.



Each of us strove conscientiously to impart knowledge.  Neither of us

succeeded.  Wakeham tried hard to be funny; I tried hard to whistle.

He did all I told him; I followed his instructions implicitly.  The

result was the feeblest of wit and the feeblest of whistles.



"Do you think anybody would laugh at that?" Wakeham would pathetically

enquire at the termination of his supremest effort.  And honestly I

would have to confess I did not think any living being would.



"How far off do you think any one could hear that?" I would demand

anxiously, on recovering sufficient breath to speak at all.



"Well, it would depend upon whether you knew it was coming," Wakeham

would reply kindly, not wishing to discourage me.



We abandoned the scheme by mutual consent at about the end of a

fortnight.



"I suppose it's something that you've got to have inside you," I

suggested to Wakeham in consolation.



"I don't think the roof of your mouth can be quite the right shape for

it," concluded Wakeham.



My success as story-teller, commentator, critic, jester, revived my

childish ambition towards authorship.  My first stirrings in this

direction I cannot rightly place.  I remember when very small falling

into a sunk dust-bin--a deep hole, rather, into which the gardener

shot his rubbish.  The fall twisted my ankle so that I could not move;

and the time being evening and my prison some distance from the house,

my predicament loomed large before me.  Yet one consolation remained

with me:  the incident would be of value to me in the autobiography

upon which I was then engaged.  I can distinctly recollect lying on my

back among decaying leaves and broken glass, framing my account.  "On

this day a strange adventure befell me.  Walking in the garden, all

unheeding, I suddenly"--I did not want to add the truth--"tumbled into

a dust-hole, six feet square, that any one but a moon calf might have

seen."  I puzzled to evolve a more dignified situation.  The dust-bin

became a cavern, the entrance to which had been artfully concealed;

the six or seven feet I had really fallen, "an endless descent,

terminating in a vast and gloomy chamber."  I was divided between

opposing desires:  One, for rescue followed by sympathy and supper;

the other, for the alarming experience of a night of terror where I

lay.  Nature conquering Art, I yelled; and the episode terminated

prosaically with a warm bath and arnica.  But from it I judge that

desire for the woes and perils of authorship was with me somewhat

early.



Of my many other dreams I would speak freely, discussing them at

length with sympathetic souls, but concerning this one ambition I was

curiously reticent.  Only to two--my mother and a grey-bearded

Stranger--did I ever breathe a word of it.  Even from my father I kept

it a secret, close comrades in all else though we were.  He would have

talked of it much and freely, dragged it into the light of day; and

from this I shrank.



My talk with the Stranger came about in this wise.  One evening I had

taken a walk to Victoria Park--a favourite haunt of mine at summer

time.  It was a fair and peaceful evening, and I fell a-wandering

there in pleasant reverie, until the waning light hinted to me the

question of time.  I looked about me.  Only one human being was in

sight, a man with his back towards me, seated upon a bench overlooking

the ornamental water.



I drew nearer.  He took no notice of me, and interested--though why, I

could not say--I seated myself beside him at the other end of the

bench.  He was a handsome, distinguished-looking man, with wonderfully

bright, clear eyes and iron-grey hair and beard.  I might have thought

him a sea captain, of whom many were always to be met with in that

neighbourhood, but for his hands, which were crossed upon his stick,

and which were white and delicate as a woman's.  He turned his face

and glanced at me.  I fancied that his lips beneath the grey moustache

smiled; and instinctively I edged a little nearer to him.



"Please, sir," I said, after awhile, "could you tell me the right

time?"



"Twenty minutes to eight," he answered, looking at his watch.  And his

voice drew me towards him even more than had his beautiful strong

face.  I thanked him, and we fell back into silence.



"Where do you live?" he turned and suddenly asked me.



"Oh, only over there," I answered, with a wave of my arm towards the

chimney-fringed horizon behind us.  "I needn't be in till half-past

eight.  I like this Park so much," I added, "I often come and sit here

of an evening.'



"Why do you like to come and sit here?" he asked.  "Tell me."



"Oh, I don't know," I answered.  "I think."



I marvelled at myself.  With strangers generally I was shy and silent;

but the magic of his bright eyes seemed to have loosened my tongue.



I told him my name; that we lived in a street always full of ugly

sounds, so that a gentleman could not think, not even in the evening

time, when Thought goes a-visiting.



"Mamma does not like the twilight time," I confided to him.  "It

always makes her cry.  But then mamma is--not very young, you know,

and has had a deal of trouble; and that makes a difference, I

suppose."



He laid his hand upon mine.  We were sitting nearer to each other now.

"God made women weak to teach us men to be tender," he said.  "But

you, Paul, like this 'twilight time'?"



"Yes," I answered, "very much.  Don't you?"



"And why do you like it?" he asked.



"Oh," I answered, "things come to you."



"What things?"



"Oh, fancies," I explained to him.  "I am going to be an author when I

grow up, and write books."



He took my hand in his and shook it gravely, and then returned it to

me.  "I, too, am a writer of books," he said.



And then I knew what had drawn me to him.



So for the first time I understood the joy of talking "shop" with a

fellow craftsman.  I told him my favourite authors--Scott, and Dumas,

and Victor Hugo; and to my delight found they were his also; he

agreeing with me that real stories were the best, stories in which

people did things.



"I used to read silly stuff once," I confessed, "Indian tales and that

sort of thing, you know.  But mamma said I'd never be able to write if

I read that rubbish."



"You will find it so all through life, Paul," he replied.  "The things

that are nice are rarely good for us.  And what do you read now?"



"I am reading Marlowe's Plays and De Quincey's Confessions just now,"

I confided to him.



"And do you understand them?"



"Fairly well," I answered.  "Mamma says I'll like them better as I go

on.  I want to learn to write very, very well indeed," I admitted to

him; "then I'll be able to earn heaps of money."



He smiled.  "So you don't believe in Art for Art's sake, Paul?"



I was puzzled.  "What does that mean?" I asked.



"It means in our case, Paul," he answered, "writing books for the

pleasure of writing books, without thinking of any reward, without

desiring either money or fame."



It was a new idea to me.  "Do many authors do that?" I asked.



He laughed outright this time.  It was a delightful laugh.  It rang

through the quiet Park, awaking echoes; and caught by it, I laughed

with him.



"Hush!" he said; and he glanced round with a whimsical expression of

fear, lest we might have been overheard.  "Between ourselves, Paul,"

he continued, drawing me more closely towards him and whispering, "I

don't think any of us do.  We talk about it.  But I'll tell you this,

Paul; it is a trade secret and you must remember it:  No man ever made

money or fame but by writing his very best. It may not be as good as

somebody else's best, but it is his best. Remember that, Paul."



I promised I would.



"And you must not think merely of the money and the fame, Paul," he

added the next moment, speaking more seriously.  "Money and fame are

very good things, and only hypocrites pretend to despise them.  But if

you write books thinking only of money, you will be disappointed.  It

is earned easier in other ways.  Tell me, that is not your only idea?"



I pondered.  "Mamma says it is a very noble calling, authorship," I

remembered, "and that any one ought to be very proud and glad to be

able to write books, because they give people happiness and make them

forget things; and that one ought to be very good if one is going to

be an author, so as to be worthy to help and teach others."



"And do you try to be good, Paul?" he enquired.



"Yes," I answered; "but it's very hard to be quite good--until of

course you're grown up."



He smiled, but more to himself than to me.  "Yes," he said, "I suppose

it is difficult to be good until you are grown up.  Perhaps we shall

all of us be good when we're quite grown up."  Which, from a gentleman

with a grey beard, appeared to me a puzzling observation.



"And what else does mamma say about literature?" he asked.  "Can you

remember?"



Again I pondered, and her words came back to me.  "That he who can

write a great book is greater than a king; that the gift of being able

to write is given to anybody in trust; that an author should never

forget he is God's servant."



He sat for awhile without speaking, his chin resting on his folded

hands supported by his gold-topped cane.  Then he turned and laid a

hand upon my shoulder, and his clear, bright eyes were close to mine.



"Your mother is a wise lady, Paul," he said.  "Remember her words

always.  In later life let them come back to you; they will guide you

better than the chatter of the Clubs."



"And what modern authors do you read?" he asked after a silence:  "any

of them--Thackeray, Bulwer Lytton, Dickens?"



"I have read 'The Last of the Barons,'" I told him; "I like that.  And

I've been to Barnet and seen the church.  And some of Mr. Dickens'."



"And what do you think of Mr. Dickens?" he asked.  But he did not seem

very interested in the subject.  He had picked up a few small stones,

and was throwing them carefully into the water.



"I like him very much," I answered; "he makes you laugh."



"Not always?" he asked.  He stopped his stone-throwing, and turned

sharply towards me.



"Oh, no, not always," I admitted; "but I like the funny bits best. I

like so much where Mr. Pickwick--"



"Oh, damn Mr. Pickwick!" he said.



"Don't you like him?" I asked.



"Oh, yes, I like him well enough, or used to," he replied; "I'm a bit

tired of him, that's all.  Does your mamma like Mr.--Mr. Dickens?"



"Not the funny parts," I explained to him.  "She thinks he is

occasionally--"



"I know," he interrupted, rather irritably, I thought; "a trifle

vulgar."



It surprised me that he should have guessed her exact words.  "I don't

think mamma has much sense of humour," I explained to him.  "Sometimes

she doesn't even see papa's jokes."



At that he laughed again.  "But she likes the other parts?" he

enquired, "the parts where Mr. Dickens isn't--vulgar?"



"Oh, yes," I answered.  "She says he can be so beautiful and tender,

when he likes."



Twilight was deepening.  It occurred to me to enquire of him again the

time.



"Just over the quarter," he answered, looking at his watch.



"I'm so sorry," I said.  "I must go now."



"So am I sorry, Paul," he answered.  "Perhaps we shall meet again.

Good-bye."  Then as our hands touched:  "You have never asked me my

name, Paul," he reminded me.



"Oh, haven't I?" I answered.



"No, Paul," he replied, "and that makes me think of your future with

hope.  You are an egotist, Paul; and that is the beginning of all

art."



And after that he would not tell me his name.  "Perhaps next time we

meet," he said.  "Good-bye, Paul.  Good luck to you!"



So I went my way.  Where the path winds out of sight I turned.  He was

still seated upon the bench, but his face was towards me, and he waved

his hand to me.  I answered with a wave of mine.  And then the

intervening boughs and bushes gradually closed in around me.  And

across the rising mist there rose the hoarse, harsh cry:



"All out!  All out!"

