





CHAPTER X.



IN WHICH PAUL IS SHIPWRECKED, AND CAST INTO DEEP WATERS.



My father died, curiously enough, on the morning of his birthday.  We

had not expected the end to arrive for some time, and at first did not

know that it had come.



"I have left him sleeping," said my mother, who had slipped out very

quietly in her dressing-gown.  "Washburn gave him a draught last

night.  We won't disturb him."



So we sat round the breakfast table, speaking in low tones, for the

house was small and flimsy, all sound easily heard through its thin

partitions.  Afterwards my mother crept upstairs, I following, and

cautiously opened the door a little way.



The blinds were still down, and the room dark.  It seemed a long time

that my mother stood there listening, her ear against the jar.  The

first costermonger--a girl's voice, it sounded--passed, crying

shrilly:  "Watercreases, fine fresh watercreases with your

breakfast-a'penny a bundle watercreases;" and further off a hoarse

youth was wailing:  "Mee-ilk-mee-ilk-oi."



Inch by inch my mother opened the door wider and we stole in.  He was

lying with his eyes still closed, the lips just slightly parted.  I

had never seen death before, and could not realise it.  All that I

could see was that he looked even younger than I had ever seen him

look before.  By slow degrees only, it came home to me, the knowledge

that he was gone away from us.  For days--for weeks, I would hear his

step behind me in the street, his voice calling to me, see his face

among the crowds, and hastening to meet him, stand bewildered because

it had mysteriously disappeared.  But at first I felt no pain

whatever.



To my mother it was but a short parting.  Into her placid faith had

never fallen fear nor doubt.  He was waiting for her.  In God's good

time they would meet again.  What need of sorrow!  Without him the

days passed slowly:  the house must ever be a little dull when the

good man's away.  But that was all.  So my mother would speak of him

always--of his dear, kind ways, of his oddities and follies we loved

so to recall, not through tears, but smiles, thinking of him not as of

one belonging to the past, but as of one beckoning to her from the

future.



We lived on still in the old house though ever planning to move, for

the great brick monster had crept closer round about us year by year,

devouring in his progress all things fair.  Field and garden, tree and

cottage, time-mellowed house suggesting story, kind hedgerow hiding

hideousness beyond--the few spots yet in that doomed land lingering to

remind one of the sunshine, one by one had he scrunched them between

his ugly teeth.  A world apart, this east end of London, this ghetto

of the poor for ever growing, dreariness added year by year to

dreariness, hopelessness stretching ever farther its long, shrivelled

arms, these endless rows of reeking cells where London herds her

slaves.  Often of a misty afternoon when we knew that without this

city of the dead life was stirring in the sunshine, we would fare

forth to house-hunt in pleasant suburbs, now themselves added to the

weary catacomb of narrow streets--to Highgate, then a tiny town

connected by a coach with leafy Holloway; to Hampstead with its rows

of ancient red-brick houses, from whose wind-blown heath one saw

beyond the woods and farms, far London's domes and spires, to Wood

Green among the pastures, where smock-coated labourers discussed their

politics and ale beneath wide-spreading elms; to Hornsey, then a

village consisting of an ivy-covered church and one grass-bordered

way.  But though we often saw "the very thing for us" and would

discuss its possibilities from every point of view and find them good,

we yet delayed.



"We must think it over," would say my mother; "there is no hurry; for

some reasons I shall be sorry to leave Poplar."



"For what reasons, mother?"



"Oh, well, no particular reason, Paul.  Only we have lived there so

long, you know.  It will be a wrench leaving the old house."



To the making of man go all things, even to the instincts of the

clinging vine.  We fling our tendrils round what is the nearest

castle-keep or pig-stye wall, rain and sunshine fastening them but

firmer.  Dying Sir Walter Scott--do you remember?--hastening home from

Italy, fearful lest he might not be in time to breathe again the damp

mists of the barren hills.  An ancient dame I knew, they had carried

her from her attic in slumland that she might be fanned by the sea

breezes, and the poor old soul lay pining for what she called her

"home."  Wife, mother, widow, she had lived there till the alley's

reek smelt good to her nostrils, till its riot was the voices of her

people.  Who shall understand us save He who fashioned us?



So the old house held us to its dismal bosom; and not until within its

homely but unlovely arms, first my aunt, and later on my mother had

died, and I had said good-bye to Amy, crying in the midst of littered

emptiness, did I leave it.



My aunt died as she had lived, grumbling.



"You will be glad to get rid of me, all of you!" she said, dropping

for the first and last time I can recollect into the retort direct;

"and I can't say I shall be very sorry to go myself.  It hasn't been

my idea of life."



Poor old lady!  That was only a couple of weeks before the end.  I do

not suppose she guessed it was so certain or perhaps she might have

been more sentimental.



"Don't be foolish," said my mother, "you're not going to die!"



"What's the use of talking like an idiot," retorted my aunt, "I've got

to do it some time.  Why not now, when everything's all ready for it.

It isn't as if I was enjoying myself."



"I am sure we do all we can for you," said my mother.  "I know you

do," replied my aunt.  "I'm a burden to you.  I always have been."



"Not a burden," corrected my mother.



"What does the woman call it then," snapped back my aunt.  "Does she

reckon I've been a sunbeam in the house?  I've been a trial to

everybody.  That's what I was born for; it's my metier."



My mother put her arms about the poor old soul and kissed her.  "We

should miss you very much," she said.



"I'm sure I hope they all will!" answered my aunt.  "It's the only

thing I've got to leave 'em, worth having."



My mother laughed.



"Maybe it's been a good thing for you, Maggie," grumbled my aunt; "if

it wasn't for cantankerous, disagreeable people like me, gentle,

patient people like you wouldn't get any practice.  Perhaps, after

all, I've been a blessing to you in disguise."



I cannot honestly say we ever wished her back; though we certainly did

miss her--missed many a joke at her oddities, many a laugh at her

cornery ways.  It takes all sorts, as the saying goes, to make a

world.  Possibly enough if only we perfect folk were left in it we

would find it uncomfortably monotonous.



As for Amy, I believe she really regretted her.



"One never knows what's good for one till one's lost it," sighed Amy.



"I'm glad to think you liked her," said my mother.



"You see, mum," explained Amy, "I was one of a large family; and a bit

of a row now and again cheers one up, I always think.  I'll be losing

the power of my tongue if something doesn't come along soon."



"Well, you are going to be married in a few weeks now," my mother

reminded her.



But Amy remained despondent.  "They're poor things, the men, at a few

words, the best of them," she replied.  "As likely as not just when

you're getting interested you turn round to find that they've put on

their hat and gone out."



My mother and I were very much alone after my aunt's death.  Barbara

had gone abroad to put the finishing touches to her education--to

learn the tricks of the Nobs' trade, as old Hasluck phrased it; and I

had left school and taken employment with Mr. Stillwood, without

salary, the idea being that I should study for the law.



"You are in luck's way, my boy, in luck's way," old Mr. Gadley had

assured me.  "To have commenced your career in the office of

Stillwood, Waterhead and Royal will be a passport for you anywhere.

It will stamp you, my boy."



Mr. Stillwood himself was an extremely old and feeble gentleman--so

old and feeble it seemed strange that he, a wealthy man, had not long

ago retired.



"I am always meaning to," he explained to me one day soon after my

advent in his office.  "When your poor father came to me he told me

very frankly the sad fact--that he had only a few more years to live.

'Mr. Kelver,' I answered him, 'do not let that trouble you, so far as

I am concerned.  There are one or two matters in the office I should

like to see cleared up, and in these you can help me.  When they are

completed I shall retire!  Yet, you see, I linger on.  I am like the

old hackney coach horse, Mr. Weller--or is it Mr. Jingle--tells us of;

if the shafts were drawn away I should probably collapse.  So I jog

on, I jog on.'"



He had married late in life a common woman much younger than himself,

who had brought to him a horde of needy and greedy relatives, and no

doubt, as a refuge from her noisy neighbourhood, the daily peace of

Lombard Street was welcome to him.  We saw her occasionally.  She was

one of those blustering, "managing" women who go through life under

the impression that making a disturbance is somehow "putting things to

rights."  Ridiculously ashamed of her origin, she sought to hide it

under what her friends assured her was the air of a duchess, but

which, as a matter of fact, resembled rather the Sunday manners of an

elderly barmaid.  Mr. Gadley alone was not afraid of her; but, on the

contrary, kept her always very much in fear of him, often speaking to

her with refreshing candour.  He had known her in the days it was her

desire should be buried in oblivion, and had always resented as a

personal insult her entry into the old established aristocratic firm

of Stillwood & Co.



Her history was peculiar.  Mr. Stillwood, when a blase man about town,

verging on forty, had first seen her, then a fair-haired,

ethereal-looking child, in spite of her dirt, playing in the gutter.

To his lasting self-reproach it was young Gadley himself, accompanying

his employer home from Westminster, who had drawn Mr. Stillwood's

attention to the girl by boxing her ears for having, as he passed,

slapped his face with a convenient sprat.  Stillwood, acting on the

impulse of the moment, had taken the child by the hand and dragged

her, unwilling, to her father's place of business--a small coal shed

in the Horseferry Road.  The arrangement he there made amounted

practically to the purchase of the child.  She was sent abroad to

school and the coal shed closed.  On her return, ten years later, a

big, handsome young woman, he married her, and learned at leisure the

truth of the old saying, "what's bred in the bone will come out in the

flesh," scrub it and paint it and hide it away under fine clothes as

you will.



Her constant complaint against her husband was that he was only a

solicitor, a profession she considered vulgar; and nothing "riled" old

Gadley more than hearing her views upon this point.



"It's not fair to the gals," I once heard her say to him.  I was

working in the next room, with the door not quite closed, added to

which she talked at the top of her voice on all subjects.  "What real

gentleman, I should like to know, is going to marry the daughter of a

City attorney?  As I told him years ago, he ought to have retired and

gone into the House."



"The very thing your poor father used to talk of doing whenever things

were going a bit queer in the retail coal and potato business,"

grunted old Gadley.



Mrs. Stillwood called him a "low beast" in her most aristocratic

tones, and swept out of the room.



Not that old Stillwood himself ever expressed fondness for the law.



"I am not at all sure, Kelver," I remember his saying to me on one

occasion, "that you have done wisely in choosing the law.  It makes

one regard humanity morally as the medical profession regards it

physically:--as universally unsound.  You suspect everybody of being a

rogue.  When people are behaving themselves, we lawyers hear nothing

of them.  All we hear of is roguery, trickery and hypocrisy.  It

deteriorates the character, Kelver.  We live in a perpetual atmosphere

of transgression.  I sometimes fancy it may be infectious."



"It does not seem to have infected you, sir," I replied; for, as I

think I have already mentioned, the firm of Stillwood, Waterhead and

Royal was held in legal circles as the synonym for rectitude of

dealing quite old-fashioned.



"I hope not, Kelver, I hope not," the old gentleman replied; "and yet,

do you know, I sometimes suspect myself--wonder if I may not perhaps

be a scamp without realising it.  A rogue, you know, Kelver, can

always explain himself into an honest man to his own satisfaction.  A

scamp is never a scamp to himself."



His words for the moment alarmed me, for, acting on old Gadley's

advice, I had persuaded my mother to put all her small capital into

Mr. Stillwood's hands for re-investment, a transaction that had

resulted in substantial increase of our small income.  But, looking

into his smiling eyes, my momentary fear vanished.



Laughing, he laid his hand upon my shoulder.  "One person always be

suspicious of, Kelver--yourself.  Nobody can do you so much harm as

yourself."



Of Washburn we saw more and more.  "Hal" we both called him now, for

removing with his gentle, masterful hands my mother's shyness from

about her, he had established himself almost as one of the family, my

mother regarding him as she might some absurdly bearded boy entrusted

to her care without his knowing it, I looking up to him as to some

wonderful elder brother.



"You rest me, Mrs. Kelver," he would say, lighting his pipe and

sinking down into the deep leathern chair that always waited for him

in our parlour.  "Your even voice, your soft eyes, your quiet hands,

they soothe me."



"It is good for a man," he would say, looking from one to the other of

us through the hanging smoke, "to test his wisdom by two things:  the

face of a good woman, and the ear of a child--I beg your pardon,

Paul--of a young man.  A good woman's face is the white sunlight.

Under the gas-lamps who shall tell diamond from paste?  Bring it into

the sunlight:  does it stand that test?  Then it is good.  And the

children! they are the waiting earth on which we fling our store.  Is

it chaff and dust or living seed?  Wait and watch.  I shower my

thoughts over our Paul, Mrs. Kelver.  They seem to me brilliant, deep,

original.  The young beggar swallows them, forgets them.  They were

rubbish.  Then I say something that dwells with him, that grows.  Ah,

that was alive, that was a seed.  The waiting earth, it can make use

only of what is true."



"You should marry, Hal," my mother would say.  It was her panacea for

all mankind.



"I would, Mrs. Kelver," he answered her on one occasion, "I would

to-morrow if I could marry half a dozen women.  I should make an ideal

husband for half a dozen wives.  One I should neglect for five days,

and be a burden to upon the sixth."



From any other than Hal my mother would have taken such a remark, made

even in jest, as an insult to her sex.  But Hal's smile was a coating

that could sugar any pill.



"I am not one man, Mrs. Kelver, I am half a dozen.  If I were to marry

one wife she would be married to six husbands.  It is too many for any

woman to manage."



"Have you never fallen in love?" asked my mother.



"Three of me have, but on each occasion the other five of me out-voted

him."



"You're sure six would be sufficient?" queried my mother, smiling.



"Just the right number, Mrs. Kelver.  There is one of me must worship,

adore a woman madly, abjectly; grovel before her like the Troubadour

before his Queen of Song, eat her slipper, drink the water she has

washed in, scourge himself before her window, die for a kiss of her

glove flung down with a laugh.  She must be scornful, contemptuous,

cruel.  There is another I would cherish, a tender, yielding creature,

one whose face would light at my coming, cloud at my going; one to

whom I should be a god.  There is a third I, a child of Pan--an ugly

little beast, Mrs. Kelver; horns on head and hoofs on feet, leering

through the wood, seeking its fit mate.  And a fourth would wed a

wholesome, homely wench, deep of bosom, broad of hip; fit mother of a

sturdy brood.  A fifth could only be content with a true friend, a

comrade wise and witty, a sharer and understander of all joys and

thoughts and feelings.  And a last, Mrs. Kelver, yearns for a woman

pure and sweet, clothed in love and crowned with holiness.  Shouldn't

we be a handful, Mrs. Kelver, for any one woman in an eight-roomed

house?"



But my mother was not to be discouraged.  "You will find the woman one

day, Hal, who will be all of them to you--all of them that are worth

having, that is.  And your eight-roomed house will be a kingdom!"



"A man is many, and a woman but one," answered Hal.



"That is what men say who are too blind to see more than one side of a

woman," retorted my mother, a little sharply; for the honour and

credit of her own sex in all things was very dear to my mother.  And

indeed this I have learned, that the flag of Womanhood you shall ever

find upheld by all true women, flouted only by the false.  For a judge

in petticoats is ever but a witness in a wig.



Hal laid aside his pipe and leant forward in his chair.  "Now tell us,

Mrs. Kelver, for our guidance, we two young bachelors, what must the

lover of a young girl be?"



Always very serious on this subject of love, my mother answered

gravely:  "She asks for the whole of a man, Hal, not merely for a

sixth, nor any other part of him.  She is a child asking for a lover

to whom she can look up, who will teach her, guide her, protect her.

She is a queen demanding homage, and yet he is her king whom it is her

joy to serve.  She asks to be his partner, his fellow-worker, his

playmate, and at the same time she loves to think of him as her child,

her big baby she must take care of.     Whatever he has to give she

has also to respond with.  You need not marry six wives, Hal; you will

find your six in one.



"'As the water to the vessel, woman shapes herself to man;' an old

heathen said that three thousand years ago, and others have repeated

him; that is what you mean."



"I don't like that way of putting it," answered my mother.  "I mean

that as you say of man, so in every true woman is contained all women.

But to know her completely you must love her with all love."



Sometimes the talk would be of religion, for my mother's faith was no

dead thing that must be kept ever sheltered from the air, lest it

crumble.



One evening "Who are we that we should live?" cried Hal.  "The spider

is less cruel; the very pig less greedy, gluttonous and foul; the

tiger less tigerish; our cousin ape less monkeyish.  What are we but

savages, clothed and ashamed, nine-tenths of us?"



"But Sodom and Gomorrah," reminded him my mother, "would have been

spared for the sake of ten just men."



"Much more sensible to have hurried the ten men out, leaving the

remainder to be buried with all their abominations under their own

ashes," growled Hal.



"And we shall be purified," continued my mother, "the evil in us

washed away."



"Why have made us ill merely to mend us?  If the Almighty were so

anxious for our company, why not have made us decent in the

beginning?"  He had just come away from a meeting of Poor Law

Guardians, and was in a state of dissatisfaction with human nature

generally.



"It is His way," answered my mother.  "The precious stone lies hid in

clay.  He has His purpose."



"Is the stone so very precious?"



"Would He have taken so much pains to fashion it if it were not?  You

see it all around you, Hal, in your daily practice--heroism,

self-sacrifice, love stronger than death.  Can you think He will waste

it, He who uses again even the dead leaf?"



"Shall the new leaf remember the new flower?"



"Yes, if it ever knew it.  Shall memory be the only thing to die?"



Often of an evening I would accompany Hal upon his rounds.  By the

savage tribe he both served and ruled he had come to be regarded as

medicine man and priest combined.  He was both their tyrant and their

slave, working for them early and late, yet bullying them

unmercifully, enforcing his commands sometimes with vehement tongue,

and where that would not suffice with quick fists; the counsellor,

helper, ruler, literally of thousands.  Of income he could have made

barely enough to live upon; but few men could have enjoyed more sense

of power; and that I think it was that held him to the neighbourhood.



"Nature laid me by and forgot me for a couple of thousand years," was

his own explanation of himself.  "Born in my proper period, I should

have climbed to chieftainship upon uplifted shields.  I might have

been an Attila, an Alaric.  Among the civilised one can only climb by

crawling, and I am too impatient to crawl.  Here I am king at once by

force of brain and muscle."  So in Poplar he remained, poor in fees

but rich in honour.



The love of justice was a passion with him.  The oppressors of the

poor knew and feared him well.  Injustice once proved before him,

vengeance followed sure.  If the law would not help, he never

hesitated to employ lawlessness, of which he could always command a

satisfactory supply.  Bumble might have the Board of Guardians at his

back, Shylock legal support for his pound of flesh; but sooner or

later the dark night brought punishment, a ducking in dock basin or

canal, "Brutal Assault Upon a Respected Resident" (according to the

local papers), the "miscreants" always making and keeping good their

escape, for he was an admirable organiser.



One night it seemed to him necessary that a child should go at once

into the Infirmary.



"It ain't no use my taking her now," explained the mother, "I'll only

get bullyragged for disturbing 'em.  My old man was carried there

three months ago when he broke his leg, but they wouldn't take him in

till the morning."



"Oho! oho! oho!" sang Hal, taking the child up in his arms and putting

on his hat.  "You follow me; we'll have some sport.  Tally ho! tally

ho!"  And away we went, Hal heading our procession through the

streets, shouting a rollicking song, the baby staring at him

openmouthed.



"Now ring," cried Hal to the mother on our reaching the Workhouse

gate.  "Ring modestly, as becomes the poor ringing at the gate of

Charity."  And the bell tinkled faintly.



"Ring again!" cried Hal, drawing back into the shadow; and at last the

wicket opened.



"Oh, if you please, sir, my baby--"



"Blast your baby!" answered a husky voice, "what d'ye mean by coming

here this time of night?"



"Please, sir, I'm afraid it's dying, and the Doctor--"



The man was no sentimentalist, and to do him justice made no

hypocritical pretence of being one.  He consigned the baby and its

mother and the doctor to Hell, and the wicket would have closed but

for the point of Hal's stick.



"Open the gate!" roared Hal.  It was idle pretending not to hear Hal

anywhere within half a mile of him when he filled his lungs for a cry.

"Open it quick, you blackguard!  You gross vat-load of potato spirit,

you--"



That the Governor should speak a language familiar to the governed was

held by the Romans, born rulers of men, essential to authority.  This

theory Hal also maintained.  His command of idiom understanded by his

people was one of his rods of power.  In less time than it took the

trembling porter to loosen the bolts, Hal had presented him with a

word picture of himself, as seen by others, that must have lessened

his self-esteem.



"I didn't know as it was you, Doctor," explained the man.



"No, you thought you had only to deal with some helpless creature you

could bully.  Stir your fat carcass, you ugly cur!  I'm in a hurry."



The House Surgeon was away, but an attendant or two were lounging

about, unfortunately for themselves, for Hal, being there, took it

upon himself to go round the ward setting crooked things straight; and

a busy and alarming time they had of it.  Not till a couple of hours

later did he fling himself forth again, having enjoyed himself

greatly.



A gentleman came to reside in the district, a firm believer in the

wisdom of the couplet:  "A woman, a spaniel and a walnut tree, The

more you beat them the better they be."  The spaniel and the walnut

tree he did not possess, so his wife had the benefit of his undivided

energies.  Whether his treatment had improved her morally, one cannot

say; her evident desire to do her best may have been natural or may

have been assisted; but physically it was injuring her.  He used to

beat her about the head with his strap, his argument being that she

always seemed half asleep, and that this, for the time being, woke her

up.  Sympathisers brought complaint to Hal, for the police in that

neighbourhood are to keep the streets respectable.  With the life in

the little cells that line them they are no more concerned than are

the scavengers of the sewers with the domestic arrangements of the

rats.



"What's he like?" asked Hal.



"He's a big 'un," answered the woman who had come with the tale, "and

he's good with his fists--I've seen him.  But there's no getting at

him.  He's the sort to have the law on you if you interfere with him,

and she's the sort to help him."



"Any likely time to catch him at it?" asked Hal.



"Saturdays it's as regular as early closing," answered the woman, "but

you might have to wait a bit."



"I'll wait in your room, granny, next Saturday," suggested Hal.



"All right," agreed the woman, "I'll risk it, even if I do get a

bloody head for it."



So that week end we sat very still on two rickety chairs listening to

a long succession of sharp, cracking sounds that, had one not known,

one might have imagined produced by some child monotonously exploding

percussion caps, each one followed by an answering groan.  Hal never

moved, but sat smoking his pipe, an ugly smile about his mouth.  Only

once he opened his lips, and then it was to murmur to himself:  "And

God blessed them and said unto them, Be fruitful and multiply."



The horror ceased at last, and later we heard the door unlock and a

man's foot upon the landing above.  Hal beckoned to me, and swiftly we

slipped out and down the creaking stairs.  He opened the front door,

and we waited in the evil-smelling little passage.  The man came

towards us whistling.  He was a powerfully built fellow, rather

good-looking, I remember.  He stopped abruptly upon catching sight of

Hal, who stood crouching in the shadow of the door.



"What are you doing here?" he demanded.



"Waiting to pull your nose!" answered Hal, suiting the action to the

word.  And then laughing he ran down the street, I following.



The man gave chase, calling to us with a string of imprecations to

stop.  But Hal only ran the faster, though after a street or two he

slackened, and the man gained on us a little.



So we continued, the distance between us and our pursuer now a little

more, now a little less.  People turned and stared at us.  A few boys,

scenting grim fun, followed shouting for awhile; but these we soon

out-paced, till at last in deserted streets, winding among warehouses

bordering the river, we three ran alone, between long, lifeless walls.

I looked into Hal's face from time to time, and he was laughing; but

every now and then he would look over his shoulder at the man behind

him still following doggedly, and then his face would be twisted into

a comically terrified grimace.  Turning into a narrow cul-de-sac, Hal

suddenly ducked behind a wide brick buttress, and the man, still

running, passed us.  And then Hal stood up and called to him, and the

man turned, looked into Hal's eyes, and understood.



He was not a coward.  Besides, even a rat when cornered will fight for

its life.  He made a rush at Hal, and Hal made no attempt to defend

himself.  He stood there laughing, and the man struck him full in the

face, and the blood spurted out and flowed down into his mouth.  The

man came on again, though terror was in every line of his face, all

his desire being to escape.  But this time Hal drove him back again.

They fought for awhile, if one can call it fighting, till the man, mad

for air, reeled against the wall, stood there quivering convulsively,

his mouth wide open, resembling more than anything else some huge

dying fish.  And Hal drew away and waited.



I have no desire to see again the sight I saw that quiet, still

evening, framed by those high, windowless walls, from behind which

sounded with ceaseless regularity the gentle swish of the incoming

tide.  All sense of retribution was drowned in the sight of Hal's

evident enjoyment of his sport.  The judge had disappeared, leaving

the work to be accomplished by a savage animal loosened for the

purpose.



The wretched creature flung itself again towards its only door of

escape, fought with the vehemence of despair, to be flung back again,

a hideous, bleeding mass of broken flesh.  I tried to cling to Hal's

arm, but one jerk of his steel muscles flung me ten feet away.



"Keep off, you fool!" he cried.  "I won't kill him.  I'm keeping my

head.  I shall know when to stop."  And I crept away and waited.



Hal joined me a little later, wiping the blood from his face.  We made

our way to a small public-house near the river, and from there Hal

sent a couple of men on whom he could rely with instructions how to

act.  I never heard any more of the matter.  It was a subject on which

I did not care to speak to Hal.  I can only hope that good came of it.



There was a spot--it has been cleared away since to make room for the

approach to Greenwich Tunnel--it was then the entrance to a grain

depot in connection with the Milwall Docks.  A curious brick well it

resembled, in the centre of which a roadway wound downward, corkscrew

fashion, disappearing at the bottom into darkness under a yawning

arch.  The place possessed the curious property of being ever filled

with a ceaseless murmur, as though it were some aerial maelstrom,

drawing into its silent vacuum all wandering waves of sound from the

restless human ocean flowing round it.  No single tone could one ever

distinguish:  it was a mingling of all voices, heard there like the

murmur of a sea-soaked shell.



We passed through it on our return.  Its work for the day was

finished, its strange, weary song uninterrupted by the mighty waggons

thundering up and down its spiral way.  Hal paused, leaning against

the railings that encircled its centre, and listened.



"Hark, do you not hear it, Paul?" he asked.  "It is the music of

Humanity.  All human notes are needful to its making:  the faint wail

of the new-born, the cry of the dying thief; the beating of the

hammers, the merry trip of dancers; the clatter of the teacups, the

roaring of the streets; the crooning of the mother to her babe, the

scream of the tortured child; the meeting kiss of lovers, the sob of

those that part.  Listen! prayers and curses, sighs and laughter; the

soft breathing of the sleeping, the fretful feet of pain; voices of

pity, voices of hate; the glad song of the strong, the foolish

complaining of the weak.  Listen to it, Paul!  Right and wrong, good

and evil, hope and despair, it is but one voice--a single note, drawn

by the sweep of the Player's hand across the quivering strings of man.

What is the meaning of it, Paul?  Can you read it?  Sometimes it seems

to me a note of joy, so full, so endless, so complete, that I cry:

'Blessed be the Lord whose hammers have beaten upon us, whose fires

have shaped us to His ends!'  And sometimes it sounds to me a dying

note, so that I could curse Him who in wantonness has wrung it from

the anguish of His creatures--till I would that I could fling myself,

Prometheus like, between Him and His victims, calling:  "My darkness,

but their light; my agony, 0 God; their hope!'"



The faint light from a neighbouring gas-lamp fell upon his face that

an hour before I had seen the face of a wild beast. The ugly mouth was

quivering, tears stood in his great, tender eyes.  Could his prayer in

that moment have been granted, could he have pressed against his bosom

all the pain of the world, he would have rejoiced.



He shook himself together with a laugh.  "Come, Paul, we have had a

busy afternoon, and I'm thirsty.  Let us drink some beer, my boy, good

sound beer, and plenty of it."



My mother fell ill that winter.  Mountain born and mountain bred, the

close streets had never agreed with her, and scolded by all of us, she

promised, "come the fine weather," to put sentiment behind her, and go

away from them.



"I'm thinking she will," said Hal, gripping my shoulder with his

strong hand, "but it'll be by herself that she'll go, lad.  My wonder

is," he continued, "that she has held out so long.  If anything, it is

you that have kept her alive.  Now that you are off her mind to a

certain extent, she is worrying about your father, I expect.  These

women, they never will believe a man can take care of himself, even in

Heaven.  She's never quite trusted the Lord with him, and never will

till she's there to give an eye to things herself."



Hal's prophecy fell true.  She left "come the fine weather," as she

had promised:  I remember it was the first day primroses were hawked

in the street.  But another death had occurred just before; which,

concerning me closely as it does, I had better here dispose of; and

that was the death of old Mr. Stillwood, who passed away rich in

honour and regret, and was buried with much ostentation and much

sincere sorrow; for he had been to many of his clients, mostly old

folk, rather a friend than a mere man of business, and had gained from

all with whom he had come in contact, respect, and from many real

affection.



In conformity with the old legal fashions that in his life he had so

fondly clung to, his will was read aloud by Mr. Gadley after the

return from the funeral, and many were the tears its recital called

forth.  Written years ago by himself and never altered, its quaint

phraseology was full of kindly thought and expression.  No one had

been forgotten.  Clerks, servants, poor relations, all had been

treated with even-handed justice, while for those with claim upon him,

ample provision had been made.  Few wills, I think, could ever have

been read less open to criticism.



Old Gadley slipped his arm into mine as we left the house.  "If you've

nothing to do, young 'un," he said, "I'll get you to come with me to

the office.  I have got all the keys in my pocket, and we shall be

quiet.  It will be sad work for me, and I had rather we were alone.  A

couple of hours will show us everything."



We lighted the wax candles--old Stillwood could never tolerate gas in

his own room--and opening the safe took out the heavy ledgers one by

one, and from them Gadley dictated figures which I wrote down and

added up.



"Thirty years I have kept these books for him," said old Gadley, as we

laid by the last of them, "thirty years come Christmas next, he and I

together.  No other hands but ours have ever touched them, and now

people to whom they mean nothing but so much business will fling them

about, drop greasy crumbs upon them--I know their ways, the

brutes!--scribble all over them.  And he who always would have

everything so neat and orderly!"



We came to the end of them in less than the time old Gadley had

thought needful:  in such perfect order had everything been

maintained.  I was preparing to go, but old Gadley had drawn a couple

of small keys from his pocket, and was shuffling again towards the

safe.



"Only one more," he explained in answer to my look, "his own private

ledger.  It will merely be in the nature of a summary, but we'll just

glance through it."



He opened an inner drawer and took from it a small thick volume bound

in green leather and closed with two brass locks.  An ancient volume,

it appeared, its strong binding faded and stained.  Old Gadley sat

down with it at the dead man's own desk, and snuffing the two shaded

candles, unlocked and opened it.  I was standing opposite, so that the

book to me was upside down, but the date on the first page, "1841,"

caught my eye, as also the small neat writing now brown with age.



"So neat, so orderly he always was," murmured old Gadley again,

smoothing the page affectionately with his hand, and I waited for his

dictation.



But no glib flow of figures fell from him.  His eyebrows suddenly

contracted, his body stiffened itself.  Then for the next quarter of

an hour nothing sounded in the quiet room but his turning of the

creakling pages.  Once or twice he glanced round swiftly over his

shoulder, as though haunted by the idea of some one behind him; then

back to the neat, closely written folios, his little eyes, now

exhibiting a comical look of horror, starting out of his round red

face.  First slowly, then quickly with trembling hands he turned the

pages, till the continual ratling of the leaves sounded like strange,

mocking laughter through the silent, empty room; almost one could

imagine it coming from some watching creature hidden in the shadows.



The end reached, he sat staring before him, his whole body quivering,

great beads of sweat upon his shiny bald head.



"Am I mad?" was all he could find to say.  "Kelver, am I mad?"



He handed me the book.  It was a cynically truthful record of fraud,

extending over thirty years.  Every client, every friend, every

relative that had fallen into his net he had robbed:  the fortunate

ones of a part, the majority of their all.  Its very first entry

debited him with the proceeds of his own partner's estate.  Its last

ran --"Re Kelver--various sales of stock."  To his credit were his

payments year after year of imaginary interests on imaginary

securities, the surplus accounted for with simple brevity:

"Transferred to own account."  No record could have been more clear,

more frank.  Beneath each transaction was written its true history;

the actual investments, sometimes necessary, carefully distinguished

from the false.  In neat red ink would occur here and there a note for

his own guidance:  "Eldest child comes of age August, '73.  Be

prepared for trustees desiring production."  Turning to "August, '73,"

one found that genuine investment had been made, to be sold again a

few months later on.  From beginning to end not a single false step

had he committed.  Suspicious clients had been ear-marked:  the

trusting discriminated with gratitude, and milked again and again to

meet emergency.



As a piece of organisation it was magnificent.  No one but a financial

genius could have picked a dozen steps through such a network of

chicanery.  For half a lifetime he had moved among it, dignified,

respected and secure.



Whether even he could have maintained his position for another month

was doubtful.  Suicide, though hinted at, was proved to have been

impossible.  It seemed as though with his amazing audacity he had

tricked even Death into becoming his accomplice.



"But it is impossible, Kelver!" cried Gadley, "this must be some

dream.  Stillwood, Waterhead and Royal!  What is the meaning of it?"



He took the book into his hands again, then burst into tears.  "You

never knew him," wailed the poor little man.  "Stillwood, Waterhead

and Royal!  I came here as office boy fifty years ago.  He was more

like a friend to me than--" and again the sobs shook his little fat

body.



I locked the books away and put him into his hat and coat.  But I had

much difficulty in getting him out of the office.



"I daren't, young 'un," he cried, drawing back.  "Fifty years I have

walked out of this office, proud of it, proud of being connected with

it.  I daren't face the street!"



All the way home his only idea was:  Could it not be hidden?  Honest,

kindly little man that he was, he seemed to have no thought for the

unfortunate victims.  The good name of his master, of his friend,

gone!  Stillwood, Waterhead and Royal, a by-word!  To have avoided

that I believe he would have been willing for yet another hundred

clients to be ruined.



I saw him to his door, then turned homeward; and to my surprise in a

dark by-street heard myself laughing heartily.  I checked myself

instantly, feeling ashamed of my callousness, of my seeming

indifference to the trouble even of myself and my mother.  Yet as

there passed before me the remembrance of that imposing and expensive

funeral with its mournful following of tearful faces; the hushed

reading of the will with its accompaniment of rustling approval; the

picture of the admirably sympathetic clergyman consoling with white

hands Mrs. Stillwood, inclined to hysteria, but anxious concerning her

two hundred pounds' worth of crape which by no possibility of means

could now be paid for--recurred to me the obituary notice in "The

Chelsea Weekly Chronicle":  the humour of the thing swept all else

before it, and I laughed again--I could not help it--loud and long.

It was my first introduction to the comedy of life, which is apt to be

more brutal than the comedy of fiction.



But nearing home, the serious side of the matter forced itself

uppermost.  Fortunately, our supposed dividends had been paid to us by

Mr. Stillwood only the month before.  Could I keep the thing from

troubling my mother's last days?  It would be hard work.  I should

have to do it alone, for a perhaps foolish pride prevented my taking

Hal into my confidence, even made his friendship a dread to me, lest

he should come to learn and offer help.  There is a higher generosity,

it is said, that can receive with pleasure as well as bestow favour;

but I have never felt it.  Could I be sure of acting my part, of not

betraying myself to her sharp eyes, of keeping newspapers and chance

gossip away from her?  Good shrewd Amy I cautioned, but I shrank from

even speaking on the subject to Hal, and my fear was lest he should

blunder into the subject, which for the usual nine days occupied much

public attention.  But fortunately he appeared not even to have heard

of the scandal.



Possibly had the need lasted longer I might have failed, but as it

was, a few weeks saw the end.



"Don't leave me to-day, Paul," whispered my mother to me one morning.

So I stayed, and in the evening my mother put her arms around my neck

and I lay beside her, my head upon her breast, as I used to when a

little boy.  And when the morning came I was alone.

