




	APPENDIX TO INTRODUCTION.




	No. I.---ADVERTISEMENT
	FOR THE APPREHENSION OF ROB ROY.

(From the Edinburgh Evening Courant, June 18 to June 21, A.D. 1732. No. 1058.)

  ``That Robert Campbell, commonly known by the name of Rob Roy
MacGregor, being lately intrusted by several noblemen and gentlemen with
considerable sums for buying cows for them in the Highlands, has treacherously
gone off with the money, to the value of <L>1000 sterling, which he
carries along with him. All Magistrates and Officers of his Majesty's
forces are intreated to seize upon the said Rob Roy, and the money which
he carries with him, until the persons concerned in the money be heard
against him; and that notice be given, when he is apprehended, to the
keepers of the Exchange Coffee-house at Edinburgh, and the keeper of the
Coffee-house at Glasgow, where the parties concerned will be advertised,
and the seizers shall be very reasonably rewarded for their pains.''

  It is unfortunate that this Hue and Cry, which is afterwards repeated
in the same paper, contains no description of Rob Roy's person, which, of
course, we must suppose to have been pretty generally known. As it is
directed against Rob Roy personally, it would seem to exclude the idea of
the cattle being carried off by his partner, MacDonald, who would certainly
have been mentioned in the advertisement, if the creditors concerned had
supposed him to be in possession of the money.



	No. II.---LETTERS
	FROM AND TO THE DUKE OF MONTROSE
	RESPECTING ROB ROY'S ARREST OF MR. GRAHAME OF KILLEARN.

	_The Duke of Montrose to------------_<*>

* It does not appear to whom this letter was addressed. Certainly, from its
* style and tenor, It was designed for some person high in rank and office---perhaps
* the King's Advocate for the time.


				``Glasgow, the 21st November, 1716.

  ``My Lord,---I was surprised last night with the account of a very remarkable
instance of the insolence of that very notorious rogue Rob Roy,
whom your lordship has often heard named. The honour of his Majesty's
Government being concerned in it, I thought it my duty to acquaint your
lordship of the particulars by an express.

  ``Mr. Grahame of Killearn (whom I have had occasion to mention frequently
to you, for the good service he did last winter during the rebellion)
having the charge of my Highland estate, went to Monteath, which is a
part of it, on Monday last, to bring in my rents, it being usual for him to
be there for two or three nights together at this time of the year, in a
country house, for the conveniency of meeting the tenants, upon that
account. The same night, about 9 of the clock, Rob Roy, with a party of
those ruffians whom he has still kept about him since the late rebellion, surrounded
the house where Mr. Grahame was with some of my tenants doing
his business, ordered his men to present their guns in att the windows of
the room where he was sitting, while he himself at the same time with
others entered at the door, with cocked pistols, and made Mr. Grahame
prisoner, carreing him away to the hills with the money he had got, his
books and papers, and my tenants' bonds for their fines, amounting to
above a thousand pounds sterling, whereof the one-half had been paid last
year, and the other was to have been paid now; and att the same time had
the insolence to cause him to write a letter to me (the copy of which is
enclosed) offering me terms of a treaty.

  ``That your Lordship may have the better view of this matter, it will
be necessary that I should inform you, that this fellow has now, of a long
time, put himself at the head of the Clan M`Gregor, a race of people who
in all ages have distinguished themselves beyond others, by robberies, depredations,
and murders, and have been the constant harbourers and entertainers
of vagabonds and loose people. From the time of the Revolution
he has taken every opportunity to appear against the Government,
acting rather as a robber than doing any real service to those whom he
pretended to appear for, and has really done more mischief to the countrie
than all the other Highlanders have done.

  ``Some three or four years before the last rebellion broke out, being
overburdened with debts, he quitted his ordinary residence, and removed
some twelve or sixteen miles farther into the Highlands, putting himself
under the protection of the Earl of Bredalbin. When my Lord Cadogan
was in the Highlands, he ordered his house att this place to be burnt,
which your Lordship sees he now places to my account.

  ``This obliges him to return to the same countrie he went from, being a
most rugged inaccessible place, where he took up his residence anew
amongst his own friends and relations; but well judging that it was possible
to surprise him, he, with about forty-five of his followers, went to
Inverary, and made a sham surrender of their arms to Coll. Campbell of
Finab, Commander of one of the Independent Companies, and returned
home with his men, each of them having the Coll.'s protection. This
happened in the beginning of summer last; yet not long after he appeared
with his men twice in arms, in opposition to the King's troops: and one
of those times attackt them, rescued a prisoner from them, and all this
while sent abroad his party through the countrie, plundering the countrie
people, and amongst the rest some of my tenants.

  ``Being informed of these disorders after I came to Scotland, I applied
to Lieut.-Genll. Carpenter, who ordered three parties from Glasgow, Stirling,
and Finlarig, to march in the night by different routes, in order to surprise
him and his men in their houses, which would have its effect certainly, if
the great rains that happened to fall that verie night had not retarded the
march of the troops, so as some of the parties came too late to the stations
that they were ordered for. All that could be done upon the occasion was
to burn a countrie house, where Rob Roy then resided, after some of his
clan had, from the rocks, fired upon the king's troops, by which a grenadier
was killed.

  ``Mr. Grahame of Killearn, being my deputy-sheriff in that countrie,
went along with the party that marched from Stirling; and doubtless will
now meet with the worse treatment from that barbarous people on that
account. Besides, that he is my relation, and that they know how active
he has been in the service of the Government---all which, your Lordship
may believe, puts me under very great concern for the gentleman, while, at
the same time, I can foresee no manner of way how to relieve him, other
than to leave him to chance and his own management.

  ``I had my thoughts before of proposing to Government the building of
some barracks as the only expedient for suppressing these rebels, and
securing the peace of the countrie; and in that view I spoke to Genll. Carpenter,
who has now a scheme of it in his hands; and I am persuaded that
will be the true method for restraining them effectually; but, in the meantime,
it will be necessary to lodge some of the troops in those places,
upon which I intend to write to the Generall.

  ``I am sensible I have troubled your Lordship with a very long letter,
which I should be ashamed of, were I myself singly concerned; but where
the honour of the King's Government is touched, I need make no apologie,
and I shall only beg leave to add, that I am, with great respect, and truth,

				`` My Lord,

			``y<r>. Lord<s>. most humble and obedient servant,

						``MONTROSE''

COPY OF GRAHAME OF KILLEARN'S LETTER, ENCLOSED IN THE PRECEDING.

				``Chappellarroch, Nov. 19th, 1716.

  ``May it please your Grace,---I am obliged to give your Grace the
trouble of this, by Robert Roy's commands, being so unfortunate at present
as to be his prisoner. I refer the way and manner I was apprehended,
to the bearer, and shall only, in short, acquaint your Grace with the demands,
which are, that your Grace shall discharge him of all soumes he
owes your Grace, and give him the soume of 3400 merks for his loss and
damages sustained by him, both at Craigrostown and at his house, Auchinchisallen;
and that your Grace shall give your word not to trouble or
prosecute him afterwards; till which time he carries me, all the money I
received this day, my books and bonds for entress, not yet paid, along
with him, with assurance of hard usage, if any party are sent after him.
The soume I received this day, conform to the nearest computation I can
make before several of the gentlemen, is 3227<L>. 2sh. 8d. Scots, of which
I gave them notes. I shall wait your Grace's return, and ever am,

			``Your Grace's most obedient, faithful,

				``humble servant,

	_Sic subscribitur,_		``John Grahame.''



	THE DUKE OF MONTROSE TO ------------

	28_th Nov._ 1716---_Killearn's Release._

				``Glasgow, 28th Nov. 1716.

  ``Sir,---Having acquainted you by my last, of the 21st instant, of what
had happened to my friend, Mr. Grahame of Killearn, I'm very glad now
to tell you, that last night I was very agreeably surprised with Mr.
Grahame's coming here himself, and giving me the first account I had
had of him from the time of his being carried away. It seems Rob Roy,
when he came to consider a little better of it, found that, he could not
mend his matters by retaining Killearn his prisoner, which could only
expose him still the more to the justice of the Government; and therefore
thought fit to dismiss him on Sunday evening last, having kept him from
the Monday night before, under a very uneasy kind of restraint, being
obliged to change continually from place to place. He gave him back the
books, papers, and bonds, but kept the money.

			``I am, with great truth, Sir,

				``your most humble servant,

					``MONTROSE.''

  [Some papers connected with Rob Roy Macgregor, signed ``Ro. Campbell,''
in 1711, were lately presented to the Society of Antiquaries. One of
these is a kind of contract between the Duke of Montrose and Rob Roy, by
which the latter undertakes to deliver within a given time ``Sixtie good and
sufficient Kintaill highland Cowes, betwixt the age of five and nine years,
at fourtene pounds Scotts per peice, with ane bull to the bargane, and that
at the head dykes of Buchanan upon the twenty-eight day of May next.''---
Dated December 1711.---See _Proceedings,_ vol. vii. p. 253.]





	No. III.---CHALLENGE BY ROB ROY.

  ``Rob Roy _to ain hie and mighty Prince,_ James Duke of Montrose.

  ``In charity to your Grace's couradge and conduct, please know, the only
way to retrive both is to treat Rob Roy like himself, in appointing tyme,
place, and choice of arms, that at once you may extirpate your inveterate
enemy, or put a period to your punny (puny?) life in falling gloriously by
his hands. That impertinent criticks or flatterers may not brand me for
challenging a man that's repute of a poor dastardly soul, let such know
that I admit of the two great supporters of his character and the captain
of his bands to joyne with him in the combat. Then sure your Grace
wont have the impudence to clamour att court for multitudes to hunt me
like a fox, under pretence that I am not to be found above ground. This
saves your Grace and the troops any further trouble of searching; that is,
if your ambition of glory press you to embrace this unequald venture
offerd of Rob's head. But if your Grace's piety, prudence, and cowardice,
forbids hazarding this gentlemanly expedient, then let your desire of peace
restore what you have robed from me by the tyranny of your present
cituation, otherwise your overthrow as a man is determined; and advertise
your friends never more to look for the frequent civility payed them, of
sending them home without their arms only. Even their former cravings
wont purchase that favour; so your Grace by this has peace in your offer,
if the sound of wax be frightful, and chuse you whilk, your good friend or
mortal enemy.''

  This singular rhodomontade is enclosed in a letter to a friend of Rob Roy,
probably a retainer of the Duke of Argyle in Isle, which is in these
words:---

  ``Sir,---Receive the enclosd paper, q<n> you are takeing yor Botle it will
divert yorself and comrad's. I gote noe news since I seed you, only q<t>
wee had before about the Spainyard's is like to continue. If I'll get any
further account about them I'll be sure to let you know of it, and till then
I will not write any more till I'll have more sure account. and I am

			``Sir, your most affectionate C<n> [cousin],

				``and most humble servant,

					``Ro: Roy.''

  ``_Apryle_ 16_th,_ 1719.

``To Mr. Patrick Anderson, at Hay---These.'

	The seal, _a stag_---no bad emblem of a wild cateran.

  It appears from the envelope that Rob Roy still continued to act as
Intelligencer to the Duke of Argyle, and his agents. The war he alludes to
is probably some vague report of invasion from Spain. Such rumours
were likely enough to be afloat, in consequence of the disembarkation of
the troops who were taken at Glensheal in the preceding year, 1718.



	No. IV.---LETTER

	FROM ROBERT CAMPBELL, _alias_ M`GREGOR,
	COMMONLY CALLED ROB ROY, TO FIELD-MARSHAL WADE,

	Then receiving the submission of disaffected Chieftains and Clans.*

* This curious epistle is copied from an authentic narrative of Marshal Wade's
* proceedings in the Highlands, communicated by the late eminent antiquary, George
* Chalmers, Esq., to Mr. Robert Jamieson, of the Register House, Edinburgh, and
* published in the Appendix to an Edition of Burt's Letters from the North of Scotland,
* 2 vols. 8vo, Edinburgh, 1818.

  Sir,---The great humanity with which you have constantly acted in the
discharge of the trust reposed in you, and your ever having made use of
the great powers with which you were vested as the means of doing good
and charitable offices to such as ye found proper objects of compassion,
will, I hope, excuse my importunity in endeavouring to approve myself not
absolutely unworthy of that mercy and favour which your Excellency has
so generously procured from his Majesty for others in my unfortunate
circumstances. I am very sensible nothing can be alledged sufficient to
excuse so great a crime as I have been guilty of it, that of Rebellion. But
I humbly beg leave to lay before your Excellency some particulars in the
circumstance of my guilt, which, I hope, will extenuate it in some
measure. It was my misfortune, at the time the Rebellion broke out, to
be liable to legal diligence and caption, at the Duke of Montrose's instance,
for debt alledged due to him. To avoid being flung into prison, as I must
certainly have been, had I followed my real inclinations in joining the
King's troops at Stirling, I was forced to take party with the adherents of
the Pretender; for the country being all in arms, it was neither safe
nor indeed possible for me to stand neuter. I should not, however, plead
my being forced into that unnatural rebellion against his Majesty, King
George, if I could not at the same time assure your Excellency, that I not
only avoided acting offensively against his Majesty's forces upon all
occasions, but on the contrary, sent his Grace the Duke of Argyle all the
intelligence I could from time to time, of the strength and situation of the
rebels; which I hope his Grace will do me the justice to acknowledge.
As to the debt to the Duke of Montrose, I have discharged it to the
utmost farthing. I beg your Excellency would be persuaded that, had it
been in my power, as it was in my inclination, I should always have acted
for the service of his Majesty King George, and that one reason of my
begging the favour of your intercession with his Majesty for the pardon of
my life, is the earnest desire I have to employ it in his service, whose good-
ness, justice, and humanity, are so conspicuous to all mankind.---I am,
with all duty and respect, your Excellency's most, &c.,

				``Robert Campbell.''



	No. V.---LETTER.

	ESCAPE OF ROB ROY FROM THE DUKE OF ATHOLE.

  The following copy of a letter which passed from one clergyman of the
Church of Scotland to another, was communicated to me by John Gregorson,
Esq. of Ardtornish. The escape of Rob Roy is mentioned, like other
interesting news of the time with which it is intermingled. The disagreement
between the Dukes of Athole and Argyle seems to have animated the
former against Rob Roy, as one of Argyle's partisans.

  ``Rev. and dear Brother,

  Y<rs> of the 28th Jun I had by the bearer. I<m> pleased
yo have got back again y<r> Delinquent which may probably safe you of the
trouble of her child. I'm sory I've yet very little of certain news to give
you from Court tho' I've seen all the last weekes prints, only I find in
them a pasage which is all the account I can give you of the Indemnity
y<t> when the estates of forfaulted Rebells Comes to be sold all Just debts
Documented are to be preferred to Officers of the Court of enquiry. The
Bill in favours of that Court against the Lords of Session in Scotland in
past the house of Commons and Come before the Lords which is thought
to be considerably more ample y<n> formerly w<t> respect to the Disposeing of
estates Canvassing and paying of Debts. It's said y<t> the examinations of
Cadugans accounts is droped but it wants Confirmations here as yet. Oxford's
tryals should be entered upon Saturday last. We hear that the
Duchess of Argyle is w<t> child. I doe not hear y<t> the Divisions at Court
are any thing abated or of any appearance of the Dukes having any thing
of his Maj: favour. I heartily wish the present humours at Court may
not prove an encouragm<t> to watchfull and restles enemies.

  My accounts of Rob Roy his escape are y<t> after severall Embassies between
his Grace (who I hear did Correspond w<t> some at Court about it)
and Rob he at length upon promise of protectione Came to waite upon the
Duke & being presently secured his Grace sent post to Ed<r> to acquent the
Court of his being aprehended & call his friends at Ed<r> and to desire a
party from Ge<n> Carpinter to receive and bring him to Ed<r> which party
came the length of Kenross in Fife, he was to be delivered to them by a
party his Grace had demanded from the Governour at Perth, who when
upon their march towards Dunkell to receive him, were mete w<t> and returned
by his Grace having resolved to deliver him by a party of his own
men and left Rob at Logierate under a strong guard till y<t> party should be
ready to receive him. This space of time Rob had Imployed in taking the
other dram heartily w<t> the Guard & q<n> all were pretty hearty, Rob is delivering
a letter for his wife to a servant to whom he most needs deliver
some private instructions at the Door (for his wife) where he's attended
wt on the Guard. When serious in this privat Conversations he is making
some few steps carelessly from the Door about the house till he comes
close by this horse which he soon mounted and made off. This is no small
mortifican to the guard because of the delay it give to there hopes of a
Considerable additionall charge ag<t> John Roy.<*> my wife was upon

* _i.e._ John the Red---John Duke of Argyle, so called from his complexion, more
* commonly styled ``Red John the Warriour.''

Thursday last delivered of a Son after sore travell of which she still continues
very weak. I give y<l> Lady hearty thanks for the Highland plaid.
It's good cloath but it does not answer the sett I sent some time agae
w<t> McArthur & tho it had I told in my last y<t> my wife was obliged to provid
herself to finish her bed before she was lighted but I know y<t> let<r> came
not timely to y<r> hand------I'm sory I had not mony to send by the
bearer having no thought of it & being exposed to some little expenses last
week but I expect some sure occasion when             order by a letter to
receive it. excuse this freedom from &c.

  ``_Manse of Comrie, July_ 2_d,_ 1717.

  ``I salute yr lady I wish my .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .
her Daughter much Joy.''



	No. VI.---HIGHLAND WOOING.

  There are many productions of the Scottish Ballad Poets upon the lion-like
mode of wooing practised by the ancient Highlanders when they had
a fancy for the person (or property) of a Lowland damsel. One example
is found in Mr. Robert Jamieson's Popular Scottish Songs:---

	Bonny Babby Livingstone
	  Gaed out to see the kye,
	And she has met with Glenlyon,
	  Who has stolen her away.

	He took free her her sattin coat,
	  But an her si1ken gown,
	Syne roud her in his tartan plaid,
	  And happd her round and roun'.

In another ballad we are told how---

	Four-and-twenty Hieland men,
	  Came doun by Fiddoch Bide,
	And they have sworn a deadly aith,
	  Jean Muir suld be a bride:

	And they have sworn a deadly aith,
	  Ilke man upon his durke,
	That she should wed with Duncan Ger,
	  Or they'd make bloody works.

  This last we have from tradition, but there are many others in the collections
of Scottish Ballads to the same purpose.

  The achievement of Robert Oig, or young Rob Roy, as the Lowlanders
called him, was celebrated in a ballad, of which there are twenty different
and various editions. The tune is lively and wild, and we select the fol-
lowing words from memory:---

	Rob Roy is frae the Hielands come,
	  Down to the Lowland border;
	And he has stolen that lady away,
	  To haud his house in order.

	He set her on a milk-white steed,
	  Of none he stood in awe;
	Untill they reached the Hieland hills,
	  Aboon the Balmaha'!<*>

* A pass on the eastern margin of Loch Lomond, and an entrance to the Highlands.

	Saying, Be content, be content,
	  Be content with me, lady;
	Where will ye find in Lennox land,
	  Sae braw a man as me, lady?

	Rob Roy he was my father called,
	  MacGregor was his name, lady;
	A' the country, far and near,
	  Have heard MaeGregor's fame, lady.

	He was a hedge about his friends,
	  A heckle to his foes, lady;
	If any man did him gainsay,
	  He felt his deadly blows, lady.

	I am as bold, I am as bold,
	  I am as bold and more, lady;
	Any man that doubts my word,
	  May try my gude claymore, lady.

	Then be content, be content.
	  Be content with me, lady;
	For now you are my wedded wife,
	  Until the day you die, lady.



	No. VI---GHLUNE DHU.

  The following notices concerning this Chief fell under the Author's eye
while the sheets were in the act of going through the press. They occur
in manuscript memoirs, written by a person intimately acquainted with the
incidents of 1745.

  This Chief had the important task intrusted to him of defending the
Castle of Doune, in which the Chevalier placed a garrison to protect his
communication with the Highlands, and to repel any sallies which might
be made from Stirling Castle---Ghlune Dhu distinguished himself by his
good conduct in this charge.

  Ghlune Dhu is thus described:---``Glengyle is, in person, a tall handsome
man, and has more of the mien of the ancient heroes than our modern
fine gentlemen are possessed of. He is honest and disinterested to a proverb
---extremely modest---brave and intrepid---and born one of the best
partisans in Europe. In short, the whole people of that country declared
that never did men live under so mild a government as Glengyle's, not a
man having so much as lost a chicken while he continued there.''

  It would appear from this curious passage, that Glengyle---not Stewart
of Balloch, as averred in a note on Waverley---commanded the garrison of
Doune. Balloch might, no doubt, succeed MacGregor in the situation.
