





		CHAPTER SECOND.



    I begin shrewdly to suspect the young man of a terrible taint---Poetry;
    with which idle disease if he be infected, there's no hope of him in a
    state course. _Actum est_ of him for a commonwealth's man, if he go
    to't in rhyme once.
				Ben Jonson's _Bartholomew Fair._




  My father had, generally speaking, his temper under complete
self-command, and his anger rarely indicated itself by words, except
in a sort of dry testy manner, to those who had displeased
him. He never used threats, or expressions of loud resentment.
All was arranged with him on system, and it was his practice to
do ``the needful'' on every occasion, without wasting words about
it. It was, therefore, with a bitter smile that he listened to my
imperfect answers concerning the state of commerce in France,
and unmercifully permitted me to involve myself deeper and
deeper in the mysteries of agio, tariffs, tare and tret; nor can I
charge my memory with his having looked positively angry, until
he found me unable to explain the exact effect which the depreciation
of the louis d'or had produced on the negotiation of bills
of exchange. ``The most remarkable national occurrence in my
time,'' said my father (who nevertheless had seen the Revolution)---
``and he knows no more of it than a post on the quay!''

  ``Mr. Francis,'' suggested Owen, in his timid and conciliatory
manner, ``cannot have forgotten, that by an _arret_ of the King of
France, dated 1st May 1700, it was provided that the _porteur,_
within ten days after due, must make demand''------

  ``Mr. Francis,'' said my father, interrupting him, ``will, I
dare say, recollect for the moment anything you are so kind as
hint to him. But, body o' me! how Dubourg could permit him!
Hark ye, Owen, what sort of a youth is Clement Dubourg, his
nephew there, in the office, the black-haired lad?''

  ``One of the cleverest clerks, sir, in the house; a prodigious
young man for his time,'' answered Owen; for the gaiety and
civility of the young Frenchman had won his heart.

  ``Ay, ay, I suppose _he_ knows something of the nature of exchange.
Dubourg was determined I should have one youngster
at least about my hand who understood business. But I see his
drift, and he shall find that I do so when he looks at the balance-sheet.
Owen, let Clement's salary be paid up to next quarter-day,
and let him ship himself back to Bourdeaux in his father's
ship, which is clearing out yonder.''

  ``Dismiss Clement Dubourg, sir?'' said Owen, with a faltering
voice.

  ``Yes, sir, dismiss him instantly; it is enough to have a stupid
Englishman in the counting-house to make blunders, without
keeping a sharp Frenchman there to profit by them.''

  I had lived long enough in the territories of the _Grand Monarque_
to contract a hearty aversion to arbitrary exertion of authority,
even if it had not been instilled into me with my earliest
breeding; and I could not refrain from interposing, to prevent
an innocent and meritorious young man from paying the penalty
of having acquired that proficiency which my father had desired
for me.

  ``I beg pardon, sir,'' when Mr. Osbaldistone had done speaking;
``but I think it but just, that if I have been negligent of my
studies, I should pay the forfeit myself. I have no reason to
charge Monsieur Dubourg with having neglected to give me
opportunities of improvement, however little I may have profited
by them; and with respect to Monsieur Clement Dubourg''------

  ``With respect to him, and to you, I shall take the measures
which I see needful,'' replied my father; ``but it is fair in you,
Frank, to take your own blame on your own shoulders---very
fair, that cannot be denied.---I cannot acquit old Dubourg,''
he said, looking to Owen, ``for having merely afforded Frank
the means of useful knowledge, without either seeing that he
took advantage of them or reporting to me if he did not. You
see, Owen, he has natural notions of equity becoming a British
merchant.''

  ``Mr. Francis,'' said the head-clerk, with his usual formal inclination
of the head, and a slight elevation of his right hand,
which he had acquired by a habit of sticking his pen behind his
ear before he spoke---``Mr. Francis seems to understand the fundamental
principle of all moral accounting, the great ethic rule
of three. Let A do to B, as he would have B do to him; the
product will give the rule of conduct required.''

  My father smiled at this reduction of the golden rule to arithmetical
form, but instantly proceeded.

  ``All this signifies nothing, Frank; you have been throwing
away your time like a boy, and in future you must learn to live
like a man. I shall put you under Owen's care for a few months,
to recover the lost ground.''

  I was about to reply, but Owen looked at me with such a supplicatory
and warning gesture, that I was involuntarily silent.

  ``We will then,'' continued my father, ``resume the subject of
mine of the 1st ultimo, to which you sent me an answer which
was unadvised and unsatisfactory. So now, fill your glass, and
push the bottle to Owen.''

  Want of courage---of audacity if you will---was never my
failing. I answered firmly, ``I was sorry that my letter was
unsatisfactory, unadvised it was not; for I had given the proposal
his goodness had made me, my instant and anxious attention,
and it was with no small pain that I found myself obliged
to decline it.''

  My father bent his keen eye for a moment on me, and instantly
withdrew it. As he made no answer, I thought myself
obliged to proceed, though with some hesitation, and he only
interrupted me by monosyllables.---``It is impossible, sir, for
me to have higher respect for any character than I have for the
commercial, even were it not yours.''

  ``Indeed!''

  ``It connects nation with nation, relieves the wants, and
contributes to the wealth of all; and is to the general commonwealth
of the civilised world what the daily intercourse of ordinary
life is to private society, or rather, what air and food are
to our bodies.''

  ``Well, sir?''

  ``And yet, sir, I find myself compelled to persist in declining
to adopt a character which I am so ill qualified to support.''

  ``I will take care that you acquire the qualifications necessary.
You are no longer the guest and pupil of Dubourg.''

  ``But, my dear sir, it is no defect of teaching which I plead,
but my own inability to profit by instruction.''

  ``Nonsense.---Have you kept your journal in the terms I
desired?''

  ``Yes, sir.''

  ``Be pleased to bring it here.''

  The volume thus required was a sort of commonplace book,
kept by my father's recommendation, in which I had been
directed to enter notes of the miscellaneous information which I
had acquired in the course of my studies. Foreseeing that he
would demand inspection of this record, I had been attentive to
transcribe such particulars of information as he would most likely
be pleased with, but too often the pen had discharged the task
without much correspondence with the head. And it had also
happened, that, the book being the receptacle nearest to my
hand, I had occasionally jotted down memoranda which had little
regard to traffic. I now put it into my father's hand, devoutly
hoping he might light on nothing that would increase his displeasure
against me. Owen's face, which had looked something
blank when the question was put, cleared up at my ready answer,
and wore a smile of hope, when I brought from my apartment,
and placed before my father, a commercial-looking volume,
rather broader than it was long, having brazen clasps and a
binding of rough calf. This looked business-like, and was encouraging
to my benevolent well-wisher. But he actually smiled
with pleasure as he heard my father run over some part of the
contents, muttering his critical remarks as he went on.

  ``_---Brandies---Barils and barricants, also tonneaux.---At Nantz
29---Velles to the barique at Cognac and Rochelle 27---At Bourdeaux
32_---Very right, Frank---_Duties on tonnage and custom-house,
see Saxby's Tables_---That's not well; you should have
transcribed the passage; it fixes the thing in the memory---_Reports
outward and inward---Corn debentures---Over-sea Cockets---
Linens---Isingham---Gentish---Stock-fish---Titling---Cropling---
Lub-fish._ You should have noted that they are all, nevertheless
to be entered as titlings.---How many inches long is a
titling?''

  Owen, seeing me at fault, hazarded a whisper, of which I fortunately
caught the import.

  ``Eighteen inches, sir.''------

  ``And a lub-fish is twenty-four---very right. It is important
to remember this, on account of the Portuguese trade---But
what have we here?---_Bourdeaux founded in the year---Castle
of the Trompette---Palace of Gallienus_---Well, well, that's very
right too.---This is a kind of waste-book, Owen, in which all the
transactions of the day,---emptions, orders, payments, receipts,
acceptances, draughts, commissions, and advices,---are entered
miscellaneously.''

  ``That they may be regularly transferred to the day-book and
ledger,'' answered Owen: ``I am glad Mr. Francis is so methodical.''

  I perceived myself getting so fast into favour, that I began
to fear the consequence would be my father's more obstinate perseverance
in his resolution that I must become a merchant; and
as I was determined on the contrary, I began to wish I had not,
to use my friend Mr. Owen's phrase, been so methodical. But I
had no reason for apprehension on that score; for a blotted piece
of paper dropped out of the book, and, being taken up by my
father, he interrupted a hint from Owen, on the propriety of
securing loose memoranda with a little paste, by exclaiming,
``To the memory of Edward the Black Prince---What's all this?
---verses!---By Heaven, Frank, you are a greater blockhead than
I supposed you!''

  My father, you must recollect, as a man of business, looked
upon the labour of poets with contempt; and as a religious man,
and of the dissenting persuasion, he considered all such pursuits
as equally trivial and profane. Before you condemn him, you
must recall to remembrance how too many of the poets in the
end of the seventeenth century had led their lives and employed
their talents. The sect also to which my father belonged, felt, or
perhaps affected, a puritanical aversion to the lighter exertions
of literature. So that many causes contributed to augment the
unpleasant surprise occasioned by the ill-timed discovery of this
unfortunate copy of verses. As for poor Owen, could the bob-wig
which he then wore have uncurled itself, and stood on end with
horror, I am convinced the morning's labour of the friseur would
have been undone, merely by the excess of his astonishment at
this enormity. An inroad on the strong-box, or an erasure in the
ledger, or a mis-summation in a fitted account, could hardly
have surprised him more disagreeably. My father read the lines
sometimes with an affectation of not being able to understand the
sense---sometimes in a mouthing tone of mock heroic---always
with an emphasis of the most bitter irony, most irritating to the
nerves of an author.

	``O for the voice of that wild horn,
	  On Fontarabian echoes borne,
		The dying hero's call,
	  That told imperial Charlemagne,
	  How Paynim sons of swarthy Spain
		Had wrought his champion's fall.

  ``_Fontarabian echoes!_'' continued my father, interrupting himself;
``the Fontarabian Fair would have been more to the purpose---
_Paynim!_---What's Paynim?---Could you not say Pagan
as well, and write English at least, if you must needs write nonsense?---

	``Sad over earth and ocean sounding.
	  And England's distant cliffs astounding.
		Such are the notes should say
	How Britain's hope, and France's fear,
	Victor of Cressy and Poitier,
		In Bordeaux dying lay.''

  ``Poitiers, by the way, is always spelt with an _s,_ and I know
no reason why orthography should give place to rhyme.---

	`` `Raise my faint head, my squires,' he said,
	  `And let the casement be display'd,
		That I may see once more
	  The splendour of the setting sun
	  Gleam on thy mirrored wave, Garonne,
		And Blaye's empurpled shore.

  ``_Garonne_ and _sun_ is a bad rhyme. Why, Frank, you do not
even understand the beggarly trade you have chosen.

	`` `Like me, he sinks to Glory's sleep,
	  His fall the dews of evening steep,
		As if in sorrow shed,
	  So soft shall fall the trickling tear,
	  When England's maids and matrons hear
		Of their Black Edward dead.

	`` `And though my sun of glory set,
	  Nor France, nor England, shall forget
		The terror of my name;
	  And oft shall Britain's heroes rise,
	  New planets in these southern skies,
		Through clouds of blood and flame.'

  ``A cloud of flame is something new---Good-morrow, my
masters all, and a merry Christmas to you!---Why, the bellman
writes better lines.'' He then tossed the paper from him with an
air of superlative contempt, and concluded---``Upon my credit,
Frank, you are a greater blockhead than I took you for.''

  What could I say, my dear Tresham? There I stood, swelling
with indignant mortification, while my father regarded me with
a calm but stern look of scorn and pity; and poor Owen, with
uplifted hands and eyes, looked as striking a picture of horror as
if he had just read his patron's name in the Gazette. At length
I took courage to speak, endeavouring that my tone of voice
should betray my feelings as little as possible.

  ``I am quite aware, sir, how ill qualified I am to play the conspicuous
part in society you have destined for me; and, luckily,
I am not ambitious of the wealth I might acquire. Mr. Owen
would be a much more effective assistant.'' I said this in some
malice, for I considered Owen as having deserted my cause a
little too soon.

  ``Owen!'' said my father---``The boy is mad---actually insane.
And, pray, sir, if I may presume to inquire, having coolly turned
me over to Mr. Owen (although I may expect more attention from
any one than from my son), what may your own sage projects
be?''

  ``I should wish, sir,'' I replied, summoning up my courage,
``to travel for two or three years, should that consist with your
pleasure; otherwise, although late, I would willingly spend the
same time at Oxford or Cambridge.''

  ``In the name of common sense! was the like ever heard?---
to put yourself to school among pedants and Jacobites, when you
might be pushing your fortune in the world! Why not go to
Westminster or Eton at once, man, and take to Lilly's Grammar
and Accidence, and to the birch, too, if you like it?''

  ``Then, sir, if you think my plan of improvement too late, I
would willingly return to the Continent.''

  ``You have already spent too much time there to little purpose,
Mr. Francis.''

  ``Then I would choose the army, sir, in preference to any
other active line of life.''

  ``Choose the d---l!'' answered my father, hastily, and then
checking himself---``I profess you make me as great a fool as
you are yourself. Is he not enough to drive one mad, Owen?''
---Poor Owen shook his head, and looked down. ``Hark ye,
Frank,'' continued my father, ``I will cut all this matter very
short. I was at your age when my father turned me out of
doors, and settled my legal inheritance on my younger brother. I
left Osbaldistone Hall on the back of a broken-down hunter, with
ten guineas in my purse. I have never crossed the threshold
again, and I never will. I know not, and I care not, if my fox-hunting
brother is alive, or has broken his neck; but he has
children, Frank, and one of them shall be my son if you cross me
farther in this matter.''

  ``You will do your pleasure,'' I answered---rather, I fear, with
more sullen indifference than respect, ``with what is your own.''

  ``Yes, Frank, what I have _is_ my own, if labour in getting, and
care in augmenting, can make a right of property; and no drone
shall feed on my honeycomb. Think on it well: what I have said
is not without reflection, and what I resolve upon I will execute.''

  ``Honoured sir!---dear sir!'' exclaimed Owen, tears rushing
into his eyes, ``you are not wont to be in such a hurry in transacting
business of importance. Let Mr. Francis run up the balance
before you shut the account; he loves you, I am sure; and when
he puts down his filial obedience to the _per contra,_ I am sure his
objections will disappear.''

  ``Do you think I will ask him twice,'' said my father, sternly,
``to be my friend, my assistant, and my confidant?---to be a partner
of my cares and of my fortune?---Owen, I thought you had
known me better.''

  He looked at me as if he meant to add something more, but
turned instantly away, and left the room abruptly. I was, I own,
affected by this view of the case, which had not occurred to me;
and my father would probably have had little reason to complain
of me, had he commenced the discussion with this argument.

  But it was too late. I had much of his own obduracy of resolution,
and Heaven had decreed that my sin should be my
punishment, though not to the extent which my transgression
merited. Owen, when we were left alone, continued to look at me
with eyes which tears from time to time moistened, as if to discover,
before attempting the task of intercessor, upon what point
my obstinacy was most assailable. At length he began, with
broken and disconcerted accents,---``O L---d, Mr. Francis!---Good
Heavens, sir!---My stars, Mr. Osbaldistone!---that I should ever
have seen this day---and you so young a gentleman, sir!---For
the love of Heaven! look at both sides of the account---think
what you are going to lose---a noble fortune, sir---one of the
finest houses in the City, even under the old firm of Tresham
and Trent, and now Osbaldistone and Tresham---You might
roll in gold, Mr. Francis---And, my dear young Mr. Frank, if
there was any particular thing in the business of the house which
you disliked, I would'' (sinking his voice to a whisper) ``put it
in order for you termly, or weekly, or daily, if you will---Do, my
dear Mr. Francis, think of the honour due to your father, that
your days may be long in the land.''

  ``I am much obliged to you, Mr. Owen,'' said I---``very much
obliged indeed; but my father is best judge how to bestow his
money. He talks of one of my cousins: let him dispose of his
wealth as he pleases---I will never sell my liberty for gold.''

  ``Gold, sir?---I wish you saw the balance-sheet of profits at
last term---It was in five figures---five figures to each partner's
sum total, Mr. Frank---And all this is to go to a Papist, and a
north-country booby, and a disaffected person besides---It will
break my heart, Mr. Francis, that have been toiling more like a
dog than a man, and all for love of the firm. Think how it will
sound, Osbaldistone, Tresham, and Osbaldistone---or perhaps,
who knows'' (again lowering his voice), ``Osbaldistone, Osbaldistone,
and Tresham, for our Mr. Osbaldistone can buy them all
out.''

  ``But, Mr. Owen, my cousin's name being also Osbaldistone,
the name of the company will sound every bit as well in your
ears.''

  ``O fie upon you, Mr. Francis, when you know how well I
love you---Your cousin, indeed!---a Papist, no doubt, like his
father, and a disaffected person to the Protestant succession---
that's another item, doubtless.''

  ``There are many very good men Catholics, Mr. Owen,'' rejoined
I.

  As Owen was about to answer with unusual animation, my
father re-entered the apartment.

  ``You were right,'' he said, ``Owen, and I was wrong; we
will take more time to think over this matter.---Young man,
you will prepare to give me an answer on this important subject
this day month.''

  I bowed in silence, sufficiently glad of a reprieve, and trusting
it might indicate some relaxation in my father's determination.

  The time of probation passed slowly, unmarked by any
accident whatever. I went and came, and disposed of my time
as I pleased, without question or criticism on the part of my
father. Indeed, I rarely saw him, save at meal-times, when he
studiously avoided a discussion which you may well suppose I
was in no hurry to press onward. Our conversation was of the
news of the day, or on such general topics as strangers discourse
upon to each other; nor could any one have guessed, from its
tenor, that there remained undecided betwixt us a dispute of
such importance. It haunted me, however, more than once,
like the nightmare. Was it possible he would keep his word,
and disinherit his only son in favour of a nephew whose very
existence he was not perhaps quite certain of? My grandfather's
conduct, in similar circumstances, boded me no good,
had I considered the matter rightly. But I had formed an
erroneous idea of my father's character, from the importance
which I recollected I maintained with him and his whole family
before I went to France. I was not aware that there are men
who indulge their children at an early age, because to do so
interests and amuses them, and who can yet be sufficiently
severe when the same children cross their expectations at a
more advanced period. On the contrary, I persuaded myself,
that all I had to apprehend was some temporary alienation of
affection---perhaps a rustication of a few weeks, which I thought
would rather please me than otherwise, since it would give me
an opportunity of setting about my unfinished version of Orlando
Furioso, a poem which I longed to render into English verse.
I suffered this belief to get such absolute possession of my
mind, that I had resumed my blotted papers, and was busy
in meditation on the oft-recurring rhymes of the Spenserian
stanza, when I heard a low and cautious tap at the door of my
apartment. ``Come in,'' I said, and Mr. Owen entered. So
regular were the motions and habits of this worthy man, that
in all probability this was the first time he had ever been in
the second story of his patron's house, however conversant with
the first; and I am still at a loss to know in what manner he
discovered my apartment.

  ``Mr. Francis,'' he said, interrupting my expression of surprise
and pleasure at seeing, him, ``I do not know if I am doing well
in what I am about to say---it is not right to speak of what
passes in the compting-house out of doors---one should not tell,
as they say, to the post in the warehouse, how many lines there
are in the ledger. But young Twineall has been absent from
the house for a fortnight and more, until two days since.''

  ``Very well, my dear sir, and how does that concern us?''

  ``Stay, Mr. Francis;---your father gave him a private commission;
and I am sure he did not go down to Falmouth about
the pilchard affair; and the Exeter business with Blackwell and
Company has been settled; and the mining people in Cornwall,
Trevanion and Treguilliam, have paid all they are likely to pay;
and any other matter of business must have been put through
my books:---in short, it's my faithful belief that Twineall has
been down in the north.''

  ``Do you really suppose?'' so said I, somewhat startled.

  ``He has spoken about nothing, sir, since he returned, but
his new boots, and his Ripon spurs, and a cockfight at York---
it's as true as the multiplication-table. Do, Heaven bless you,
my dear child, make up your mind to please your father, and
to be a man and a merchant at once.''

  I felt at that instant a strong inclination to submit, and to
make Owen happy by requesting him to tell my father that I
resigned myself to his disposal. But pride---pride, the source
of so much that is good and so much that is evil in our course
of life, prevented me. My acquiescence stuck in my throat;
and while I was coughing to get it up, my father's voice summoned
Owen. He hastily left the room, and the opportunity
was lost.

  My father was methodical in everything. At the very same
time of the day, in the same apartment, and with the same
tone and manner which he had employed an exact month before,
he recapitulated the proposal he had made for taking me into
partnership, and assigning me a department in the counting-house,
and requested to have my final decision. I thought at
the time there was something unkind in this; and I still think
that my father's conduct was injudicious. A more conciliatory
treatment would, in all probability, have gained his purpose.
As it was, I stood fast, and, as respectfully as I could, declined
the proposal he made to me. Perhaps---for who can judge
of their own heart?---I felt it unmanly to yield on the first
summons, and expected farther solicitation, as at least a pretext
for changing my mind. If so, I was disappointed; for my
father turned coolly to Owen, and only said, `` You see it is as
I told you.---Well, Frank'' (addressing me), ``you are nearly
of age, and as well qualified to judge of what will constitute
your own happiness as you ever are like to be; therefore, I
say no more. But as I am not bound to give in to your plans,
any more than you are compelled to submit to mine, may I
ask to know if you have formed any which depend on my
assistance?''

  I answered, not a little abashed, ``That being bred to no
profession, and having no funds of my own, it was obviously
impossible for me to subsist without some allowance from my
father; that my wishes were very moderate; and that I hoped
my aversion for the profession to which he had designed me,
would not occasion his altogether withdrawing his paternal
support and protection.''

  ``That is to say, you wish to lean on my arm, and yet to
walk your own way? That can hardly be, Frank;---however,
I suppose you mean to obey my directions, so far as they do
not cross your own humour?''

  I was about to speak---``Silence, if you please,'' he continued.
``Supposing this to be the case, you will instantly set out for
the north of England, to pay your uncle a visit, and see the
state of his family. I have chosen from among his sons (he
has six, I believe) one who, I understand, is most worthy to fill
the place I intended for you in the counting-house. But some
farther arrangements may be necessary, and for these your
presence may be requisite. You shall have farther instructions
at Osbaldistone Hall, where you will please to remain until you
hear from me. Everything will be ready for your departure
to-morrow morning.''

  With these words my father left the apartment.

  ``What does all this mean, Mr. Owen?'' said I to my sympathetic
friend, whose countenance wore a cast of the deepest
dejection.

  ``You have ruined yourself, Mr. Frank, that's all. When
your father talks in that quiet determined manner, there will
be no more change in him than in a fitted account.''

  And so it proved; for the next morning, at five o'clock, I
found myself on the road to York, mounted on a reasonably
good horse, and with fifty guineas in my pocket; travelling, as
it would seem, for the purpose of assisting in the adoption of a
successor to myself in my father's house and favour, and, for
aught I knew, eventually in his fortune also.
