



			CHAPTER FIFTH.



	How melts my beating heart as I behold
	Each lovely nymph, our island's boast and pride,
	Push on the generous steed, that sweeps along
	O'er rough, o'er smooth, nor heeds the steepy hill,
	Nor falters in the extended vale below!
						The Chase.



  I approached my native north, for such I esteemed it, with
that enthusiasm which romantic and wild scenery inspires in
the lovers of nature. No longer interrupted by the babble of
my companion, I could now remark the difference which the
country exhibited from that through which I had hitherto
travelled. The streams now more properly deserved the name,
for, instead of slumbering stagnant among reeds and willows,
they brawled along beneath the shade of natural copsewood;
were now hurried down declivities, and now purled more
leisurely, but still in active motion, through little lonely valleys,
which, opening on the road from time to time, seemed to invite
the traveller to explore their recesses. The Cheviots rose before
me in frowning majesty; not, indeed, with the sublime variety
of rock and cliff which characterizes mountains of the primary
class but huge, round-headed, and clothed with a dark robe of
russet, gaining, by their extent and desolate appearance, an influence
upon the imagination, as a desert district possessing a
character of its own.

  The abode of my fathers, which I was now approaching, was
situated in a glen, or narrow valley, which ran up among those
hills. Extensive estates, which once belonged to the family of
Osbaldistone, had been long dissipated by the misfortunes or
misconduct of my ancestors; but enough was still attached to
the old mansion, to give my uncle the title of a man of large
property. This he employed (as I was given to understand by
some inquiries which I made on the road) in maintaining the
prodigal hospitality of a northern squire of the period, which he
deemed essential to his family dignity.

  From the summit of an eminence I had already had a distant
view of Osbaldistone Hall, a large and antiquated edifice, peeping
out from a Druidical grove of huge oaks; and I was
directing my course towards it, as straightly and as speedily as
the windings of a very indifferent road would permit, when my
horse, tired as he was, pricked up his ears at the enlivening
notes of a pack of hounds in full cry, cheered by the occasional
bursts of a French horn, which in those days was a constant
accompaniment to the chase. I made no doubt that the pack
was my uncle's, and drew up my horse with the purpose of
suffering the hunters to pass without notice, aware that a hunting-field
was not the proper scene to introduce myself to a keen
sportsman, and determined when they had passed on, to proceed
to the mansion-house at my own pace, and there to await the
return of the proprietor from his sport. I paused, therefore,
on a rising ground, and, not unmoved by the sense of interest
which that species of silvan sport is so much calculated to
inspire (although my mind was not at the moment very accessible
to impressions of this nature), I expected with some eagerness
the appearance of the huntsmen.

  The fox, hard run, and nearly spent, first made his appearance
from the copse which clothed the right-hand side of the valley.
His drooping brush, his soiled appearance, and jaded trot, proclaimed
his fate impending; and the carrion crow, which hovered
over him, already considered poor Reynard as soon to be his
prey. He crossed the stream which divides the little valley,
and was dragging himself up a ravine on the other side of its
wild banks, when the headmost hounds, followed by the rest of
the pack in full cry, burst from the coppice, followed by the
huntsman and three or four riders. The dogs pursued the
trace of Reynard with unerring instinct; and the hunters
followed with reckless haste, regardless of the broken and
difficult nature of the ground. They were tall, stout young
men, well mounted, and dressed in green and red, the uniform
of a sporting association, formed under the auspices of old Sir
Hildebrand Osbaldistone.---``My cousins!'' thought I, as they
swept past me. The next reflection was, what is my reception
likely to be among these worthy successors of Nimrod? and how
improbable is it that I, knowing little or nothing of rural sports,
shall find myself at ease, or happy, in my uncle's family. A
vision that passed me interrupted these reflections.

  It was a young lady, the loveliness of whose very striking
features was enhanced by the animation of the chase and the
glow of the exercise, mounted on a beautiful horse, jet black,
unless where he was flecked by spots of the snow-white foam
which embossed his bridle. She wore, what was then somewhat
unusual, a coat, vest, and hat, resembling those of a man,
which fashion has since called a riding habit. The mode had
been introduced while I was in France, and was perfectly new
to me. Her long black hair streamed on the breeze, having in
the hurry of the chase escaped from the ribbon which bound
it. Some very broken ground, through which she guided her
horse with the most admirable address and presence of mind,
retarded her course, and brought her closer to me than any of
the other riders had passed. I had, therefore, a full view of
her uncommonly fine face and person, to which an inexpressible
charm was added by the wild gaiety of the scene, and the
romance of her singular dress and unexpected appearance. As
she passed me, her horse made, in his impetuosity, an irregular
movement, just while, coming once more upon open ground,
she was again putting him to his speed. It served as an
apology for me to ride close up to her, as if to her assistance.
There was, however, no cause for alarm; it was not a stumble,
nor a false step; and, if it had, the fair Amazon had too much
self-possession to have been deranged by it. She thanked my
good intentions, however, by a smile, and I felt encouraged to
put my horse to the same pace, and to keep in her immediate
neighbourhood. The clamour of ``Whoop! dead! dead!''---
and the corresponding flourish of the French horn, soon
announced to us that there was no more occasion for haste,
since the chase was at a close. One of the young men whom
we had seen approached us, waving the brush of the fox in
triumph, as if to upbraid my fair companion,

  ``I see,'' she replied,---``I see; but make no noise about it:
if Ph<oe>be,'' she said, patting the neck of the beautiful animal
on which she rode, ``had not got among the cliffs, you would
have had little cause for boasting.''

  They met as she spoke, and I observed them both look at me,
and converse a moment in an under-tone, the young lady
apparently pressing the sportsman to do something which he
declined shyly, and with a sort of sheepish sullenness. She
instantly turned her horse's head towards me, saying,---``Well,
well, Thornie, if you won't, I must, that's all.---Sir,'' she continued,
addressing me, ``I have been endeavouring to persuade
this cultivated young gentleman to make inquiry of you whether,
in the course of your travels in these parts, you have heard anything
of a friend of ours, one Mr. Francis Osbaldistone, who has
been for some days expected at Osbaldistone Hall?''

  I was too happy to acknowledge myself to be the party
inquired after, and to express my thanks for the obliging
inquiries of the young lady.

  ``In that case, sir,'' she rejoined, ``as my kinsman's politeness
seems to be still slumbering, you will permit me (though I
suppose it is highly improper) to stand mistress of ceremonies,
and to present to you young Squire Thorncliff Osbaldistone,
your cousin, and Die Vernon, who has also the honour to be
your accomplished cousin's poor kinswoman.''

  There was a mixture of boldness, satire, and simplicity in
the manner in which Miss Vernon pronounced these words.
My knowledge of life was sufficient to enable me to take up a
corresponding tone as I expressed my gratitude to her for her
condescension, and my extreme pleasure at having met with
them. To say the truth, the compliment was so expressed,
that the lady might easily appropriate the greater share of it,
for Thorncliff seemed an arrant country bumpkin, awkward,
shy, and somewhat sulky withal. He shook hands with me,
however, and then intimated his intention of leaving me that
he might help the huntsman and his brothers to couple up the
hounds,---a purpose which he rather communicated by way of
information to Miss Vernon than as apology to me.

  ``There he goes,'' said the young lady, following him with
eyes in which disdain was admirably painted---``the prince of
grooms and cock-fighters, and blackguard horse-coursers. But
there is not one of them to mend another.---Have you read
Markham?'' said Miss Vernon.

  ``Read whom, ma'am?---I do not even remember the author's
name.''

  ``O lud! on what a strand are you wrecked!'' replied the
young lady. ``A poor forlorn and ignorant stranger, unacquainted
with the very Alcoran of the savage tribe whom you
are come to reside among---Never to have heard of Markham,
the most celebrated author on farriery! then I fear you are
equally a stranger to the more modern names of Gibson and
Bartlett?''

  ``I am, indeed, Miss Vernon.''

  ``And do you not blush to own it?'' said Miss Vernon.
``Why, we must forswear your alliance. Then, I suppose, you
can neither give a ball, nor a mash, nor a horn!''

  ``I confess I trust all these matters to an ostler, or to my
groom.''

  ``Incredible carelessness!---And you cannot shoe a horse, or
cut his mane and tail; or worm a dog, or crop his ears, or cut
his dew-claws; or reclaim a hawk, or give him his casting-stones,
or direct his diet when he is sealed; or''------

  ``To sum up my insignificance in one word,'' replied I, ``I
am profoundly ignorant in all these rural accomplishments.''

  ``Then, in the name of Heaven, Mr. Francis Osbaldistone,
what _can_ you do?''

  ``Very little to the purpose, Miss Vernon; something, however,
I can pretend to---When my groom has dressed my horse I
can ride him, and when my hawk is in the field, I can fly him.''

  ``Can you do this?'' said the young lady, putting her horse
to a canter.

  There was a sort of rude overgrown fence crossed the path
before us, with a gate composed of pieces of wood rough from
the forest; I was about to move forward to open it, when Miss
Vernon cleared the obstruction at a flying leap. I was bound
in point of honour to follow, and was in a moment again at her
side. ``There are hopes of you yet,'' she said. ``I was afraid
you had been a very degenerate Osbaldistone. But what on
earth brings you to Cub-Castle?---for so the neighbours have
christened this hunting-hall of ours. You might have stayed
away, I suppose, if you would?''

  I felt I was by this time on a very intimate footing with my
beautiful apparition, and therefore replied, in a confidential
under-tone---``Indeed, my dear Miss Vernon, I might have
considered it as a sacrifice to be a temporary resident in Osbaldistone
Hall, the inmates being such as you describe them; but
I am convinced there is one exception that will make amends
for all deficiencies.''

  ``O, you mean Rashleigh?'' said Miss Vernon.

  ``Indeed I do not; I was thinking---forgive me---of some
person much nearer me.''

  ``I suppose it would be proper not to understand your
civility?---But that is not my way---I don't make a courtesy for
it because I am sitting on horseback. But, seriously, I deserve
your exception, for I am the only conversable being about the
Hall, except the old priest and Rashleigh.''

  ``And who is Rashleigh, for Heaven's sake?''

  ``Rashleigh is one who would fain have every one like him
for his own sake. He is Sir Hildebrand's youngest son---about
your own age, but not so---not well looking, in short. But
nature has given him a mouthful of common sense, and the
priest has added a bushelful of learning; he is what we call a
very clever man in this country, where clever men are scarce.
Bred to the church, but in no hurry to take orders.''

  ``To the Catholic Church?''

  ``The Catholic Church? what Church else?'' said the young
lady. ``But I forgot---they told me you are a heretic. Is that
true, Mr. Osbaldistone?''

  ``I must not deny the charge.''

  ``And yet you have been abroad, and in Catholic countries?''

  ``For nearly four years.''

  ``You have seen convents?''

  ``Often; but I have not seen much in them which recommended
the Catholic religion.''

  ``Are not the inhabitants happy?''

  ``Some are unquestionably so, whom either a profound sense
of devotion, or an experience of the persecutions and misfortunes
of the world, or a natural apathy of temper, has led into retirement.
Those who have adopted a life of seclusion from sudden
and overstrained enthusiasm, or in hasty resentment of some
disappointment or mortification, are very miserable. The
quickness of sensation soon returns, and like the wilder animals
in a menagerie, they are restless under confinement, while others
muse or fatten in cells of no larger dimensions than theirs.''

  ``And what,'' continued Miss Vernon, ``becomes of those
victims who are condemned to a convent by the will of others?
what do they resemble? especially, what do they resemble, if
they are born to enjoy life, and feel its blessings?''

  ``They are like imprisoned singing-birds,'' replied I, ``condemned
to wear out their lives in confinement, which they try
to beguile by the exercise of accomplishments which would have
adorned society had they been left at large.''

  ``I shall be,'' returned Miss Vernon---``that is,'' said she,
correcting herself---``I should be rather like the wild hawk,
who, barred the free exercise of his soar through heaven, will
dash himself to pieces against the bars of his cage. But to
return to Rashleigh,'' said she, in a more lively tone, ``you will
think him the pleasantest man you ever saw in your life, Mr.
Osbaldistone,---that is, for a week at least. If he could find
out a blind mistress, never man would be so secure of conquest;
but the eye breaks the spell that enchants the ear.---But here
we are in the court of the old hall, which looks as wild and old-fashioned
as any of its inmates. There is no great toilette kept
at Osbaldistone Hall, you must know; but I must take off these
things, they are so unpleasantly warm,---and the hat hurts my
forehead, too,'' continued the lively girl, taking it off, and shaking
down a profusion of sable ringlets, which, half laughing, half
blushing, she separated with her white slender fingers, in order
to clear them away from her beautiful face and piercing hazel
eyes. If there was any coquetry in the action, it was well disguised
by the careless indifference of her manner. I could not
help saying, ``that, judging of the family from what I saw, I
should suppose the toilette a very unnecessary care.''

  ``That's very politely said---though, perhaps, I ought not to
understand in what sense it was meant,'' replied Miss Vernon;
``but you will see a better apology for a little negligence when
you meet the Orsons you are to live amongst, whose forms no
toilette could improve. But, as I said before, the old dinner-bell
will clang, or rather clank, in a few minutes---it cracked of its
own accord on the day of the landing of King Willie, and my
uncle, respecting its prophetic talent, would never permit it to be
mended. So do you hold my palfrey, like a duteous knight, until
I send some more humble squire to relieve you of the charge.''

  She threw me the rein as if we had been acquainted from our
childhood, jumped from her saddle, tripped across the courtyard,
and entered at a side-door, leaving me in admiration of her beauty,
and astonished with the over-frankness of her manners, which
seemed the more extraordinary at a time when the dictates of
politeness, flowing from the court of the Grand Monarque Louis
XIV., prescribed to the fair sex an unusual severity of decorum.
I was left awkwardly enough stationed in the centre of the
court of the old hall, mounted on one horse, and holding
another in my hand.

  The building afforded little to interest a stranger, had I been
disposed to consider it attentively; the sides of the quadrangle
were of various architecture, and with their stone-shafted latticed
windows, projecting turrets, and massive architraves, resembled
the inside of a convent, or of one of the older and less splendid
colleges of Oxford. I called for a domestic, but was for some
time totally unattended to; which was the more provoking, as I
could perceive I was the object of curiosity to several servants,
both male and female, from different parts of the building, who
popped out their heads and withdrew them, like rabbits in a
warren, before I could make a direct appeal to the attention of any
individual. The return of the huntsmen and hounds relieved
me from my embarrassment, and with some difficulty I got one
down to relieve me of the charge of the horses, and another
stupid boor to guide me to the presence of Sir Hildebrand.
This service he performed with much such grace and good-will,
as a peasant who is compelled to act as guide to a hostile patrol;
and in the same manner I was obliged to guard against his deserting
me in the labyrinth of low vaulted passages which conducted
to ``Stun Hall,'' as he called it, where I was to be introduced
to the gracious presence of my uncle.

  We did, however, at length reach a long vaulted room, floored
with stone, where a range of oaken tables, of a weight and size
too massive ever to be moved aside, were already covered for
dinner. This venerable apartment, which had witnessed the
feasts of several generations of the Osbaldistone family, bore also
evidence of their success in field sports. Huge antlers of deer,
which might have been trophies of the hunting of Chevy Chace,
were ranged around the walls, interspersed with the stuffed skins
of badgers, otters, martins, and other animals of the chase.
Amidst some remnants of old armour, which had, perhaps,
served against the Scotch, hung the more valued weapons of
silvan war, cross-bows, guns of various device and construction,
nets, fishing-rods, otter-spears, hunting-poles, with many other
singular devices, and engines for taking or killing game. A few
old pictures, dimmed with smoke, and stained with March beer,
hung on the walls, representing knights and ladies, honoured,
doubtless, and renowned in their day; those frowning fearfully
from huge bushes of wig and of beard; and these looking delightfully
with all their might at the roses which they brandished in
their hands.

  I had just time to give a glance at these matters, when about
twelve blue-coated servants burst into the hall with much tumult
and talk, each rather employed in directing his comrades than in
discharging his own duty. Some brought blocks and billets to
the fire, which roared, blazed, and ascended, half in smoke, half
in flame, up a huge tunnel, with an opening wide enough to accommodate
a stone seat within its ample vault, and which was
fronted, by way of chimney-piece, with a huge piece of heavy
architecture, where the monsters of heraldry, embodied by the
art of some Northumbrian chisel, grinned and ramped in red free-stone,
now japanned by the smoke of centuries. Others of these
old-fashioned serving-men bore huge smoking dishes, loaded with
substantial fare; others brought in cups, flagons, bottles, yea
barrels of liquor. All tramped, kicked, plunged, shouldered, and
jostled, doing as little service with as much tumult as could well
be imagined. At length, while the dinner was, after various
efforts, in the act of being arranged upon the board, ``the clamour
much of men and dogs,'' the cracking of whips, calculated for
the intimidation of the latter, voices loud and high, steps which,
impressed by the heavy-heeled boots of the period, clattered like
those in the statue of the _Festin de Pierre,_<*> announced the arrival

* Now called Don Juan.

of those for whose benefit the preparations were made. The
hubbub among the servants rather increased than diminished as
this crisis approached. Some called to make haste,---others to
take time,---some exhorted to stand out of the way, and make
room for Sir Hildebrand and the young squires,---some to close
round the table and be _in_ the way,---some bawled to open, some
to shut, a pair of folding-doors which divided the hall from a
sort of gallery, as I afterwards learned, or withdrawing-room,
fitted up with black wainscot. Opened the doors were at length,
and in rushed curs and men,---eight dogs, the domestic chaplain,
the village doctor, my six cousins, and my uncle.
