



			CHAPTER ELEVENTH.



	What gars ye gaunt, my merrymen a'?
	  What gars ye look sae dreary?
	What gars ye hing your head sae sair
	  In the castle of Balwearie?
				Old Scotch Ballad.



  The next morning chanced to be Sunday, a day peculiarly hard
to be got rid of at Osbaldistone Hall; for after the formal
religious service of the morning had been performed, at which
all the family regularly attended, it was hard to say upon which
individual, Rashleigh and Miss Vernon excepted, the fiend of
ennui descended with the most abundant outpouring of his
spirit. To speak of my yesterday's embarrassment amused Sir
Hildebrand for several minutes, and he congratulated me on
my deliverance from Morpeth or Hexham jail, as he would have
done if I had fallen in attempting to clear a five-barred gate,
and got up without hurting myself.

  ``Hast had a lucky turn, lad; but do na be over venturous
again. What, man! the king's road is free to all men, be they
Whigs, be they Tories.''

  ``On my word, sir, I am innocent of interrupting it; and it
is the most provoking thing on earth, that every person will
take it for granted that I am accessory to a crime which I
despise and detest, and which would, moreover, deservedly forfeit
my life to the laws of my country.''

  ``Well, well, lad; even so be it; I ask no questions---no man
bound to tell on himsell---that's fair play, or the devil's in't.''

  Rashleigh here came to my assistance; but I could not help
thinking that his arguments were calculated rather as hints to
his father to put on a show of acquiescence in my declaration
of innocence, than fully to establish it.

  ``In your own house, my dear sir---and your own nephew---
you will not surely persist in hurting his feelings by seeming
to discredit what he is so strongly interested in affirming. No
doubt, you are fully deserving of all his confidence, and I am
sure, were there anything you could do to assist him in this
strange affair, he would have recourse to your goodness. But
my cousin Frank has been dismissed as an innocent man, and
no one is entitled to suppose him otherwise. For my part, I
have not the least doubt of his innocence; and our family
honour, I conceive, requires that we should maintain it with
tongue and sword against the whole country.''

  ``Rashleigh,'' said his father, looking fixedly at him, ``thou
art a sly loon---thou hast ever been too cunning for me, and
too cunning for most folks. Have a care thou provena too
cunning for thysell---two faces under one hood is no true
heraldry. And since we talk of heraldry, I'll go and read
Gwillym.''

  This resolution he intimated with a yawn, resistless as that
of the Goddess in the Dunciad, which was responsively echoed
by his giant sons, as they dispersed in quest of the pastimes to
which their minds severally inclined them---Percie to discuss a
pot of March beer with the steward in the buttery,---Thorncliff
to cut a pair of cudgels, and fix them in their wicker hilts,---
John to dress May-flies,---Dickon to play at pitch and toss by
himself, his right hand against his left,---and Wilfred to bite
his thumbs and hum himself into a slumber which should last
till dinner-time, if possible. Miss Vernon had retired to the
library.

  Rashleigh and I were left alone in the old hall, from which
the servants, with their usual bustle and awkwardness, had at
length contrived to hurry the remains of our substantial breakfast.
I took the opportunity to upbraid him with the manner
in which he had spoken of my affair to his father, which I
frankly stated was highly offensive to me, as it seemed rather
to exhort Sir Hildebrand to conceal his suspicions, than to root
them out.

  ``Why, what can I do, my dear friend?'' replied Rashleigh
``my father's disposition is so tenacious of suspicions of all
kinds, when once they take root (which, to do him justice, does
not easily happen), that I have always found it the best way to
silence him upon such subjects, instead of arguing with him.
Thus I get the better of the weeds which I cannot eradicate,
by cutting them over as often as they appear, until at length
they die away of themselves. There is neither wisdom nor
profit in disputing with such a mind as Sir Hildebrand's, which
hardens itself against conviction, and believes in its own inspirations
as firmly as we good Catholics do in those of the Holy
Father of Rome.''

  ``It is very hard, though, that I should live in the house of
a man, and he a near relation too, who will persist in believing
me guilty of a highway robbery.''

  ``My father's foolish opinion, if one may give that epithet to
any opinion of a father's, does not affect your real innocence;
and as to the disgrace of the fact, depend on it, that, considered
in all its bearings, political as well as moral, Sir Hildebrand
regards it as a meritorious action---a weakening of the enemy
---a spoiling of the Amalekites; and you will stand the higher
in his regard for your supposed accession to it.''

  ``I desire no man's regard, Mr. Rashleigh, on such terms as
must sink me in my own; and I think these injurious suspicions
will afford a very good reason for quitting Osbaldistone
Hall, which I shall do whenever I can communicate on the
subject with my father.''

  The dark countenance of Rashleigh, though little accustomed
to betray its master's feelings, exhibited a suppressed smile,
which he instantly chastened by a sigh.
 
  ``You are a happy man, Frank---you go and come, as the
wind bloweth where it listeth. With your address, taste, and
talents, you will soon find circles where they will be more
valued, than amid the dull inmates of this mansion; while
I------'' he paused.

  ``And what is there in your lot that can make you or any
one envy mine,---an outcast, as I may almost term myself,
from my father's house and favour?''

  ``Ay, but,'' answered Rashleigh, ``consider the gratified sense
of independence which you must have attained by a very temporary
sacrifice,---for such I am sure yours will prove to be;
consider the power of acting as a free agent, of cultivating your
own talents in the way to which your taste determines you, and
in which you are well qualified to distinguish yourself. Fame
and freedom are cheaply purchased by a few weeks' residence
in the North, even though your place of exile be Osbaldistone
Hall. A second Ovid in Thrace, you have not his reasons for
writing Tristia.''

  ``I do not know,'' said I, blushing as became a young scribbler,
``how you should be so well acquainted with my truant
studies.''

  ``There was an emissary of your father's here some time since,
a young coxcomb, one Twineall, who informed me concerning
your secret sacrifices to the muses, and added, that some of your
verses had been greatly admired by the best judges.''

  Tresham, I believe you are guiltless of having ever essayed
to build the lofty rhyme; but you must have known in your
day many an apprentice and fellow-craft, if not some of the
master-masons, in the temple of Apollo. Vanity is their
universal foible, from him who decorated the shades of Twickenham,
to the veriest scribbler whom he has lashed in his
Dunciad. I had my own share of this common failing, and
without considering how little likely this young fellow Twineall
was, by taste and habits, either to be acquainted with one or
two little pieces of poetry, which I had at times insinuated
into Button's coffee-house, or to report the opinion of the
critics who frequented that resort of wit and literature, I
almost instantly gorged the bait; which Rashleigh perceiving,
improved his opportunity by a diffident, yet apparently very
anxious request to be permitted to see some of my manuscript
productions.

  ``You shall give me an evening in my own apartment,'' he
continued; ``for I must soon lose the charms of literary society
for the drudgery of commerce, and the coarse every-day avocations
of the world. I repeat it, that my compliance with my
father's wishes for the advantage of my family, is indeed a
sacrifice, especially considering the calm and peaceful profession
to which my education destined me.''

  I was vain, but not a fool, and this hypocrisy was too strong
for me to swallow. ``You would not persuade me,'' I replied,
that you really regret to exchange the situation of an obscure
Catholic priest, with all its privations, for wealth and society,
and the pleasures of the world?''

  Rashleigh saw that he had coloured his affectation of moderation
too highly, and, after a second's pause, during which, I
suppose, he calculated the degree of candour which it was necessary
to use with me (that being a quality of which he was never
needlessly profuse), he answered, with a smile---``At my age, to
be condemned, as you say, to wealth and the world, does not,
indeed, sound so alarming as perhaps it ought to do. But, with
pardon be it spoken, you have mistaken my destination---a
Catholic priest, if you will, but not an obscure one. No, sir,---
Rashleigh Osbaldistone will be more obscure, should he rise to
be the richest citizen in London, than he might have been as a
member of a church, whose ministers, as some one says, `set
their sandall'd feet on princes.' My family interest at a certain
exiled court is high, and the weight which that court ought to
possess, and does possess, at Rome is yet higher---my talents not
altogether inferior to the education I have received. In sober
judgment, I might have looked forward to high eminence in the
church---in the dream of fancy, to the very highest. Why might
not''---(he added, laughing, for it was part of his manner to keep
much of his discourse apparently betwixt jest and earnest)---
``why might not Cardinal Osbaldistone have swayed the fortunes
of empires, well-born and well-connected, as well as the low-born
Mazarin, or Alberoni, the son of an Italian gardener?''

  ``Nay, I can give you no reason to the contrary; but in your
place I should not much regret losing the chance of such precarious
and invidious elevation.''

  ``Neither would I,'' he replied, ``were I sure that my present
establishment was more certain; but that must depend upon
circumstances which I can only learn by experience---the disposition
of your father, for example.''

  ``Confess the truth without finesse, Rashleigh; you would
willingly know something of him from me?''

  ``Since, like Die Vernon, you make a point of following the
banner of the good knight Sincerity, I reply---certainly.''

  ``Well, then, you will find in my father a man who has
followed the paths of thriving more for the exercise they afforded
to his talents, than for the love of the gold with which they are
strewed. His active mind would have been happy in any situation
which gave it scope for exertion, though that exertion had
been its sole reward. But his wealth has accumulated, because,
moderate and frugal in his habits, no new sources of expense
have occurred to dispose of his increasing income. He is a man
who hates dissimulation in others; never practises it himself;
and is peculiarly alert in discovering motives through the colouring
of language. Himself silent by habit, he is readily disgusted
by great talkers; the rather, that the circumstances by which
he is most interested, afford no great scope for conversation.
He is severely strict in the duties of religion; but you have no
reason to fear his interference with yours, for he regards toleration
as a sacred principle of political economy. But if you have
any Jacobitical partialities, as is naturally to be supposed, you
will do well to suppress them in his presence, as well as the least
tendency to the highflying or Tory principles; for he holds both
in utter detestation. For the rest, his word is his own bond,
and must be the law of all who act under him. He will fail in
his duty to no one, and will permit no one to fail towards him;
to cultivate his favour, you must execute his commands, instead
of echoing his sentiments. His greatest failings arise out of
prejudices connected with his own profession, or rather his exclusive
devotion to it, which makes him see little worthy of
praise or attention, unless it be in some measure connected with
commerce.''

  ``O rare-painted portrait!'' exclaimed Rashleigh, when I was
silent---``Vandyke was a dauber to you, Frank. I see thy sire
before me in all his strength and weakness; loving and honouring
the King as a sort of lord mayor of the empire, or chief of
the board of trade---venerating the Commons, for the acts regulating
the export trade---and respecting the Peers, because the
Lord Chancellor sits on a woolsack.''

  ``Mine was a likeness, Rashleigh; yours is a caricature.
But in return for the _carte du pays_ which I have unfolded to
you, give me some lights on the geography of the unknown
lands''---

  ``On which you are wrecked,'' said Rashleigh. ``It is not
worth while; it is no Isle of Calypso, umbrageous with shade
and intricate with silvan labyrinth---but a bare ragged Northumbrian
moor, with as little to interest curiosity as to delight
the eye; you may descry it in all its nakedness in half an hour's
survey, as well as if I were to lay it down before you by line
and compass.''

  ``O, but something there is, worthy a more attentive survey
---What say you to Miss Vernon? Does not she form an interesting
object in the landscape, were all round as rude as Iceland's
coast?''

  I could plainly perceive that Rashleigh disliked the topic now
presented to him; but my frank communication had given me
the advantageous title to make inquiries in my turn. Rashleigh
felt this, and found himself obliged to follow my lead, however
difficult he might find it to play his cards successfully. ``I have
known less of Miss Vernon,'' he said, ``for some time, than I was
wont to do formerly. In early age I was her tutor; but as she
advanced towards womanhood, my various avocations,---the
gravity of the profession to which I was destined,---the peculiar
nature of her engagements,---our mutual situation, in short,
rendered a close and constant intimacy dangerous and improper.
I believe Miss Vernon might consider my reserve as unkindness,
but it was my duty; I felt as much as she seemed to do, when
compelled to give way to prudence. But where was the safety
in cultivating an intimacy with a beautiful and susceptible girl,
whose heart, you are aware, must be given either to the cloister
or to a betrothed husband?''

  ``The cloister or a betrothed husband?'' I echoed---``Is that
the alternative destined for Miss Vernon?''

  ``It is indeed,'' said Rashleigh, with a sigh. ``I need not, I
suppose, caution you against the danger of cultivating too closely
the friendship of Miss Vernon;---you are a man of the world,
and know how far you can indulge yourself in her society with
safety to yourself, and justice to her. But I warn you, that,
considering her ardent temper, you must let your experience keep
guard over her as well as yourself, for the specimen of yesterday
may serve to show her extreme thoughtlessness and neglect of
decorum.''

  There was something, I was sensible, of truth, as well as good
sense, in all this; it seemed to be given as a friendly warning,
and I had no right to take it amiss; yet I felt I could with
pleasure have run Rashleigh Osbaldistone through the body all
the time he was speaking.

  ``The deuce take his insolence!'' was my internal meditation.
``Would he wish me to infer that Miss Vernon had fallen in
love with that hatchet-face of his, and become degraded so low
as to require his shyness to cure her of an imprudent passion? I
will have his meaning from him,'' was my resolution, ``if I should
drag it out with cart-ropes.''

  For this purpose, I placed my temper under as accurate a
guard as I could, and observed, ``That, for a lady of her good
sense and acquired accomplishments, it was to be regretted that
Miss Vernon's manners were rather blunt and rustic.''

  ``Frank and unreserved, at least, to the extreme,'' replied
Rashleigh: ``yet, trust me, she has an excellent heart. To tell
you the truth, should she continue her extreme aversion to the
cloister, and to her destined husband, and should my own labours
in the mine of Plutus promise to secure me a decent independence,
I shall think of reviewing our acquaintance and sharing it with
Miss Vernon.''

  ``With all his fine voice, and well-turned periods,'' thought
I, ``this same Rashleigh Osbaldistone is the ugliest and most
conceited coxcomb I ever met with!''

  ``But,'' continued Rashleigh, as if thinking aloud, ``I should
not like to supplant Thorncliff.''

  ``Supplant Thorncliff!---Is your brother Thorncliff,'' I inquired,
with great surprise, ``the destined husband of Diana
Vernon?''

  ``Why, ay, her father's commands, and a certain family-contract,
destined her to marry one of Sir Hildebrand's sons. A
dispensation has been obtained from Rome to Diana Vernon to
marry _Blank_ Osbaldistone, Esq., son of Sir Hildebrand Osbaldistone,
of Osbaldistone Hall, Bart., and so forth; and it only
remains to pitch upon the happy man whose name shall fill the
gap in the manuscript. Now, as Percie is seldom sober, my
father pitched on Thorncliff, as the second prop of the family,
and therefore most proper to carry on the line of the Osbaldistones.''

  ``The young lady,'' said I, forcing myself to assume an air of
pleasantry, which, I believe, became me extremely ill, ``would
perhaps have been inclined to look a little lower on the family-tree,
for the branch to which she was desirous of clinging.''

  ``I cannot say,'' he replied. ``There is room for little choice
in our family; Dick is a gambler, John a boor, and Wilfred an
ass. I believe my father really made the best selection for poor
Die, after all.''

  ``The present company,'' said I, ``being always excepted.''

  ``Oh, my destination to the church placed me out of the
question; otherwise I will not affect to say, that, qualified by
my education both to instruct and guide Miss Vernon, I might
not have been a more creditable choice than any of my elders.''

  ``And so thought the young lady, doubtless?''

  ``You are not to suppose so,'' answered Rashleigh, with an
affectation of denial which was contrived to convey the strongest
affirmation the case admitted of: ``friendship---only friendship
---formed the tie betwixt us, and the tender affection of an
opening mind to its only instructor---Love came not near us---
I told you I was wise in time.''

  I felt little inclination to pursue this conversation any farther,
and shaking myself clear of Rashleigh, withdrew to my own
apartment, which I recollect I traversed with much vehemence
of agitation, repeating aloud the expressions which had most
offended me.---``Susceptible---ardent---tender affection---Love---
Diana Vernon, the most beautiful creature I ever beheld, in
love with him, the bandy-legged, bull-necked, limping scoundrel!
Richard the Third in all but his hump-back!---And yet the
opportunities he must have had during his cursed course of
lectures; and the fellow's flowing and easy strain of sentiment;
and her extreme seclusion from every one who spoke and acted
with common sense; ay, and her obvious pique at him, mixed
with admiration of his talents, which looked as like the result
of neglected attachment as anything else---Well, and what is
it to me, that I should storm and rage at it? Is Diana
Vernon the first pretty girl that has loved and married an ugly
fellow? And if she were free of every Osbaldistone of them,
what concern is it of mine?---a Catholic---a Jacobite---a
termagant into the boot---for me to look that way were utter
madness.''

  By throwing such reflections on the flame of my displeasure,
I subdued it into a sort of smouldering heart-burning, and
appeared at the dinner-table in as sulky a humour as could well
be imagined.
