




			CHAPTER EIGHTH.



	``Sir,'' quoth the Lawyer, ``not to flatter ye,
	You have as good and fair a battery
	As heart could wish, and need not shame
	The proudest man alive to claim.''
					Butler.



  Our horses were taken by a servant in Sir Hildebrand's livery,
whom we found in the court-yard, and we entered the house.
In the entrance-hall I was somewhat surprised, and my fair
companion still more so, when we met Rashleigh Osbaldistone,
who could not help showing equal wonder at our rencontre.

  ``Rashleigh,'' said Miss Vernon, without giving him time to
ask any question, ``you have heard of Mr. Francis Osbaldistone's
affair, and you have been talking to the Justice about it?''

  ``Certainly,'' said Rashleigh, composedly---``it has been my
business here.---I have been endeavouring,'' he said, with a bow
to me, ``to render my cousin what service I can. But I am
sorry to meet him here.''

  ``As a friend and relation, Mr. Osbaldistone, you ought to
have been sorry to have met me anywhere else, at a time when
the charge of my reputation required me to be on this spot as
soon as possible.''

  ``True; but judging from what my father said, I should have
supposed a short retreat into Scotland---just till matters should
be smoothed over in a quiet way''------

  I answered with warmth, ``That I had no prudential measures
to observe, and desired to have nothing smoothed over;---
on the contrary, I was come to inquire into a rascally calumny,
which I was determined to probe to the bottom.''

  ``Mr. Francis Osbaldistone is an innocent man, Rashleigh,''
said Miss Vernon, ``and he demands an investigation of the
charge against him, and I intend to support him in it.''

  ``You do, my pretty cousin?---I should think, now, Mr.
Francis Osbaldistone was likely to be as effectually, and rather
more delicately, supported by my presence than by yours.''

  ``Oh, certainly; but two heads are better than one, you
know.''

  ``Especially such a head as yours, my pretty Die,'' advancing
and taking her hand with a familiar fondness, which made me
think him fifty times uglier than nature had made him. She
led him, however, a few steps aside; they conversed in an under
voice, and she appeared to insist upon some request which he
was unwilling or unable to comply with. I never saw so strong
a contrast betwixt the expression of two faces. Miss Vernon's,
from being earnest, became angry; her eyes and cheeks became
more animated, her colour mounted, she clenched her little hand,
and stamping on the ground with her tiny foot, seemed to listen
with a mixture of contempt and indignation to the apologies,
which, from his look of civil deference, his composed and respectful
smile, his body rather drawing back than advanced,
and other signs of look and person, I concluded him to be pouring
out at her feet. At length she flung away from him, with
``I _will_ have it so.''

  ``It is not in my power---there is no possibility of it.---Would
you think it, Mr. Osbaldistone?'' said he, addressing me---

  ``You are not mad?'' said she, interrupting him.

  ``Would you think it?'' said he, without attending to her
hint---``Miss Vernon insists, not only that I know your innocence
(of which, indeed, it is impossible for any one to be
more convinced), but that I must also be acquainted with the
real perpetrators of the outrage on this fellow---if indeed such
an outrage has been committed. Is this reasonable, Mr. Osbaldistone?''

  ``I will not allow any appeal to Mr. Osbaldistone, Rashleigh,''
said the young lady; ``he does not know, as I do, the incredible
extent and accuracy of your information on all points.''

  ``As I am a gentleman, you do me more honour than I
deserve.''

  ``Justice, Rashleigh---only justice:---and it is only justice
which I expect at your hands.''

  ``You are a tyrant, Diana,'' he answered, with a sort of sigh
---``a capricious tyrant, and rule your friends with a rod of
iron. Still, however, it shall be as you desire. But you ought
not to be here---you know you ought not;---you must return
with me.''

  Then turning from Diana, who seemed to stand undecided,
he came up to me in the most friendly manner, and said, ``Do
not doubt my interest in what regards you, Mr. Osbaldistone.
If I leave you just at this moment, it is only to act for your
advantage. But you must use your influence with your cousin
to return; her presence cannot serve you, and must prejudice
herself.''

  ``I assure you, sir,'' I replied, ``you cannot be more convinced
of this than I; I have urged Miss Vernon's return as anxiously
as she would permit me to do.''

 ``I have thought on it,'' said Miss Vernon after a pause,
``and I will not go till I see you safe out of the hands of the
Philistines. Cousin Rashleigh, I dare say, means well; but he
and I know each other well. Rashleigh, I will =not= go;---I
know,'' she added, in a more soothing tone, ``my being here
will give you more motive for speed and exertion.''

  ``Stay then, rash, obstinate girl,'' said Rashleigh; ``you know
but too well to whom you trust;'' and hastening out of the hall,
we heard his horse's feet a minute afterwards in rapid motion.

  ``Thank Heaven he is gone!'' said Diana. ``And now let
us seek out the Justice.''

  ``Had we not better call a servant?''

  ``Oh, by no means; I know the way to his den---we must
burst on him suddenly---follow me.''

  I did follow her accordingly, as she tripped up a few gloomy
steps, traversed a twilight passage, and entered a sort of ante-room,
hung round with old maps, architectural elevations, and
genealogical trees. A pair of folding-doors opened from this
into Mr. Inglewood's sitting apartment, from which was heard
the fag-end of an old ditty, chanted by a voice which had been
in its day fit for a jolly bottle-song.

	``O, in Skipton-in-Craven
	Is never a haven,
	    But many a day foul weather;
	And he that would say
	A pretty girl nay,
	    I wish for his cravat a tether.''

  ``Heyday!'' said Miss Vernon, ``the genial Justice must have
dined already---I did not think it had been so late.''

  It was even so. Mr. Inglewood's appetite having been
sharpened by his official investigations, he had antedated his
meridian repast, having dined at twelve instead of one o'clock,
then the general dining hour in England. The various occurrences
of the morning occasioned our arriving some time
after this hour, to the Justice the most important of the four-and-twenty,
and he had not neglected the interval.

  ``Stay you here,'' said Diana. ``I know the house, and I
will call a servant; your sudden appearance might startle the
old gentleman even to choking;'' and she escaped from me,
leaving me uncertain whether I ought to advance or retreat.
It was impossible for me not to hear some part of what passed
within the dinner apartment, and particularly several apologies
for declining to sing, expressed in a dejected croaking voice, the
tones of which, I conceived, were not entirely new to me.

  ``Not sing, sir? by our Lady! but you must---What! you
have cracked my silver-mounted cocoa-nut of sack, and tell me
that you cannot sing!---Sir, sack will make a cat sing, and speak
too; so up with a merry stave, or trundle yourself out of my
doors!---Do you think you are to take up all my valuable time
with your d-d declarations, and then tell me you cannot
sing?''

  ``Your worship is perfectly in rule,'' said another voice, which,
from its pert conceited accent, might be that of the cleric, ``and
the party must be conformable; he hath _canet_ written on his
face in court hand.''

  ``Up with it then,'' said the Justice, ``or by St. Christopher,
you shall crack the cocoa-nut full of salt-and-water, according to
the statute for such effect made and provided.''

  Thus exhorted and threatened, my quondam fellow-traveller,
for I could no longer doubt that he was the recusant in question,
uplifted, with a voice similar to that of a criminal singing his
last psalm on the scaffold, a most doleful stave to the following
effect:---

	``Good people all, I pray give ear,
	A woeful story you shall hear,
	'Tis of a robber as stout as ever
	Bade a true man stand and deliver.
	    With his foodle doo fa loodle loo.

	``This knave, most worthy of a cord,
	Being armed with pistol and with sword,
	'Twixt Kensington and Brentford then
	Did boldly stop six honest men.
	    With his foodle doo, etc.

	``These honest men did at Brentford dine,
	Having drank each man his pint of wine,
	When this bold thief, with many curses,
	Did say, You dogs, your lives or purses.
	    With his foodle doo,'' etc.

  I question if the honest men, whose misfortune is commemorated
in this pathetic ditty, were more startled at the appearance
of the bold thief than the songster was at mine; for,
tired of waiting for some one to announce me, and finding my
situation as a listener rather awkward, I presented myself to
the company just as my friend Mr. Morris, for such, it seems,
was his name, was uplifting the fifth stave of his doleful ballad.
The high tone with which the tune started died away in a
quaver of consternation on finding himself so near one whose
character he supposed to be little less suspicious than that of
the hero of his madrigal, and he remained silent, with a mouth
gaping as if I had brought the Gorgon's head in my hand.

  The Justice, whose eyes had closed under the influence of
the somniferous lullaby of the song, started up in his chair as it
suddenly ceased, and stared with wonder at the unexpected
addition which the company had received while his organs of
sight were in abeyance. The clerk, as I conjectured him to be
from his appearance, was also commoved; for, sitting opposite
to Mr. Morris, that honest gentleman's terror communicated
itself to him, though he wotted not why.

  I broke the silence of surprise occasioned by my abrupt
entrance.---``My name, Mr. Inglewood, is Francis Osbaldistone;
I understand that some scoundrel has brought a complaint
before you, charging me with being concerned in a loss which
he says he has sustained.''

  ``Sir,'' said the Justice, somewhat peevishly, ``these are matters
I never enter upon after dinner;---there is a time for everything,
and a justice of peace must eat as well as other folks.''

  The goodly person of Mr. Inglewood, by the way, seemed
by no means to have suffered by any fasts, whether in the
service of the law or of religion.

  ``I beg pardon for an ill-timed visit, sir; but as my reputation
is concerned, and as the dinner appears to be concluded''-------

  ``It is not concluded, sir,'' replied the magistrate; ``man
requires digestion as well as food, and I protest I cannot have
benefit from my victuals unless I am allowed two hours of
quiet leisure, intermixed with harmless mirth, and a moderate
circulation of the bottle.''

  ``If your honour will forgive me,'' said Mr. Jobson, who had
produced and arranged his writing implements in the brief space
that our conversation afforded; ``as this is a case of felony, and
the gentleman seems something impatient, the charge is _contra
pacem domini regis_''------

  ``D---n _dominie regis!_'' said the impatient Justice---``I hope
it's no treason to say so; but it's enough to made one mad to
be worried in this way.	Have I a moment of my life quiet for
warrants, orders, directions, acts, bails, bonds, and recognisances?
---I pronounce to you, Mr. Jobson, that I shall send you and
the justiceship to the devil one of these days.''

  ``Your honour will consider the dignity of the office one of
the quorum and custos rotulorum, an office of which Sir Edward
Coke wisely saith, The whole Christian world hath not the like
of it, so it be duly executed.''

  ``Well,'' said the Justice, partly reconciled by this eulogium
on the dignity of his situation, and gulping down the rest of
his dissatisfaction in a huge bumper of claret, ``let us to this
gear then, and get rid of it as fast as we can.---Here you, sir---
you, Morris---you, knight of the sorrowful countenance---is this
Mr. Francis Osbaldistone the gentleman whom you charge with
being art and part of felony?''

  ``I, sir?'' replied Morris, whose scattered wits had hardly
yet reassembled themselves; ``I charge nothing---I say nothing
against the gentleman,''

  ``Then we dismiss your complaint, sir, that's all, and a good
riddance---Push about the bottle---Mr. Osbaldistone, help yourself.''

  Jobson, however, was determined that Morris should not
back out of the scrape so easily. ``What do you mean, Mr.
Morris?---Here is your own declaration---the ink scarce dried---
and you would retract it in this scandalous manner!''

  ``How do I know,'' whispered the other in a tremulous tone,
``how many rogues are in the house to back him? I have read
of such things in Johnson's Lives of the Highwaymen. I protest
the door opens''------

  And it did open, and Diana Vernon entered---``You keep
fine order here, Justice---not a servant to be seen or heard of.''

  ``Ah!'' said the Justice, starting up with an alacrity which
showed that he was not so engrossed by his devotions to Themis
or Comus, as to forget what was due to beauty---``Ah, ha!
Die Vernon, the heath-bell of Cheviot, and the blossom of the
Border, come to see how the old bachelor keeps house? Art
welcome, girl, as flowers in May.''

  ``A fine, open, hospitable house you do keep, Justice, that
must be allowed---not a soul to answer a visitor.''

  ``Ah, the knaves! they reckoned themselves secure of me
for a couple of hours---But why did you not come earlier?---
Your cousin Rashleigh dined here, and ran away like a poltroon
after the first bottle was out---But you have not dined---we'll
have something nice and ladylike---sweet and pretty like yourself,
tossed up in a trice.''

  ``I may eat a crust in the ante-room before I set out,''
answered Miss Vernon---``I have had a long ride this morning;
but I can't stay long, Justice---I came with my cousin, Frank
Osbaldistone, there, and I must show him the way back again
to the Hall, or he'll lose himself in the wolds.''

  ``Whew! sits the wind in that quarter?'' inquired the
Justice---

	``She showed him the way, she showed him the way,
	She showed him the way to woo.

What! no luck for old fellows, then, my sweet bud of the
wilderness?''

  ``None whatever, Squire Inglewood; but if you will be a
good kind Justice, and despatch young Frank's business, and
let us canter home again, I'll bring my uncle to dine with you
next week, and we'll expect merry doings.''

  ``And you shall find them, my pearl of the Tyne---Zookers,
lass, I never envy these young fellows their rides and scampers,
unless when you come across me. But I must not keep you
just now, I suppose?---I am quite satisfied with Mr. Francis
Osbaldistone's explanation---here has been some mistake, which
can be cleared at greater leisure.''

  ``Pardon me, sir,'' said I; ``but I have not heard the nature
of the accusation yet.''

  ``Yes, sir,'' said the clerk, who, at the appearance of Miss
Vernon, had given up the matter in despair, but who picked
up courage to press farther investigation on finding himself
supported from a quarter whence assuredly he expected no
backing---``Yes, sir, and Dalton saith, That he who is apprehended
as a felon shall not be discharged upon any man's
discretion, but shall be held either to bail or commitment,
paying to the clerk of the peace the usual fees for recognisance
or commitment.''

  The Justice, thus goaded on, gave me at length a few words
of explanation.

  It seems the tricks which I had played to this man Morris
had made a strong impression on his imagination; for I found
they had been arrayed against me in his evidence, with all the
exaggerations which a timorous and heated imagination could
suggest. It appeared also, that on the day he parted from me,
he had been stopped on a solitary spot and eased of his beloved
travelling-companion, the portmanteau, by two men, well
mounted and armed, having their faces covered with vizards.

  One of them, he conceived, had much of my shape and air,
and in a whispering conversation which took place betwixt the
freebooters, he heard the other apply to him the name of
Osbaldistone. The declaration farther set forth, that upon
inquiring into the principles of the family so named, he, the
said declarant, was informed that they were of the worst
description, the family, in all its members, having been Papists
and Jacobites, as he was given to understand by the dissenting
clergyman at whose house he stopped after his rencontre, since
the days of William the Conqueror.

  Upon all and each of these weighty reasons, he charged me
with being accessory to the felony committed upon his person;
he, the said declarant, then travelling in the special employment
of Government, and having charge of certain important papers,
and also a large sum in specie, to be paid over, according to his
instructions, to certain persons of official trust and importance
in Scotland.

  Having heard this extraordinary accusation, I replied to it,
that the circumstances on which it was founded were such as
could warrant no justice, or magistrate, in any attempt on my
personal liberty. I admitted that I had practised a little upon
the terrors of Mr. Morris, while we travelled together, but in
such trifling particulars as could have excited apprehension in no
one who was one whit less timorous and jealous than himself.
But I added, that I had never seen him since we parted, and if
that which he feared had really come upon him, I was in nowise
accessory to an action so unworthy of my character and station
in life. That one of the robbers was called Osbaldistone, or
that such a name was mentioned in the course of the conversation
betwixt them, was a trifling circumstance, to which no
weight was due. And concerning the disaffection alleged against
me, I was willing to prove, to the satisfaction of the Justice, the
clerk, and even the witness himself, that I was of the same
persuasion as his friend the dissenting clergyman; had been
educated as a good subject in the principles of the Revolution,
and as such now demanded the personal protection of the laws
which had been assured by that great event.

  The Justice fidgeted, took snuff, and seemed considerably
embarrassed, while Mr. Attorney Jobson, with all the volubility
of his profession, ran over the statute of the 34 Edward III.,
by which justices of the peace are allowed to arrest all those
whom they find by indictment or suspicion, and to put them
into prison. The rogue even turned my own admissions against
me, alleging, ``that since I had confessedly, upon my own
showing, assumed the bearing or deportment of a robber or
malefactor, I had voluntarily subjected myself to the suspicions
of which I complained, and brought myself within the compass
of the act, having wilfully clothed my conduct with all the
colour and livery of guilt.''

  I combated both his arguments and his jargon with much
indignation and scorn, and observed, ``That I should, if necessary,
produce the bail of my relations, which I conceived could not be
refused, without subjecting the magistrate in a misdemeanour.''

  ``Pardon me, my good sir---pardon me,'' said the insatiable
clerk; ``this is a case in which neither bail nor mainprize can
be received, the felon who is liable to be committed on heavy
grounds of suspicion, not being replevisable under the statute
of the 3d of King Edward, there being in that act an express
exception of such as be charged of commandment, or force, and
aid of felony done;'' and he hinted that his worship would do
well to remember that such were no way replevisable by common
writ, nor without writ.

  At this period of the conversation a servant entered, and
delivered a letter to Mr. Jobson. He had no sooner run it
hastily over, than he exclaimed, with the air of one who wished
to appear much vexed at the interruption, and felt the consequence
attached to a man of multifarious avocations---``Good
God!---why, at this rate, I shall have neither time to attend
to the public concerns nor my own---no rest---no quiet---I
wish to Heaven another gentleman in our line would settle
here!''

  ``God forbid!'' said the Justice in a tone of _sotto-voce_ deprecation;
``some of us have enough of one of the tribe.''

  ``This is a matter of life and death, if your worship pleases.''

  ``In God's name! no more justice business, I hope,'' said the
alarmed magistrate.

  ``No---no,'' replied Mr. Jobson, very consequentially; ``old
Gaffer Rutledge of Grime's-hill is subp<oe>naed for the next world;
he has sent an express for Dr. Kill-down to put in bail---another
for me to arrange his worldly affairs.''

  ``Away with you, then,'' said Mr. Inglewood, hastily; ``his
may not be a replevisable case under the statute, you know, or
Mr. Justice Death may not like the doctor for a _main pernor,_
or bailsman.''

  ``And yet,'' said Jobson, lingering as he moved towards the
door, ``if my presence here be necessary---I could make out the
warrant for committal in a moment, and the constable is below
---And you have heard,'' he said, lowering his voice, ``Mr.
Rashleigh's opinion''---the rest was lost in a whisper.

  The Justice replied aloud, ``I tell thee no, man, no---we'll do
nought till thou return, man; 'tis but a four-mile ride---Come,
push the bottle, Mr. Morris---Don't be cast down, Mr. Osbaldistone
---And you, my rose of the wilderness---one cup of claret
to refresh the bloom of your cheeks.''

  Diana started, as if from a reverie, in which she appeared to
have been plunged while we held this discussion. ``No, Justice
---I should be afraid of transferring the bloom to a part of my
face where it would show to little advantage; but I will pledge
you in a cooler beverage;'' and filling a glass with water, she
drank it hastily, while her hurried manner belied her assumed
gaiety.

  I had not much leisure to make remarks upon her demeanour,
however, being full of vexation at the interference of fresh
obstacles to an instant examination of the disgraceful and
impertinent charge which was brought against me. But there
was no moving the Justice to take the matter up in absence of
his clerk, an incident which gave him apparently as much
pleasure as a holiday to a schoolboy. He persisted in his
endeavours to inspire jollity into a company, the individuals of
which, whether considered with reference to each other, or to
their respective situations, were by no means inclined to mirth.
``Come, Master Morris, you're not the first man that's been
robbed, I trow---grieving ne'er brought back loss, man. And
you, Mr. Frank Osbaldistone, are not the first bully-boy that
has said stand to a true man. There was Jack Winterfield, in
my young days, kept the best company in the land---at horse-races
and cock-fights who but he---hand and glove was I with
Jack. Push the bottle, Mr. Morris, it's dry talking---Many
quart bumpers have I cracked, and thrown many a merry main
with poor Jack---good family---ready wit---quick eye---as honest
a fellow, barring the deed he died for---we'll drink to his memory,
gentlemen---Poor Jack Winterfield---And since we talk of him,
and of those sort of things, and since that d---d clerk of mine
has taken his gibberish elsewhere, and since we're snug among
ourselves, Mr. Osbaldistone, if you will have my best advice, I
would take up this matter---the law's hard---very severe---
hanged poor Jack Winterfield at York, despite family connections
and great interest, all for easing a fat west-country
grazier of the price of a few beasts---Now, here is honest Mr.
Morris, has been frightened, and so forth---D---n it, man, let
the poor fellow have back his portmanteau, and end the frolic
at once.''

  Morris's eyes brightened up at this suggestion, and he began
to hesitate forth an assurance that he thirsted for no man's
blood, when I cut the proposed accommodation short, by resenting
the Justice's suggestion as an insult, that went directly to
suppose me guilty of the very crime which I had come to his
house with the express intention of disavowing. We were in
this awkward predicament when a servant, opening the door,
announced, ``A strange gentleman to wait upon his honour;''
and the party whom he thus described entered the room without
farther ceremony.

