




        	CHAPTER THIRD.





	The slack sail shifts from side to side,
	The boat, untrimm'd, admits the tide,
	Borne down, adrift, at random tost,
	The oar breaks short, the rudder's lost.
					Gay's _Fables._



  I have tagged with rhyme and blank verse the subdivisions of
this important narrative, in order to seduce your continued
attention by powers of composition of stronger attraction than
my own. The preceding lines refer to an unfortunate navigator,
who daringly unloosed from its moorings a boat, which he was
unable to manage, and thrust it off into the full tide of a
navigable river. No schoolboy, who, betwixt frolic and defiance,
has executed a similar rash attempt, could feel himself,
when adrift in a strong current, in a situation more awkward
than mine, when I found myself driving, without a compass, on
the ocean of human life. There had been such unexpected ease
in the manner in which my father slipt a knot, usually esteemed
the strongest which binds society together, and suffered me to
depart as a sort of outcast from his family, that it strangely
lessened the confidence in my own personal accomplishments,
which had hitherto sustained me. Prince Prettyman, now a
prince, and now a fisher's son, had not a more awkward sense
of his degradation. We are so apt, in our engrossing egotism,
to consider all those accessories which are drawn around us by
prosperity, as pertaining and belonging to our own persons, that
the discovery of our unimportance, when left to our own proper
resources, becomes inexpressibly mortifying. As the hum of
London died away on my ear, the distant peal of her steeples
more than once sounded to my ears the admonitory ``Turn
again,'' erst heard by her future Lord Mayor; and when I
looked back from Highgate on her dusky magnificence, I felt as
if I were leaving behind me comfort, opulence, the charms of
society, and all the pleasures of cultivated life.

  But the die was cast. It was, indeed, by no means probable
that a late and ungracious compliance with my father's wishes
would have reinstated me in the situation which I had lost.
On the contrary, firm and strong of purpose as he himself was,
he might rather have been disgusted than conciliated by my
tardy and compulsory acquiescence in his desire that I should
engage in commerce. My constitutional obstinacy came also to
my aid, and pride whispered how poor a figure I should make,
when an airing of four miles from London had blown away
resolutions formed during a month's serious deliberation. Hope,
too, that never forsakes the young and hardy, lent her lustre to
my future prospects. My father could not be serious in the
sentence of foris-familiation, which he had so unhesitatingly
pronounced. It must be but a trial of my disposition, which,
endured with patience and steadiness on my part, would raise
me in his estimation, and lead to an amicable accommodation
of the point in dispute between us. I even settled in my own
mind how far I would concede to him, and on what articles of
our supposed treaty I would make a firm stand; and the result
was, according to my computation, that I was to be reinstated
in my full rights of filiation, paying the easy penalty of some
ostensible compliances to atone for my past rebellion.

  In the meanwhile, I was lord of my person, and experienced
that feeling of independence which the youthful bosom receives
with a thrilling mixture of pleasure and apprehension. My
purse, though by no means amply replenished, was in a situation
to supply all the wants and wishes of a traveller. I had been
accustomed, while at Bourdeaux, to act as my own valet; my
horse was fresh, young, and active, and the buoyancy of my
spirits soon surmounted the melancholy reflections with which
my journey commenced.

  I should have been glad to have journeyed upon a line of road
better calculated to afford reasonable objects of curiosity, or a
more interesting country, to the traveller. But the north road
was then, and perhaps still is, singularly deficient in these
respects; nor do I believe you can travel so far through Britain
in any other direction without meeting more of what is worthy
to engage the attention. My mental ruminations, notwithstanding
my assumed confidence, were not always of an unchequered
nature. The Muse too,---the very coquette who had led me
into this wilderness,---like others of her sex, deserted me in my
utmost need, and I should have been reduced to rather an uncomfortable
state of dulness, had it not been for the occasional
conversation of strangers who chanced to pass the same way.
But the characters whom I met with were of a uniform and
uninteresting description. Country parsons, jogging homewards
after a visitation; farmers, or graziers, returning from a distant
market; clerks of traders, travelling to collect what was due to
their masters, in provincial towns; with now and then an officer
going down into the country upon the recruiting service, were,
at this period, the persons by whom the turnpikes and tapsters
were kept in exercise. Our speech, therefore, was of tithes and
creeds, of beeves and grain, of commodities wet and dry, and
the solvency of the retail dealers, occasionally varied by the
description of a siege, or battle, in Flanders, which, perhaps,
the narrator only gave me at second hand. Robbers, a fertile and
alarming theme, filled up every vacancy; and the names of the
Golden Farmer, the Flying Highwayman, Jack Needham, and
other Beggars' Opera heroes, were familiar in our mouths as
household words. At such tales, like children closing their
circle round the fire when the ghost story draws to its climax,
the riders drew near to each other, looked before and behind
them, examined the priming of their pistols, and vowed to stand
by each other in case of danger; an engagement which, like
other offensive and defensive alliances, sometimes glided out of
remembrance when there was an appearance of actual peril.

  Of all the fellows whom I ever saw haunted by terrors of this
nature, one poor man, with whom I travelled a day and a half,
afforded me most amusement. He had upon his pillion a very
small, but apparently a very weighty portmanteau, about the
safety of which he seemed particularly solicitous; never trusting
it out of his own immediate care, and uniformly repressing the
officious zeal of the waiters and ostlers, who offered their services
to carry it into the house. With the same precaution he
laboured to conceal, not only the purpose of his journey, and
his ultimate place of destination, but even the direction of each
day's route. Nothing embarrassed him more than to be asked
by any one, whether be was travelling upwards or downwards,
or at what stage he intended to bait. His place of rest for the
night he scrutinised with the most anxious care, alike avoiding
solitude, and what he considered as bad neighbourhood; and at
Grantham, I believe, he sate up all night to avoid sleeping in
the next room to a thick-set squinting fellow, in a black wig,
and a tarnished gold-laced waistcoat. With all these cares on
his mind, my fellow traveller, to judge by his thews and sinews,
was a man who might have set danger at defiance with as much
impunity as most men. He was strong and well built; and,
judging from his gold-laced hat and cockade, seemed to have
served in the army, or, at least, to belong to the military profession
in one capacity or other. His conversation also, though
always sufficiently vulgar, was that of a man of sense, when the
terrible bugbears which haunted his imagination for a moment
ceased to occupy his attention. But every accidental association
recalled them. An open heath, a close plantation, were alike
subjects of apprehension; and the whistle of a shepherd lad was
instantly converted into the signal of a depredator. Even the
sight of a gibbet, if it assured him that one robber was safely
disposed of by justice, never failed to remind him how many
remained still unhanged.

  I should have wearied of this fellow's company, had I not
been still more tired of my own thoughts. Some of the marvellous
stories, however, which he related, had in themselves a
cast of interest, and another whimsical point of his peculiarities
afforded me the occasional opportunity of amusing myself at his
expense. Among his tales, several of the unfortunate travellers
who fell among thieves, incurred that calamity from associating
themselves on the road with a well-dressed and entertaining
stranger, in whose company they trusted to find protection as
well as amusement; who cheered their journey with tale and
song, protected them against the evils of over-charges and false
reckonings, until at length, under pretext of showing a near
path over a desolate common, he seduced his unsuspicious
victims from the public road into some dismal glen, where,
suddenly blowing his whistle, he assembled his comrades from
their lurking-place, and displayed himself in his true colours---
the captain, namely, of the band of robbers to whom his unwary
fellow-travellers had forfeited their purses, and perhaps their
lives. Towards the conclusion of such a tale, and when my
companion had wrought himself into a fever of apprehension by
the progress of his own narrative, I observed that he usually
eyed me with a glance of doubt and suspicion, as if the possibility
occurred to him, that he might, at that very moment, be in
company with a character as dangerous as that which his tale
described. And ever and anon, when such suggestions pressed
themselves on the mind of this ingenious self-tormentor, he
drew off from me to the opposite side of the high-road, looked
before, behind, and around him, examined his arms, and seemed
to prepare himself for flight or defence, as circumstances might
require.

  The suspicion implied on such occasions seemed to me only
momentary, and too ludicrous to be offensive. There was, in
fact, no particular reflection on my dress or address, although I
was thus mistaken for a robber. A man in those days might
have all the external appearance of a gentleman, and yet turn
out to be a highwayman. For the division of labour in every
department not having then taken place so fully as since that
period, the profession of the polite and accomplished adventurer,
who nicked you out of your money at White's, or bowled
you out of it at Marylebone, was often united with that of the
professed ruffian, who on Bagshot Heath, or Finchley Common,
commanded his brother beau to stand and deliver. There was
also a touch of coarseness and hardness about the manners of
the times, which has since, in a great degree, been softened and
shaded away. It seems to me, on recollection, as if desperate
men had less reluctance then than now to embrace the most
desperate means of retrieving their fortune. The times were
indeed past, when Anthony-a-Wood mourned over the execution
of two men, goodly in person, and of undisputed courage and
honour, who were hanged without mercy at Oxford, merely
because their distress had driven them to raise contributions on
the highway. We were still farther removed from the days of
``the mad Prince and Poins.'' And yet, from the number of
unenclosed and extensive heaths in the vicinity of the metropolis,
and from the less populous state of remote districts, both
were frequented by that species of mounted highwaymen, that
may possibly become one day unknown, who carried on their
trade with something like courtesy; and, like Gibbet in the
Beaux Stratagem, piqued themselves on being the best behaved
men on the road, and on conducting themselves with all appropriate
civility in the exercise of their vocation. A young man,
therefore, in my circumstances was not entitled to be highly
indignant at the mistake which confounded him with this
worshipful class of depredators.

  Neither was I offended. On the contrary, I found amusement
in alternately exciting, and lulling to sleep, the suspicions
of my timorous companion, and in purposely so acting as still
farther to puzzle a brain which nature and apprehension had
combined to render none of the clearest. When my free conversation
had lulled him into complete security, it required only
a passing inquiry concerning the direction of his journey, or the
nature of the business which occasioned it, to put his suspicions
once more in arms. For example, a conversation on the comparative
strength and activity of our horses, took such a turn
as follows:---

  ``O sir,'' said my companion, ``for the gallop I grant you;
but allow me to say, your horse (although he is a very handsome
gelding---that must be owned,) has too little bone to be a
good roadster. The trot, sir'' (striking his Bucephalus with
his spurs),---``the trot is the true pace for a hackney; and, were
we near a town, I should like to try that daisy-cutter of yours
upon a piece of level road (barring canter) for a quart of claret
at the next inn.''

  ``Content, sir,'' replied I; ``and here is a stretch of ground
very favourable.''

  ``Hem, ahem,'' answered my friend with hesitation; ``I
make it a rule of travelling never to blow my horse between
stages; one never knows what occasion he may have to put him
to his mettle: and besides, sir, when I said I would match you,
I meant with even weight; you ride four stone lighter than I.''

  ``Very well; but I am content to carry weight. Pray, what
may that portmanteau of yours weigh?''

  ``My p-p-portmanteau?'' replied he, hesitating---``O very
little---a feather---just a few shirts and stockings.''

  ``I should think it heavier, from its appearance. I'll hold
you the quart of claret it makes the odds betwixt our weight.''

  ``You're mistaken, sir, I assure you---quite mistaken,'' replied
my friend, edging off to the side of the road, as was his wont
on these alarming occasions.

  ``Well, I am willing to venture the wine; or, I will bet you
ten pieces to five, that I carry your portmanteau on my croupe,
and out-trot you into the bargain.''

  This proposal raised my friend's alarm to the uttermost. His
nose changed from the natural copper hue which it had acquired
from many a comfortable cup of claret or sack, into a palish
brassy tint, and his teeth chattered with apprehension at the
unveiled audacity of my proposal, which seemed to place the
barefaced plunderer before him in full atrocity. As he faltered
for an answer, I relieved him in some degree by a question
concerning a steeple, which now became visible, and an observation
that we were now so near the village as to run no risk
from interruption on the road. At this his countenance cleared
up: but I easily perceived that it was long ere he forgot a
proposal which seemed to him so fraught with suspicion as that
which I had now hazarded. I trouble you with this detail of
the man's disposition, and the manner in which I practised
upon it, because, however trivial in themselves, these particulars
were attended by an important influence on future incidents
which will occur in this narrative. At the time, this person's
conduct only inspired me with contempt, and confirmed me in
an opinion which I already entertained, that of all the propensities
which teach mankind to torment themselves, that of
causeless fear is the most irritating, busy, painful, and pitiable.
