




			CHAPTER FOURTH.




	The Scots are poor, cries surly English pride.
	True is the charge; nor by themselves denied.
	Are they not, then, in strictest reason clear,
	Who wisely come to mend their fortunes here?
						Churchill.



  There was, in the days of which I write, an old-fashioned
custom on the English road, which I suspect is now obsolete,
or practised only by the vulgar. Journeys of length being
made on horseback, and, of course, by brief stages, it was usual
always to make a halt on the Sunday in some town where the
traveller might attend divine service, and his horse have the
benefit of the day of rest, the institution of which is as humane
to our brute labourers as profitable to ourselves. A counterpart
to this decent practice, and a remnant of old English hospitality,
was, that the landlord of a principal inn laid aside his character
of a publican on the seventh day, and invited the guests who
chanced to be within his walls to take a part of his family beef
and pudding. This invitation was usually complied with by all
whose distinguished rank did not induce them to think compliance
a derogation; and the proposal of a bottle of wine after
dinner, to drink the landlord's health, was the only recompense
ever offered or accepted.

  I was born a citizen of the world, and my inclination led me
into all scenes where my knowledge of mankind could be
enlarged; I had, besides, no pretensions to sequester myself on
the score of superior dignity, and therefore seldom failed to
accept of the Sunday's hospitality of mine host, whether of
the Garter, Lion, or Bear. The honest publican, dilated into
additional consequence by a sense of his own importance, while
presiding among the guests on whom it was his ordinary duty
to attend, was in himself an entertaining, spectacle; and around
his genial orbit, other planets of inferior consequence performed
their revolutions. The wits and humorists, the distinguished
worthies of the town or village, the apothecary, the attorney,
even the curate himself, did not disdain to partake of this
hebdomadal festivity. The guests, assembled from different
quarters, and following different professions, formed, in language,
manners, and sentiments, a curious contrast to each other, not
indifferent to those who desired to possess a knowledge of
mankind in its varieties.

  It was on such a day, and such an occasion, that my timorous
acquaintance and I were about to grace the board of the ruddy-faced
host of the Black Bear, in the town of Darlington, and
bishopric of Durham, when our landlord informed us, with a
sort of apologetic tone, that there was a Scotch gentleman to
dine with us.

  ``A gentleman!---what sort of a gentleman?'' said my companion
somewhat hastily---his mind, I suppose, running on
gentlemen of the pad, as they were then termed.

  ``Why, a Scotch sort of a gentleman, as I said before,''
returned mine host; ``they are all gentle, ye mun know, though
they ha' narra shirt to back; but this is a decentish hallion---
a canny North Briton as e'er cross'd Berwick Bridge---I trow
he's a dealer in cattle.''

  ``Let us have his company, by all means,'' answered my
companion; and then, turning to me, he gave vent to the
tenor of his own reflections. ``I respect the Scotch, sir; I
love and honour the nation for their sense of morality. Men
talk of their filth and their poverty: but commend me to
sterling honesty, though clad in rags, as the poet saith. I have
been credibly assured, sir, by men on whom I can depend, that
there was never known such a thing in Scotland as a highway
robbery.''

  ``That's because they have nothing to lose,'' said mine host,
with the chuckle of a self-applauding wit.

  ``No, no, landlord,'' answered a strong deep voice behind
him, ``it's e'en because your English gaugers and supervisors,<*>

* The introduction of gaugers, supervisors, and examiners, was one of
* the great complaints of the Scottish nation, though a natural consequence
* of the Union.

that you have sent down benorth the Tweed, have taen up the
trade of thievery over the heads of the native professors.''

  ``Well said, Mr. Campbell,'' answered the landlord; ``I did
not think thoud'st been sae near us, mon. But thou kens
I'm an outspoken Yorkshire tyke. And how go markets in
the south?''

  ``Even in the ordinar,'' replied Mr. Campbell; ``wise folks
buy and sell, and fools are bought and sold.''

  ``But wise men and fools both eat their dinner,'' answered
our jolly entertainer; ``and here a comes---as prime a buttock
of beef as e'er hungry men stuck fork in.''

  So saying, he eagerly whetted his knife, assumed his seat of
empire at the head of the board, and loaded the plates of his
sundry guests with his good cheer.

  This was the first time I had heard the Scottish accent, or,
indeed, that I had familiarly met with an individual of the
ancient nation by whom it was spoken. Yet, from an early
period, they had occupied and interested my imagination. My
father, as is well known to you, was of an ancient family in
Northumberland, from whose seat I was, while eating the aforesaid
dinner, not very many miles distant. The quarrel betwixt
him and his relatives was such, that he scarcely ever mentioned
the race from which he sprung, and held as the most contemptible
species of vanity, the weakness which is commonly termed
family pride. His ambition was only to be distinguished
as William Osbaldistone, the first, at least one of the first,
merchants on Change; and to have proved him the lineal
representative of William the Conqueror would have far less
flattered his vanity than the hum and bustle which his approach
was wont to produce among the bulls, bears, and brokers of
Stock-alley. He wished, no doubt, that I should remain in
such ignorance of my relatives and descent as might insure a
correspondence between my feelings and his own on this subject.
But his designs, as will happen occasionally to the wisest, were,
in some degree at least, counteracted by a being whom his
pride would never have supposed of importance adequate to
influence them in any way. His nurse, an old Northumbrian
woman, attached to him from his infancy, was the only person
connected with his native province for whom he retained any
regard; and when fortune dawned upon him, one of the first
uses which he made of her favours, was to give Mabel Rickets
a place of residence within his household. After the death of
my mother, the care of nursing me during my childish illnesses,
and of rendering all those tender attentions which infancy
exacts from female affection, devolved on old Mabel. Interdicted
by her master from speaking to him on the subject of
the heaths, glades, and dales of her beloved Northumberland,
she poured herself forth to my infant ear in descriptions of the
scenes of her youth, and long narratives of the events which
tradition declared to have passed amongst them. To these I
inclined my ear much more seriously than to graver, but less
animated instructors. Even yet, methinks I see old Mabel, her
head slightly agitated by the palsy of age, and shaded by a
close cap, as white as the driven snow,---her face wrinkled, but
still retaining the healthy tinge which it had acquired in rural
labour---I think I see her look around on the brick walls and
narrow street which presented themselves before our windows,
as she concluded with a sigh the favourite old ditty, which I
then preferred, and---why should I not tell the truth?---which
I still prefer to all the opera airs ever minted by the capricious
brain of an Italian Mus. D.---

	Oh, the oak, the ash, and the bonny ivy tree,
	They flourish best at home in the North Countrie!

Now, in the legends of Mabel, the Scottish nation was ever
freshly remembered, with all the embittered declamation of
which the narrator was capable. The inhabitants of the opposite
frontier served in her narratives to fill up the parts
which ogres and giants with seven-leagued boots occupy in the
ordinary nursery tales. And how could it be otherwise? Was
it not the Black Douglas who slew with his own hand the heir
of the Osbaldistone family the day after he took possession of
his estate, surprising him and his vassals while solemnizing a
feast suited to the occasion? Was it not Wat the Devil, who
drove all the year-old hogs off the braes of Lanthorn-side, in
the very recent days of my grandfather's father? And had we
not many a trophy, but, according to old Mabel's version of
history, far more honourably gained, to mark our revenge of
these wrongs? Did not Sir Henry Osbaldistone, fifth baron of
the name, carry off the fair maid of Fairnington, as Achilles did
his Chryseis and Briseis of old, and detain her in his fortress
against all the power of her friends, supported by the most
mighty Scottish chiefs of warlike fame? And had not our
swords shone foremost at most of those fields in which England
was victorious over her rival? All our family renown was
acquired---all our family misfortunes were occasioned---by the
northern wars.

  Warmed by such tales, I looked upon the Scottish people
during my childhood, as a race hostile by nature to the more
southern inhabitants of this realm; and this view of the matter
was not much corrected by the language which my father
sometimes held with respect to them. He had engaged in
some large speculations concerning oak-woods, the property of
Highland proprietors, and alleged, that he found them much
more ready to make bargains, and extort earnest of the purchase-money,
than punctual in complying on their side with
the terms of the engagements. The Scottish mercantile men,
whom he was under the necessity of employing as a sort of
middle-men on these occasions, were also suspected by my
father of having secured, by one means or other, more than
their own share of the profit which ought to have accrued. In
short, if Mabel complained of the Scottish arms in ancient
times, Mr. Osbaldistone inveighed no less against the arts of
these modern Sinons; and between them, though without any
fixed purpose of doing so, they impressed my youthful mind
with a sincere aversion to the northern inhabitants of Britain,
as a people bloodthirsty in time of war, treacherous during
truce, interested, selfish, avaricious, and tricky in the business
of peaceful life, and having few good qualities, unless there
should be accounted such, a ferocity which resembled courage
in martial affairs, and a sort of wily craft which supplied the
place of wisdom in the ordinary commerce of mankind. In
justification, or apology, for those who entertained such prejudices,
I must remark, that the Scotch of that period were
guilty of similar injustice to the English, whom they branded
universally as a race of purse-proud arrogant epicures. Such
seeds of national dislike remained between the two countries,
the natural consequences of their existence as separate and
rival states. We have seen recently the breath of a demagogue
blow these sparks into a temporary flame, which I sincerely
hope is now extinguished in its own ashes. <*>

* This seems to have been written about the time of Wilkes and
* Liberty.


  It was, then, with an impression of dislike, that I contemplated
the first Scotchman I chanced to meet in society. There
was much about him that coincided with my previous conceptions.
He had the hard features and athletic form said to
be peculiar to his country, together with the national intonation
and slow pedantic mode of expression, arising from a desire to
avoid peculiarities of idiom or dialect. I could also observe the
caution and shrewdness of his country in many of the observations
which he made, and the answers which he returned. But
I was not prepared for the air of easy self-possession and superiority
with which he seemed to predominate over the company
into which he was thrown, as it were by accident. His dress
was as coarse as it could be, being still decent; and, at a time
when great expense was lavished upon the wardrobe, even of
the lowest who pretended to the character of gentleman, this
indicated mediocrity of circumstances, if not poverty. His
conversation intimated that he was engaged in the cattle trade,
no very dignified professional pursuit. And yet, under these
disadvantages, he seemed, as a matter of course, to treat the
rest of the company with the cool and condescending politeness
which implies a real, or imagined, superiority over those towards
whom it is used. When he gave his opinion on any
point, it was with that easy tone of confidence used by those
superior to their society in rank or information, as if what he
said could not be doubted, and was not to be questioned. Mine
host and his Sunday guests, after an effort or two to support
their consequence by noise and bold averment, sunk gradually
under the authority of Mr. Campbell, who thus fairly possessed
himself of the lead in the conversation. I was tempted, from
curiosity, to dispute the ground with him myself, confiding in
my knowledge of the world, extended as it was by my residence
abroad, and in the stores with which a tolerable education
had possessed my mind. In the latter respect he offered no
competition, and it was easy to see that his natural powers
had never been cultivated by education. But I found him
much better acquainted than I was myself with the present
state of France, the character of the Duke of Orleans, who
had just succeeded to the regency of that kingdom, and that
of the statesmen by whom he was surrounded; and his
shrewd, caustic, and somewhat satirical remarks, were those
of a man who had been a close observer of the affairs of that
country.

  On the subject of politics, Campbell observed a silence and
moderation which might arise from caution. The divisions of
Whig and Tory then shook England to her very centre, and a
powerful party, engaged in the Jacobite interest, menaced the
dynasty of Hanover, which had been just established on the
throne. Every alehouse resounded with the brawls of contending
politicians, and as mine host's politics were of that
liberal description which quarrelled with no good customer,
his hebdomadal visitants were often divided in their opinion as
irreconcilably as if he had feasted the Common Council. The
curate and the apothecary, with a little man, who made no
boast of his vocation, but who, from the flourish and snap of
his fingers, I believe to have been the barber, strongly espoused
the cause of high church and the Stuart line. The excise-man,
as in duty bound, and the attorney, who looked to some
petty office under the Crown, together with my fellow-traveller,
who seemed to enter keenly into the contest, staunchly supported
the cause of King George and the Protestant succession.
Dire was the screaming---deep the oaths! Each party
appealed to Mr. Campbell, anxious, it seemed, to elicit his
approbation.

  ``You are a Scotchman, sir; a gentleman of your country
must stand up for hereditary right,'' cried one party.

  ``You are a Presbyterian,'' assumed the other class of disputants;
``you cannot be a friend to arbitrary power.''

  ``Gentlemen,'' said our Scotch oracle, after having gained,
with some difficulty, a moment's pause, ``I havena much dubitation
that King George weel deserves the predilection of his
friends; and if he can haud the grip he has gotten, why, doubtless,
he may made the gauger, here, a commissioner of the
revenue, and confer on our friend, Mr. Quitam, the preferment
of solicitor-general; and he may also grant some good deed or
reward to this honest gentleman who is sitting upon his portmanteau,
which he prefers to a chair: And, questionless, King
James is also a grateful person, and when he gets his hand in
play, he may, if he be so minded, make this reverend gentleman
archprelate of Canterbury, and Dr. Mixit chief physician to his
household, and commit his royal beard to the care of my friend
Latherum. But as I doubt mickle whether any of the competing
sovereigns would give Rob Campbell a tass of aquavit<ae>, if
he lacked it, I give my vote and interest to Jonathan Brown,
our landlord, to be the King and Prince of Skinkers, conditionally
that he fetches us another bottle as good as the last.''

  This sally was received with general applause, in which the
landlord cordially joined; and when he had given orders for
fulfilling the condition on which his preferment was to depend,
he failed not to acquaint them, ``that, for as peaceable a gentleman
as Mr. Campbell was, he was, moreover, as bold as a lion
---seven highwaymen had he defeated with his single arm, that
beset him as he came from Whitson-Tryste.''

  ``Thou art deceived, friend Jonathan,'' said Campbell, interrupting
him; ``they were but barely two, and two cowardly
loons as man could wish to meet withal.''

  ``And did you, sir, really,'' said my fellow-traveller, edging
his chair (I should have said his portmanteau) nearer to Mr.
Campbell, ``really and actually beat two highwaymen yourself
alone?''

  ``In troth did I, sir,'' replied Campbell; ``and I think it nae
great thing to make a sang about.''

  ``Upon my word, sir,'' replied my acquaintance, ``I should be
happy to have the pleasure of your company on my journey---
I go northward, sir.''

  This piece of gratuitous information concerning the route he
proposed to himself, the first I had heard my companion bestow
upon any one, failed to excite the corresponding confidence of
the Scotchman.

  ``We can scarce travel together,'' he replied, drily. ``You,
sir, doubtless, are well mounted, and I for the present travel
on foot, or on a Highland shelty, that does not help me much
faster forward.''

  So saying, he called for a reckoning for the wine, and throwing
down the price of the additional bottle which he had himself
introduced, rose as if to take leave of us. My companion made
up to him, and taking him by the button, drew him aside into
one of the windows. I could not help overhearing him pressing
something---I supposed his company upon the journey, which
Mr. Campbell seemed to decline.

  ``I will pay your charges, sir,'' said the traveller, in a tone
as if he thought the argument should bear down all opposition.

  ``It is quite impossible,'' said Campbell, somewhat contemptuously;
``I have business at Rothbury.''

  ``But I am in no great hurry; I can ride out of the way, and
never miss a day or so for good company.''

  ``Upon my faith, sir,'' said Campbell, ``I cannot render you
the service you seem to desiderate. I am,'' he added, drawing
himself up haughtily, ``travelling on my own private affairs,
and if ye will act by my advisement, sir, ye will neither unite
yourself with an absolute stranger on the road, nor communicate
your line of journey to those who are asking ye no questions
about it.'' He then extricated his button, not very ceremoniously,
from the hold which detained him, and coming up to me
as the company were dispersing, observed, ``Your friend, sir, is
too communicative, considering the nature of his trust.''

  ``That gentleman,'' I replied, looking towards the traveller,
``is no friend of mine, but an acquaintance whom I picked up
on the road. I know neither his name nor business, and you
seem to be deeper in his confidence than I am.''

  ``I only meant,'' he replied hastily, ``that he seems a thought
rash in conferring the honour of his company on those who
desire it not.''

  ``The gentleman,'' replied I, ``knows his own affairs best, and
I should be sorry to constitute myself a judge of them in any
respect.''

  Mr. Campbell made no farther observation, but merely
wished me a good journey, and the party dispersed for the
evening.

  Next day I parted company with my timid companion, as I
left the great northern road to turn more westerly in the direction
of Osbaldistone Manor, my uncle's seat. I cannot tell
whether he felt relieved or embarrassed by my departure, considering
the dubious light in which he seemed to regard me.
For my own part, his tremors ceased to amuse me, and, to say
the truth, I was heartily glad to get rid of him.

