




		CHAPTER TWELFTH.



	Drunk?---and speak parrot?---and squabble?---swagger?---
	Swear?---and discourse fustian with one's own shadow?
							Othello.



  I have already told you, my dear Tresham, what probably was
no news to you, that my principal fault was an unconquerable
pitch of pride, which exposed me to frequent mortification. I
had not even whispered to myself that I loved Diana Vernon;
yet no sooner did I hear Rashleigh talk of her as a prize which
he might stoop to carry off, or neglect, at his pleasure, than
every step which the poor girl had taken, in the innocence and
openness of her heart, to form a sort of friendship with me,
seemed in my eyes the most insulting coquetry.---``Soh! she
would secure me as a _pis aller,_ I suppose, in case Mr. Rashleigh
Osbaldistone should not take compassion upon her! But I will
satisfy her that I am not a person to be trepanned in that
manner---I will make her sensible that I see through her arts,
and that I scorn them.''

  I did not reflect for a moment, that all this indignation,
which I had no right whatever to entertain, proved that I was
anything but indifferent to Miss Vernon's charms; and I sate
down to table in high ill-humour with her and all the daughters
of Eve.

  Miss Vernon heard me, with surprise, return ungracious
answers to one or two playful strokes of satire which she threw
out with her usual freedom of speech; but, having no suspicion
that offence was meant, she only replied to my rude repartees
with jests somewhat similar, but polished by her good temper,
though pointed by her wit. At length she perceived I was
really out of humour, and answered one of my rude speeches
thus:---

  ``They say, Mr. Frank, that one may gather sense from
fools---I heard cousin Wilfred refuse to play any longer at
cudgels the other day with cousin Thornie, because cousin
Thornie got angry, and struck harder than the rules of
amicable combat, it seems, permitted. `Were I to break your
head in good earnest,' quoth honest Wilfred, `I care not how
angry you are, for I should do it so much the more easily
but it's hard I should get raps over the costard, and only pay
you back in make-believes'---Do you understand the moral of
this, Frank?''

  ``I have never felt myself under the necessity, madam, of
studying how to extract the slender portion of sense with which
this family season their conversation.''

  ``Necessity! and madam!---You surprise me, Mr. Osbaldistone.''

  ``I am unfortunate in doing so.''

  ``Am I to suppose that this capricious tone is serious? or is
it only assumed, to make your good-humour more valuable?''

  ``You have a right to the attention of so many gentlemen in
this family, Miss Vernon, that it cannot be worth your while to
inquire into the cause of my stupidity and bad spirits.''

  ``What!'' she said, ``am I to understand, then, that you
have deserted my faction, and gone over to the enemy?''

  Then, looking across the table, and observing that Rashleigh,
who was seated opposite, was watching us with a singular
expression of interest on his harsh features, she continued---

	``Horrible thought!---Ay, now I see 'tis true,
	For the grim-visaged Rashleigh smiles on me,
	And points at thee for his!------

Well, thank Heaven, and the unprotected state which has
taught me endurance, I do not take offence easily; and that I
may not be forced to quarrel, whether I like it or no, I have
the honour, earlier than usual, to wish you a happy digestion
of your dinner and your bad humour.''

  And she left the table accordingly.

  Upon Miss Vernon's departure, I found myself very little
satisfied with my own conduct. I had hurled back offered
kindness, of which circumstances had but lately pointed out
the honest sincerity, and I had but just stopped short of insulting
the beautiful, and, as she had said with some emphasis,
the unprotected being by whom it was proffered. My conduct
seemed brutal in my own eyes. To combat or drown these
painful reflections, I applied myself more frequently than usual
to the wine which circulated on the table.

  The agitated state of my feelings combined with my habits of
temperance to give rapid effect to the beverage. Habitual
topers, I believe, acquire the power of soaking themselves with
a quantity of liquor that does little more than muddy those intellects
which in their sober state are none of the clearest; but
men who are strangers to the vice of drunkenness as a habit, are
more powerfully acted upon by intoxicating liquors. My spirits,
once aroused, became extravagant; I talked a great deal, argued
upon what I knew nothing of, told stories of which I forgot the
point, then laughed immoderately at my own forgetfulness; I
accepted several bets without having the least judgment; I
challenged the giant John to wrestle with me, although he had
kept the ring at Hexham for a year, and I never tried so much
as a single fall.

  My uncle had the goodness to interpose and prevent this consummation
of drunken folly, which, I suppose, would have otherwise
ended in my neck being broken.

  It has even been reported by maligners, that I sung a song
while under this vinous influence; but, as I remember nothing
of it, and never attempted to turn a tune in all my life before
or since, I would willingly hope there is no actual foundation
for the calumny. I was absurd enough without this exaggeration.
Without positively losing my senses, I speedily lost all
command of my temper, and my impetuous passions whirled me
onward at their pleasure. I had sate down sulky and discontented,
and disposed to be silent---the wine rendered me loquacious,
disputatious, and quarrelsome. I contradicted whatever
was asserted, and attacked, without any respect to my uncle's
table, both his politics and his religion. The affected moderation
of Rashleigh, which he well knew how to qualify with irritating
ingredients, was even more provoking to me than the noisy and
bullying language of his obstreperous brothers. My uncle, to
do him justice, endeavoured to bring us to order; but his
authority was lost amidst the tumult of wine and passion. At
length, frantic at some real or supposed injurious insinuation, I
actually struck Rashleigh with my fist. No Stoic philosopher,
superior to his own passion and that of others, could have received
an insult with a higher degree of scorn. What he himself
did not think it apparently worth while to resent, Thorncliff
resented for him. Swords were drawn, and we exchanged one
or two passes, when the other brothers separated us by main
force; and I shall never forget the diabolical sneer which writhed
Rashleigh's wayward features, as I was forced from the apartment
by the main strength of two of these youthful Titans.
They secured me in my apartment by locking the door, and I
heard them, to my inexpressible rage, laugh heartily as they
descended the stairs. I essayed in my fury to break out; but
the window-grates, and the strength of a door clenched with
iron, resisted my efforts. At length I threw myself on my bed,
and fell asleep amidst vows of dire revenge to be taken in the
ensuing day.

  But with the morning cool repentance came. I felt, in the
keenest manner, the violence and absurdity of my conduct, and
was obliged to confess that wine and passion had lowered my
intellects even below those of Wilfred Osbaldistone, whom I held
in so much contempt. My uncomfortable reflections were by no
means soothed by meditating the necessity of an apology for my
improper behaviour, and recollecting that Miss Vernon must be
a witness of my submission. The impropriety and unkindness of
my conduct to her personally, added not a little to these galling
considerations, and for this I could not even plead the miserable
excuse of intoxication.

  Under all these aggravating feelings of shame and degradation,
I descended to the breakfast hall, like a criminal to receive sentence.
It chanced that a hard frost had rendered it impossible
to take out the hounds, so that I had the additional mortification
to meet the family, excepting only Rashleigh and Miss Vernon,
in full divan, surrounding the cold venison pasty and chine of
beef. They were in high glee as I entered, and I could easily
imagine that the jests were furnished at my expense. In fact,
what I was disposed to consider with serious pain, was regarded
as an excellent good joke by my uncle, and the greater part of
my cousins. Sir Hildebrand, while he rallied me on the exploits
of the preceding evening, swore he thought a young fellow had
better be thrice drunk in one day, than sneak sober to bed like
a Presbyterian, and leave a batch of honest fellows, and a double
quart of claret. And to back this consolatory speech, he poured
out a large bumper of brandy, exhorting me to swallow ``a hair
of the dog that had bit me.''

  ``Never mind these lads laughing, nevoy,'' he continued; ``they
would have been all as great milksops as yourself, had I not
nursed them, as one may say, on the toast and tankard.''

  Ill-nature was not the fault of my cousins in general; they
saw I was vexed and hurt at the recollections of the preceding
evening, and endeavoured, with clumsy kindness, to remove the
painful impression they had made on me. Thorncliff alone looked
sullen and unreconciled. This young man had never liked me from
the beginning; and in the marks of attention occasionally shown
me by his brothers, awkward as they were, he alone had never
joined. If it was true, of which, however, I began to have my
doubts, that he was considered by the family, or regarded himself,
as the destined husband of Miss Vernon, a sentiment of
jealousy might have sprung up in his mind from the marked
predilection which it was that young lady's pleasure to show for
one whom Thorncliff might, perhaps, think likely to become a
dangerous rival.

  Rashleigh at last entered, his visage as dark as mourning weed
---brooding, I could not but doubt, over the unjustifiable and
disgraceful insult I had offered to him. I had already settled in
my own mind how I was to behave on the occasion, and had
schooled myself to believe, that true honour consisted not in
defending, but in apologising for, an injury so much disproportioned
to any provocation I might have to allege.

  I therefore hastened to meet Rashleigh, and to express myself
in the highest degree sorry for the violence with which I had
acted on the preceding evening. ``No circumstances,'' I said,
``could have wrung from me a single word of apology, save my
own consciousness of the impropriety of my behaviour. I hoped
my cousin would accept of my regrets so sincerely offered, and
consider how much of my misconduct was owing to the excessive
hospitality of Osbaldistone Hall.''

  ``He shall be friends with thee, lad,'' cried the honest knight,
in the full effusion of his heart; ``or d---n me, if I call him son
more!---Why, Rashie, dost stand there like a log? _Sorry for it_
is all a gentleman can say, if he happens to do anything awry,
especially over his claret. I served in Hounslow, and should
know something, I think, of affairs of honour. Let me hear no
more of this, and we'll go in a body and rummage out the badger
in Birkenwood-bank.''

  Rashleigh's face resembled, as I have already noticed, no other
countenance that I ever saw. But this singularity lay not only
in the features, but in the mode of changing their expression.
Other countenances, in altering from grief to joy, or from anger
to satisfaction, pass through some brief interval, ere the expression
of the predominant passion supersedes entirely that of its
predecessor. There is a sort of twilight, like that between the
clearing up of the darkness and the rising of the sun, while the
swollen muscles subside, the dark eye clears, the forehead relaxes
and expands itself, and the whole countenance loses its sterner
shades, and becomes serene and placid. Rashleigh's face exhibited
none of these gradations, but changed almost instantaneously
from the expression of one passion to that of the
contrary. I can compare it to nothing but the sudden shifting
of a scene in the theatre, where, at the whistle of the prompter,
a cavern disappears, and a grove arises.

  My attention was strongly arrested by this peculiarity on the
present occasion. At Rashleigh's first entrance, ``black he stood
as night!'' With the same inflexible countenance he heard my
excuse and his father's exhortation; and it was not until Sir
Hildebrand had done speaking, that the cloud cleared away at
once, and he expressed, in the kindest and most civil terms,
his perfect satisfaction with the very handsome apology I had
offered.

  ``Indeed,'' he said, ``I have so poor a brain myself, when I
impose on it the least burden beyond my usual three glasses,
that I have only, like honest Cassio, a very vague recollection
of the confusion of last night---remember a mass of things, but
nothing distinctly---a quarrel, but nothing wherefore--So, my dear
Cousin,'' he continued, shaking me kindly by the hand, ``conceive
how much I am relieved by finding that I have to receive an
apology, instead of having to make one---I will not have a
word said upon the subject more; I should be very foolish to
institute any scrutiny into an account, when the balance, which
I expected to be against me, has been so unexpectedly and
agreeably struck in my favour. You see, Mr. Osbaldistone, I
am practising the language of Lombard Street, and qualifying
myself for my new calling.''

  As I was about to answer, and raised my eyes for the purpose,
they encountered those of Miss Vernon, who, having entered the
room unobserved during the conversation, had given it her close
attention. Abashed and confounded, I fixed my eyes on the
ground, and made my escape to the breakfast-table, where I
herded among my busy cousins.

  My uncle, that the events of the preceding day might not
pass out of our memory without a practical moral lesson, took
occasion to give Rashleigh and me his serious advice to correct
our milksop habits, as he termed them, and gradually to inure
our brains to bear a gentlemanlike quantity of liquor, without
brawls or breaking of heads. He recommended that we should
begin piddling with a regular quart of claret per day, which,
with the aid of March beer and brandy, made a handsome
competence for a beginner in the art of toping. And for our
encouragement, he assured us that he had known many a man
who had lived to our years without having drunk a pint of wine
at a sitting, who yet, by falling into honest company, and following
hearty example, had afterwards been numbered among the
best good fellows of the time, and could carry off their six bottles
under their belt quietly and comfortably, without brawling or
babbling, and be neither sick nor sorry the next morning.

  Sage as this advice was, and comfortable as was the prospect
it held out to me, I profited but little by the exhortation---
partly, perhaps, because, as often as I raised my eyes from the
table, I observed Miss Vernon's looks fixed on me, in which I
thought I could read grave compassion blended with regret and
displeasure. I began to consider how I should seek a scene of
explanation and apology with her also, when she gave me to
understand she was determined to save me the trouble of soliciting
an interview. ``Cousin Francis,'' she said, addressing me
by the same title she used to give to the other Osbaldistones,
although I had, properly speaking, no title to be called her kinsman,
``I have encountered this morning a difficult passage in the
Divina Comm<e'>dia of Dante; will you have the goodness to step
to the library and give me your assistance? and when you have
unearthed for me the meaning of the obscure Florentine, we will
join the rest at Birkenwood-bank, and see their luck at unearthing
the badger.''

  I signified, of course, my readiness to wait upon her. Rashleigh
made an offer to accompany us. ``I am something better
skilled,'' he said, ``at tracking the sense of Dante through the
metaphors and elisions of his wild and gloomy poem, than at
hunting the poor inoffensive hermit yonder out of his cave.''

  ``Pardon me, Rashleigh,'' said Miss Vernon, ``but as you are
to occupy Mr. Francis's place in the counting-house, you must
surrender to him the charge of your pupil's education at Osbaldistone
Hall. We shall call you in, however, if there is any
occasion; so pray do not look so grave upon it. Besides, it is a
shame to you not to understand field-sports---What will you do
should our uncle in Crane-Alley ask you the signs by which you
track a badger?''

  ``Ay, true, Die,---true,'' said Sir Hildebrand, with a sigh,
``I misdoubt Rashleigh will be found short at the leap when he
is put to the trial. An he would ha' learned useful knowledge
like his brothers, he was bred up where it grew, I wuss; but
French antics, and book-learning, with the new turnips, and the
rats, and the Hanoverians, ha' changed the world that I ha' known
in Old England---But come along with us, Rashie, and carry my
hunting-staff, man; thy cousin lacks none of thy company as now,
and I wonna ha' Die crossed---It's ne'er be said there was but
one woman in Osbaldistone Hall, and she died for lack of her
will.''

  Rashleigh followed his father, as he commanded, not, however,
ere he had whispered to Diana, ``I suppose I must in discretion
bring the courtier, Ceremony, in my company, and knock when
I approach the door of the library?''

  ``No, no, Rashleigh,'' said Miss Vernon; ``dismiss from your
company the false archimage Dissimulation, and it will better
ensure your free access to our classical consultations.''

  So saying, she led the way to the library, and I followed---
like a criminal, I was going to say, to execution; but, as I
bethink me, I have used the simile once, if not twice before.
Without any simile at all, then, I followed, with a sense of awkward
and conscious embarrassment, which I would have given a
great deal to shake off. I thought it a degrading and unworthy
feeling to attend one on such an occasion, having breathed the
air of the Continent long enough to have imbibed the notion that
lightness, gallantry, and something approaching to well-bred self-assurance,
should distinguish the gentleman whom a fair lady
selects for her companion in a _t<e^>te-<a`>-t<e^>te._

  My English feelings, however, were too many for my French
education, and I made, I believe, a very pitiful figure, when Miss
Vernon, seating herself majestically in a huge elbow-chair in the
library, like a judge about to hear a cause of importance, signed
to me to take a chair opposite to her (which I did, much like
the poor fellow who is going to be tried), and entered upon conversation
in a tone of bitter irony.
