




		CHAPTER THIRTY-SEVENTH.



	``Come ye hither my `six' good sons,
	    Gallant men I trow ye be,
	  How many of you, my children dear,
	    Will stand by that good Earl and me?''

	``Five'' of them did answer make---
	  ``Five'' of them spoke hastily,
	``O father, till the day we die,
	  We'll stand by that good Earl and thee.''
					The Rising in the North.



  On the morning when we were to depart from Glasgow, Andrew
Fairservice bounced into my apartment like a madman, jumping
up and down, and singing, with more vehemence than tune,

	The kiln's on fire---the kiln's on fire---
	The kiln's on fire---she's a' in a lowe.

  With some difficulty I prevailed on him to cease his confounded
clamour, and explain to me what the matter was. He
was pleased to inform me, as if he had been bringing the finest
news imaginable, ``that the Hielands were clean broken out,
every man o' them, and that Rob Roy, and a' his breekless
bands, wad be down upon Glasgow or twenty-four hours o' the
clock gaed round.''

  ``Hold your tongue,'' said I, ``you rascal! You must be drunk
or mad; and if there is any truth in your news, is it a singing
matter, you scoundrel?''

  ``Drunk or mad? nae doubt,'' replied Andrew, dauntlessly;
``ane's aye drunk or mad if he tells what grit folks dinna like
to hear---Sing? Od, the clans will make us sing on the wrang
side o' our mouth, if we are sae drunk or mad as to bide their
coming.''

  I rose in great haste, and found my father and Owen also on
foot, and in considerable alarm.

  Andrew's news proved but too true in the main. The great
rebellion which agitated Britain in the year 1715 had already
broken out, by the unfortunate Earl of Mar's setting up the
standard of the Stuart family in an ill-omened hour, to the ruin
of many honourable families, both in England and Scotland.
The treachery of some of the Jacobite agents (Rashleigh among
the rest), and the arrest of others, had made George the First's
Government acquainted with the extensive ramifications of a
conspiracy long prepared, and which at last exploded prematurely,
and in a part of the kingdom too distant to have any vital
effect upon the country, which, however, was plunged into much
confusion.

  This great public event served to confirm and elucidate the
obscure explanations I had received from MacGregor; and I
could easily see why the westland clans, who were brought
against him, should have waived their private quarrel, in consideration
that they were all shortly to be engaged in the same
public cause. It was a more melancholy reflection to my mind,
that Diana Vernon was the wife of one of those who were most
active in turning the world upside down, and that she was herself
exposed to all the privations and perils of her husband's
hazardous trade.

  We held an immediate consultation on the measures we were
to adopt in this crisis, and acquiesced in my father's plan, that
we should instantly get the necessary passports, and make the
best of our way to London. I acquainted my father with my
wish to offer my personal service to the Government in any volunteer
corps, several being already spoken of. He readily acquiesced
in my proposal; for though he disliked war as a
profession, yet, upon principle, no man would have exposed his
life more willingly in defence of civil and religious liberty.

  We travelled in haste and in peril through Dumfriesshire and
the neighbouring counties of England. In this quarter, gentlemen
of the Tory interest were already in motion, mustering men
and horses, while the Whigs assembled themselves in the
principal towns, armed the inhabitants, and prepared for civil
war. We narrowly escaped being stopped on more occasions
than one, and were often compelled to take circuitous routes to
avoid the points where forces were assembling.

  When we reached London, we immediately associated with
those bankers and eminent merchants who agreed to support the
credit of Government, and to meet that run upon the funds, on
which the conspirators had greatly founded their hopes of
furthering their undertaking, by rendering the Government, as
it were, bankrupt. My father was chosen one of the members
of this formidable body of the monied interest, as all had the
greatest confidence in his zeal, skill, and activity. He was also
the organ by which they communicated with Government, and
contrived, from funds belonging to his own house, or over which
he had command, to find purchasers for a quantity of the
national stock, which was suddenly flung into the market at a
depreciated price when the rebellion broke out. I was not idle
myself, but obtained a commission, and levied, at my father's
expense, about two hundred men, with whom I joined General
Carpenter's army.

  The rebellion, in the meantime, had extended itself to England.
The unfortunate Earl of Derwentwater had taken arms
in the cause, along with General Foster. My poor uncle, Sir
Hildebrand, whose estate was reduced to almost nothing by his
own carelessness and the expense and debauchery of his sons
and household, was easily persuaded to join that unfortunate
standard. Before doing so, however, he exhibited a degree of
precaution of which no one could have suspected him---he made
his will!

  By this document he devised his estates at Osbaldistone Hall,
and so forth, to his sons successively, and their male heirs, until
he came to Rashleigh, whom, on account of the turn he had
lately taken in politics, he detested with all his might,---he cut
him off with a shilling, and settled the estate on me as his next
heir. I had always been rather a favourite of the old gentleman;
but it is probable that, confident in the number of gigantic
youths who now armed around him, he considered the destination
as likely to remain a dead letter, which he inserted chiefly
to show his displeasure at Rashleigh's treachery, both public
and domestic. There was an article, by which he, bequeathed
to the niece of his late wife, Diana Vernon, now Lady Diana
Vernon Beauchamp, some diamonds belonging to her late aunt,
and a great silver ewer, having the arms of Vernon and Osbaldistone
quarterly engraven upon it.

  But Heaven had decreed a more speedy extinction of his
numerous and healthy lineage, than, most probably, he himself
had reckoned on. In the very first muster of the conspirators,
at a place called Green-Rigg, Thorncliff Osbaldistone quarrelled
about precedence with a gentleman of the Northumbrian border,
to the full as fierce and intractable as himself. In spite of all
remonstrances, they gave their commander a specimen of how
far their discipline might be relied upon, by fighting it out with
their rapiers, and my kinsman was killed on the spot. His
death was a great loss to Sir Hildebrand, for, notwithstanding
his infernal temper, he had a grain or two of more sense than
belonged to the rest of the brotherhood, Rashleigh always
excepted.

  Perceval, the sot, died also in his calling. He had a wager
with another gentleman (who, from his exploits in that line,
had acquired the formidable epithet of Brandy Swalewell),
which should drink the largest cup of strong liquor when King
James was proclaimed by the insurgents at Morpeth. The exploit
was something enormous. I forget the exact quantity of
brandy which Percie swallowed, but it occasioned a fever, of
which he expired at the end of three days, with the word,
_water, water,_ perpetually on his tongue.

  Dickon broke his neck near Warrington Bridge, in an attempt
to show off a foundered blood-mare which he wished to palm
upon a Manchester merchant who had joined the insurgents.
He pushed the animal at a five-barred gate; she fell in the leap,
and the unfortunate jockey lost his life.

  Wilfred the fool, as sometimes befalls, had the best fortune
of the family. He was slain at Proud Preston, in Lancashire,
on the day that General Carpenter attacked the barricades,
fighting with great bravery, though I have heard he was never
able exactly to comprehend the cause of quarrel, and did not
uniformly remember on which king's side he was engaged. John
also behaved very boldly in the same engagement, and received
several wounds, of which he was not happy enough to die on the
spot.

  Old Sir Hildebrand, entirely brokenhearted by these successive
losses, became, by the next day's surrender, one of the
unhappy prisoners, and was lodged in Newgate with his
wounded son John.

  I was now released from my military duty, and lost no time,
therefore, in endeavouring to relieve the distresses of these new
relations. My father's interest with Government, and the general
compassion excited by a parent who had sustained the successive
loss of so many sons within so short a time, would have prevented
my uncle and cousin from being brought to trial for high treason.
But their doom was given forth from a greater tribunal. John
died of his wounds in Newgate, recommending to me in his last
breath, a cast of hawks which he had at the Hall, and a black
spaniel bitch called Lucy.

  My poor uncle seemed beaten down to the very earth by his
family calamities, and the circumstances in which he unexpectedly
found himself. He said little, but seemed grateful for such
attentions as circumstances permitted me to show him. I did
not witness his meeting with my father for the first time for so
many years, and under circumstances so melancholy; but, judging
from my father's extreme depression of spirits, it must have
been melancholy in the last degree. Sir Hildebrand spoke with
great bitterness against Rashleigh, now his only surviving child;
laid upon him the ruin of his house, and the deaths of all his
brethren, and declared, that neither he nor they would have
plunged into political intrigue, but for that very member of his
family, who had been the first to desert them. He once or twice
mentioned Diana, always with great affection; and once he said,
while I sate by his bedside---``Nevoy, since Thorncliff and all of
them are dead, I am sorry you cannot have her.''

  The expression affected me much at the time; for it was a
usual custom of the poor old baronet's, when joyously setting
forth upon the morning's chase, to distinguish Thorncliff, who
was a favourite, while he summoned the rest more generally;
and the loud jolly tone in which he used to hollo, ``Call Thornie
---call all of them,'' contrasted sadly with the woebegone and
self-abandoning note in which he uttered the disconsolate words
which I have above quoted. He mentioned the contents of his
will, and supplied me with an authenticated copy;---the original
he had deposited with my old acquaintance Mr. Justice Inglewood,
who, dreaded by no one, and confided in by all as a kind of
neutral person, had become, for aught I know, the depositary of
half the wills of the fighting men of both factions in the county
of Northumberland.

  The greater part of my uncle's last hours were spent in the
discharge of the religious duties of his church, in which he was
directed by the chaplain of the Sardinian ambassador, for whom,
with some difficulty, we obtained permission to visit him. I
could not ascertain by my own observation, or through the medical
attendants, that Sir Hildebrand Osbaldistone died of any
formed complaint bearing a name in the science of medicine.
He seemed to me completely worn out and broken down by
fatigue of body and distress of mind, and rather ceased to exist,
than died of any positive struggle,---just as a vessel, buffeted
and tossed by a succession of tempestuous gales, her timbers
overstrained, and her joints loosened, will sometimes spring a
leak and founder, when there are no apparent causes for her
destruction.

  It was a remarkable circumstance that my father, after the
last duties were performed to his brother, appeared suddenly to
imbibe a strong anxiety that I should act upon the will, and
represent his father's house, which had hitherto seemed to be
the thing in the world which had least charms for him. But
formerly, he had been like the fox in the fable, contemning
what was beyond his reach; and, moreover, I doubt not that
the excessive dislike which he entertained against Rashleigh
(now Sir Rashleigh) Osbaldistone, who loudly threatened to
attack his father Sir Hildebrand's will and settlement, corroborated
my father's desire to maintain it.

  ``He had been most unjustly disinherited,'' he said, ``by his
own father---his brother's will had repaired the disgrace, if not
the injury, by leaving the wreck of his property to Frank, the
natural heir, and he was determined the bequest should take
effect.''

  In the meantime, Rashleigh was not altogether a contemptible
personage as an opponent. The information he had given
to Government was critically well-timed, and his extreme
plausibility, with the extent of his intelligence, and the artful
manner in which he contrived to assume both merit and influence,
had, to a certain extent, procured him patrons among
Ministers. We were already in the full tide of litigation with
him on the subject of his pillaging the firm of Osbaldistone and
Tresham; and, judging from the progress we made in that
comparatively simple lawsuit, there was a chance that this
second course of litigation might be drawn out beyond the
period of all our natural lives.

  To avert these delays as much as possible, my father, by the
advice of his counsel learned in the law, paid off and vested in
my person the rights to certain large mortgages affecting
Osbaldistone Hall. Perhaps, however, the opportunity to convert
a great share of the large profits which accrued from the
rapid rise of the funds upon the suppression of the rebellion,
and the experience he had so lately had of the perils of commerce,
encouraged him to realise, in this manner, a considerable
part of his property. At any rate, it so chanced, that, instead
of commanding me to the desk, as I fully expected, having
intimated my willingness to comply with his wishes, however
they might destine me, I received his directions to go down to
Osbaldistone Hall, and take possession of it as the heir and
representative of the family. I was directed to apply to Squire
Inglewood for the copy of my uncle's will deposited with him,
and take all necessary measures to secure that possession which
sages say makes nine points of the law.

  At another time I should have been delighted with this
change of destination. But now Osbaldistone Hall was accompanied
with many painful recollections. Still, however, I
thought, that in that neighbourhood only I was likely to acquire
some information respecting the fate of Diana Vernon. I had
every reason to fear it must be far different from what I could
have wished it. But I could obtain no precise information on
the subject.

  It was in vain that I endeavoured, by such acts of kindness
as their situation admitted, to conciliate the confidence of some
distant relations who were among the prisoners in Newgate. A
pride which I could not condemn, and a natural suspicion of the
Whig Frank Osbaldistone, cousin to the double-distilled traitor
Rashleigh, closed every heart and tongue, and I only received
thanks, cold and extorted, in exchange for such benefits as I had
power to offer. The arm of the law was also gradually abridging
the numbers of those whom I endeavoured to serve, and the
hearts of the survivors became gradually more contracted towards
all whom they conceived to be concerned with the existing
Government. As they were led gradually, and by detachments,
to execution, those who survived lost interest in mankind, and
the desire of communicating with them. I shall long remember
what one of them, Ned Shafton by name, replied to my anxious
inquiry, whether there was any indulgence I could procure him?
``Mr. Frank Osbaldistone, I must suppose you mean me kindly,
and therefore I thank you. But, by G---, men cannot be fattened
like poultry, when they see their neighbours carried off
day by day to the place of execution, and know that their own
necks are to be twisted round in their turn.''

  Upon the whole, therefore, I was glad to escape from London,
from Newgate, and from the scenes which both exhibited, to
breathe the free air of Northumberland. Andrew Fairservice
had continued in my service more from my father's pleasure
than my own. At present there seemed a prospect that his
local acquaintance with Osbaldistone Hall and its vicinity might
be useful; and, of course, he accompanied me on my journey,
and I enjoyed the prospect of getting rid of him, by establishing
him in his old quarters. I cannot conceive how he could prevail
upon my father to interest himself in him, unless it were by
the art, which he possessed in no inconsiderable degree, of affecting
an extreme attachment to his master; which theoretical attachment
he made compatible in practice with playing all manner
of tricks without scruple, providing only against his master being
cheated by any one but himself.

  We performed our journey to the North without any remarkable
adventure, and we found the country, so lately agitated by
rebellion, now peaceful and in good order. The nearer we approached
to Osbaldistone Hall, the more did my heart sink at
the thought of entering that deserted mansion; so that, in
order to postpone the evil day, I resolved first to make my visit
at Mr. Justice Inglewood's.

  That venerable person had been much disturbed with thoughts
of what he had been, and what he now was; and natural recollections
of the past had interfered considerably with the
active duty which in his present situation might have been
expected from him. He was fortunate, however, in one respect;
he had got rid of his clerk Jobson, who had finally left him in
dudgeon at his inactivity, and become legal assistant to a certain
Squire Standish, who had lately commenced operations in those
parts as a justice, with a zeal for King George and the Protestant
succession, which, very different from the feelings of his
old patron, Mr. Jobson had more occasion to restrain within the
bounds of the law, than to stimulate to exertion.

  Old Justice Inglewood received me with great courtesy, and
readily exhibited my uncle's will, which seemed to be without a
flaw. He was for some time in obvious distress, how he should
speak and act in my presence; but when he found, that though
a supporter of the present Government upon principle, I was
disposed to think with pity on those who had opposed it on a
mistaken feeling of loyalty and duty, his discourse became a
very diverting medley of what he had done, and what he had
left undone,---the pains he had taken to prevent some squires
from joining, and to wink at the escape of others, who had been
so unlucky as to engage in the affair.

  We were _t<e^>te-<a`>-t<e^>te,_ and several bumpers had been quaffed by
the Justice's special desire, when, on a sudden, he requested me
to fill a _bona fide_ brimmer to the health of poor dear Die Vernon,
the rose of the wilderness, the heath-bell of Cheviot, and the
blossom that's transplanted to an infernal convent.

  ``Is not Miss Vernon married, then?'' I exclaimed, in great
astonishment. ``I thought his Excellency''------

  ``Pooh! pooh! his Excellency and his Lordship's all a humbug
now, you know---mere St. Germains titles---Earl of Beauchamp,
and ambassador plenipotentiary from France, when the
Duke Regent of Orleans scarce knew that he lived, I dare say.
But you must have seen old Sir Frederick Vernon at the Hall,
when he played the part of Father Vaughan?''

  ``Good Heavens! then Vaughan was Miss Vernon's father?''

  ``To be sure he was,'' said the Justice coolly;---``there's no
use in keeping the secret now, for he must be out of the country
by this time---otherwise, no doubt, it would be my duty to
apprehend him.---Come, off with your bumper to my dear lost
Die!

	And let her health go round, around, around,
	  And let her health go round;
	For though your stocking be of silk,
	  Your knees near kiss the ground, aground, aground.''<*>

* This pithy verse occurs, it is believed, in Shadwell's play of Bury Fair.


  I was unable, as the reader may easily conceive, to join in
the Justice's jollity. My head swam with the shock I had
received. ``I never heard,'' I said, ``that Miss Vernon's father
was living.''

  ``It was not our Government's fault that he is,'' replied
Inglewood, ``for the devil a man there is whose head would
have brought more money. He was condemned to death for
Fenwick's plot, and was thought to have had some hand in the
Knightsbridge affair, in King William's time; and as he had
married in Scotland a relation of the house of Breadalbane, he
possessed great influence with all their chiefs. There was a
talk of his being demanded to be given up at the peace of
Ryswick, but he shammed ill, and his death was given publicly
out in the French papers. But when he came back here on
the old score, we old cavaliers knew him well,---that is to say,
I knew him, not as being a cavalier myself, but no information
being lodged against the poor gentleman, and my memory being
shortened by frequent attacks of the gout, I could not have
sworn to him, you know.''

  ``Was he, then, not known at Osbaldistone Hall?'' I inquired.

  ``To none but to his daughter, the old knight, and Rashleigh,
who had got at that secret as he did at every one else, and held
it like a twisted cord about poor Die's neck. I have seen her
one hundred times she would have spit at him, if it had not
been fear for her father, whose life would not have been worth
five minutes' purchase if he had been discovered to the Government.
---But don't mistake me, Mr. Osbaldistone; I say the
Government is a good, a gracious, and a just Government; and
if it has hanged one-half of the rebels, poor things, all will
acknowledge they would not have been touched had they staid
peaceably at home.''

  Waiving the discussion of these political questions, I brought
back Mr. Inglewood to his subject, and I found that Diana,
having positively refused to marry any of the Osbaldistone
family, and expressed her particular detestation of Rashleigh,
he had from that time begun to cool in zeal for the cause of the
Pretender; to which, as the youngest of six brethren, and bold,
artful, and able, he had hitherto looked forward as the means of
making his fortune. Probably the compulsion with which he
had been forced to render up the spoils which he had abstracted
from my father's counting-house by the united authority of Sir
Frederick Vernon and the Scottish Chiefs, had determined his
resolution to advance his progress by changing his opinions and
betraying his trust. Perhaps also---for few men were better
judges where his interest was concerned---he considered their
means and talents to be, as they afterwards proved, greatly
inadequate to the important task of overthrowing an established
Government. Sir Frederick Vernon, or, as he was called among
the Jacobites, his Excellency Viscount Beauchamp, had, with
his daughter, some difficulty in escaping the consequences of
Rashleigh's information. Here Mr. Inglewood's information
was at fault; but he did not doubt, since we had not heard of
Sir Frederick being in the hands of the Government, he must
be by this time abroad, where, agreeably to the cruel bond he
had entered into with his brother-in-law, Diana, since she had
declined to select a husband out of the Osbaldistone family,
must be confined to a convent. The original cause of this
singular agreement Mr. Inglewood could not perfectly explain;
but he understood it was a family compact, entered into for the
purpose of securing to Sir Frederick the rents of the remnant of
his large estates, which had been vested in the Osbaldistone
family by some legal man<oe>uvre; in short, a family compact, in
which, like many of those undertaken at that time of day, the
feelings of the principal parties interested were no more regarded
than if they had been a part of the live-stock upon the
lands.

  I cannot tell,---such is the waywardness of the human heart,
---whether this intelligence gave me joy or sorrow. It seemed
to me, that, in the knowledge that Miss Vernon was eternally
divided from me, not by marriage with another, but by seclusion
in a convent, in order to fulfil an absurd bargain of this kind,
my regret for her loss was aggravated rather than diminished.
I became dull, low-spirited, absent, and unable to support the
task of conversing with Justice Inglewood, who in his turn
yawned, and proposed to retire early. I took leave of him
overnight, determining the next day, before breakfast, to ride
over to Osbaldistone Hall.

  Mr. Inglewood acquiesced in my proposal. ``It would be
well,'' he said, ``that I made my appearance there before I was
known to be in the country, the more especially as Sir Rashleigh
Osbaldistone was now, he understood, at Mr. Jobson's
house, hatching some mischief, doubtless. They were fit company,''
he added, ``for each other, Sir Rashleigh having lost all
right to mingle in the society of men of honour; but it was
hardly possible two such d---d rascals should collogue together
without mischief to honest people.''

  He concluded, by earnestly recommending a toast and tankard,
and an attack upon his venison pasty, before I set out in the
morning, just to break the cold air on the words.

