




		CHAPTER TWENTY-SEVENTH.



	Far as the eye could reach no tree was seen,
	Earth, clad in russet, scorned the lively green;
	No birds, except as birds of passage flew;
	No bee was heard to hum, no dove to coo;
	No streams, as amber smooth-as amber clear,
	Were seen to glide, or heard to warble here.
					Prophecy of Famine.



  It was in the bracing atmosphere of a harvest morning, that I
met by appointment Fairservice, with the horses, at the door of
Mr. Jarvie's house, which was but little space distant from Mrs.
Flyter's hotel. The first matter which caught my attention
was, that whatever were the deficiencies of the pony which Mr.
Fairservice's legal adviser, Clerk Touthope, generously bestowed
upon him in exchange for Thorncliff's mare, he had contrived to
part with it, and procure in its stead an animal with so curious
and complete a lameness, that it seemed only to make use of
three legs for the purpose of progression, while the fourth appeared
as if meant to be flourished in the air by way of accompaniment.
``What do you mean by bringing such a creature as
that here, sir? and where is the pony you rode to Glasgow
upon?'' were my very natural and impatient inquiries.

  ``I sell't it, sir. It was a slink beast, and wad hae eaten its
head aff, standing at Luckie Flyter's at livery. And I hae
bought this on your honour's account. It's a grand bargain---
cost but a pund sterling the foot---that's four a'thegither. The
stringhalt will gae aff when it's gaen a mile; it's a weel-ken'd
ganger; they call it Souple Tam.''

  ``On my soul, sir,'' said I, ``you will never rest till my supple-jack
and your shoulders become acquainted, If you do not go
instantly and procure the other brute, you shall pay the penalty
of your ingenuity.''

  Andrew, notwithstanding my threats, continued to battle the
point, as he said it would cost him a guinea of rue-bargain to
the man who had bought his pony, before he could get it back
again. Like a true Englishman, though sensible I was duped
by the rascal, I was about to pay his exaction rather than lose
time, when forth sallied Mr. Jarvie, cloaked, mantled, hooded,
and booted, as if for a Siberian winter, while two apprentices,
under the immediate direction of Mattie, led forth the decent
ambling steed which had the honour on such occasions to
support the person of the Glasgow magistrate. Ere he ``clombe
to the saddle,'' an expression more descriptive of the Bailie's
mode of mounting than that of the knights-errant to whom
Spenser applies it, he inquired the cause of the dispute betwixt
my servant and me. Having learned the nature of honest
Andrew's man<oe>uvre he instantly cut short all debate, by pronouncing,
that if Fairservice did not forthwith return the three-legged
palfrey, and produce the more useful quadruped which he
had discarded, he would send him to prison, and amerce him in
half his wages. ``Mr. Osbaldistone,'' said he, ``contracted for
the service of both your horse and you---twa brutes at ance---ye
unconscionable rascal!---but I'se look weel after you during this
journey.''

  ``It will be nonsense fining me,'' said Andrew, doughtily,
``that hasna a grey groat to pay a fine wi'---it's ill taking the
breeks aff a Hielandman.''

  ``If ye hae nae purse to fine, ye hae flesh to pine,'' replied the
Bailie, ``and I will look weel to ye getting your deserts the tae
way or the tither.''

  To the commands of Mr. Jarvie, therefore, Andrew was compelled
to submit, only muttering between his teeth, ``Ower
mony maisters,---ower mony maisters, as the paddock said to
the harrow, when every tooth gae her a tig.''

  Apparently he found no difficulty in getting rid of Supple
Tam, and recovering possession of his former Bucephalus, for
he accomplished the exchange without being many minutes
absent; nor did I hear further of his having paid any smart-money
for breach of bargain.

  We now set forward, but had not reached the top of the
street in which Mr. Jarvie dwelt, when a loud hallooing and
breathless call of ``Stop, stop!'' was heard behind us. We
stopped accordingly, and were overtaken by Mr. Jarvie's two
lads, who bore two parting tokens of Mattie's care for her master.
The first was conveyed in the form of a voluminous silk handkerchief,
like the mainsail of one of his own West-Indiamen,
which Mrs. Mattie particularly desired he would put about his
neck, and which, thus entreated, he added to his other integuments.
The second youngster brought only a verbal charge (I
thought I saw the rogue disposed to laugh as he delivered it)
on the part of the housekeeper, that her master would take care
of the waters. ``Pooh! pooh! silly hussy,'' answered Mr.
Jarvie; but added, turning to me, ``it shows a kind heart
though---it shows a kind heart in sae young a quean---Mattie's
a carefu' lass.'' So speaking, he pricked the sides of his palfrey,
and we left the town without farther interruption.

  While we paced easily forward, by a road which conducted
us north-eastward from the town, I had an opportunity to
estimate and admire the good qualities of my new friend.
Although, like my father, he considered commercial transactions
the most important objects of human life, he was not wedded
to them so as to undervalue more general knowledge. On the
contrary, with much oddity and vulgarity of manner,---with a
vanity which he made much more ridiculous by disguising it now
and then under a thin veil of humility, and devoid as he was of
all the advantages of a learned education, Mr. Jarvie's conversation
showed tokens of a shrewd, observing, liberal, and, to the
extent of its opportunities, a well-improved mind. He was a
good local antiquary, and entertained me, as we passed along, with
an account of remarkable events which had formerly taken place
in the scenes through which we passed. And as he was well
acquainted with the ancient history of his district, he saw with
the prospective eye of an enlightened patriot, the buds of many
of those future advantages which have only blossomed and ripened
within these few years. I remarked also, and with great pleasure,
that although a keen Scotchman, and abundantly zealous for the
honour of his country, he was disposed to think liberally of the
sister kingdom. When Andrew Fairservice (whom, by the way,
the Bailie could not abide) chose to impute the accident of one of
the horses casting his shoe to the deteriorating influence of the
Union, he incurred a severe rebuke from Mr. Jarvie.

  ``Whisht, sir!---whisht! it's ill-scraped tongues like yours, that
make mischief atween neighbourhoods and nations. There's naething
sae gude on this side o' time but it might hae been better,
and that may be said o' the Union. Nane were keener against
it than the Glasgow folk, wi' their rabblings and their risings,
and their mobs, as they ca' them now-a-days. But it's an ill wind
blaws naebody gude---Let ilka ane roose the ford as they find it
---I say let Glasgow flourish! whilk is judiciously and elegantly
putten round the town's arms, by way of by-word.---Now, since
St. Mungo catched herrings in the Clyde, what was ever like to
gar us flourish like the sugar and tobacco trade? Will onybody
tell me that, and grumble at the treaty that opened us a road
west-awa' yonder?''

  Andrew Fairservice was far from acquiescing in these arguments
of expedience, and even ventured to enter a grumbling
protest, ``That it was an unco change to hae Scotland's laws
made in England; and that, for his share, he wadna for a' the
herring-barrels in Glasgow, and a' the tobacco-casks to boot, hae
gien up the riding o' the Scots Parliament, or sent awa' our crown,
and our sword, and our sceptre, and Mons Meg,<*> to be keepit by

* Note G. Mons Meg.

thae English pock-puddings in the Tower o' Lunnon. What wad
Sir William Wallace, or auld Davie Lindsay, hae said to the
Union, or them that made it?''

  The road which we travelled, while diverting the way with
these discussions, had become wild and open, as soon as we had
left Glasgow a mile or two behind us, and was growing more
dreary as we advanced. Huge continuous heaths spread before,
behind, and around us, in hopeless barrenness---now level and
interspersed with swamps, green with treacherous verdure, or
sable with turf, or, as they call them in Scotland, peat-bogs,---
and now swelling into huge heavy ascents, which wanted the
dignity and form of hills, while they were still more toilsome to
the passenger. There were neither trees nor bushes to relieve
the eye from the russet livery of absolute sterility.  The very
heath was of that stinted imperfect kind which has little or no
flower, and affords the coarsest and meanest covering, which, as
far as my experience enables me to judge, mother Earth is ever
arrayed in. Living thing we saw none, except occasionally a
few straggling sheep of a strange diversity of colours, as black,
bluish, and orange. The sable hue predominated, however, in
their faces and legs. The very birds seemed to shun these
wastes, and no wonder, since they had an easy method of escaping
from them;---at least I only heard the monotonous and plaintive
cries of the lapwing and curlew, which my companions
denominated the peasweep and whaup.

  At dinner, however, which we took about noon, at a most
miserable alehouse, we had the good fortune to find that these
tiresome screamers of the morass were not the only inhabitants
of the moors. The goodwife told us, that ``the gudeman had
been at the hill;'' and well for us that he had been so, for we
enjoyed the produce of his _chasse_ in the shape of some broiled
moor-game,---a dish which gallantly eked out the ewe-milk
cheese, dried salmon, and oaten bread, being all besides that
the house afforded. Some very indifferent two-penny ale, and a
glass of excellent brandy, crowned our repast; and as our horses
had, in the meantime, discussed their corn, we resumed our
journey with renovated vigour.

  I had need of all the spirits a good dinner could give, to
resist the dejection which crept insensibly on my mind, when
I combined the strange uncertainty of my errand with the disconsolate
aspect of the country through which it was leading
me. Our road continued to be, if possible, more waste and
wild than that we had travelled in the forenoon. The few
miserable hovels that showed some marks of human habitation,
were now of still rarer occurrence; and at length, as we began
to ascend an uninterrupted swell of moorland, they totally disappeared.
The only exercise which my imagination received
was, when some particular turn of the road gave us a partial
view, to the left, of a large assemblage of dark-blue mountains
stretching to the north and north-west, which promised to
include within their recesses a country as wild perhaps, but
certainly differing greatly in point of interest, from that which
we now travelled. The peaks of this screen of mountains were
as wildly varied and distinguished, as the hills which we had
seen on the right were tame and lumpish; and while I gazed
on this Alpine region, I felt a longing to explore its recesses,
though accompanied with toil and danger, similar to that which
a sailor feels when he wishes for the risks and animation of a
battle or a gale, in exchange for the insupportable monotony
of a protracted calm. I made various inquiries of my friend
Mr. Jarvie respecting the names and positions of these remarkable
mountains; but it was a subject on which he had no
information, or did not choose to be communicative. ``They're
the Hieland hills---the Hieland hills---Ye'll see and hear eneugh
about them before ye see Glasgow Cross again---I downa look
at them---I never see them but they gar me grew. It's no for
fear---no for fear, but just for grief, for the puir blinded half-starved
creatures that inhabit them---but say nae mair about
it---it's ill speaking o' Hielandmen sae near the line. I hae
ken'd mony an honest man wadna hae ventured this length
without he had made his last will and testament---Mattie had
ill-will to see me set awa' on this ride, and grat awee, the sillie
tawpie; but it's nae mair ferlie to see a woman greet than to
see a goose gang barefit.''

  I next attempted to lead the discourse on the character and
history of the person whom we were going to visit; but on this
topic Mr. Jarvie was totally inaccessible, owing perhaps in part
to the attendance of Mr. Andrew Fairservice, who chose to keep
so close in our rear that his ears could not fail to catch every
word which was spoken, while his tongue assumed the freedom
of mingling in our conversation as often as he saw an opportunity.
For this he occasionally incurred Mr. Jarvie's reproof.

  ``Keep back, sir, as best sets ye,'' said the Bailie, as Andrew
pressed forward to catch the answer to some question I had
asked about Campbell.---``ye wad fain ride the fore-horse, an
ye wist how.---That chield's aye for being out o' the cheese-fat
he was moulded in.---Now, as for your questions, Mr. Osbaldistone,
now that chield's out of ear-shot, I'll just tell you it's
free to you to speer, and it's free to me to answer, or no---Gude
I canna say muckle o' Rob, puir chield; ill I winna say o' him,
for, forby that he's my cousin, we're coming near his ain country,
and there may be ane o' his gillies ahint every whin-bush, for
what I ken---And if ye'll be guided by my advice, the less ye
speak about him, or where we are gaun, or what we are gaun
to do, we'll be the mair likely to speed us in our errand. For
it's like we may fa' in wi' some o' his unfreends---there are e'en
ower mony o' them about---and his bonnet sits even on his brow
yet for a' that; but I doubt they'll be upsides wi' Rob at the last
---air day or late day, the fox's hide finds aye the flaying knife.''

  ``I will certainly,'' I replied, ``be entirely guided by your
experience.''

  ``Right, Mr. Osbaldistone---right. But I maun speak to this
gabbling skyte too, for bairns and fules speak at the Cross what
they hear at the ingle-side.---D'ye hear, you, Andrew---what's
your name?---Fairservice!''

  Andrew, who at the last rebuff had fallen a good way behind,
did not choose to acknowledge the summons.

  ``Andrew, ye scoundrel!'' repeated Mr. Jarvie; ``here, sir
here!''

  ``Here is for the dog.'' said Andrew, coming up sulkily.

  ``I'll gie you dog's wages, ye rascal, if ye dinna attend to
what I say t'ye---We are gaun into the Hielands a bit''------

  ``I judged as muckle,'' said Andrew.

  ``Haud your peace, ye knave, and hear what I have to say
till ye---We are gaun a bit into the Hielands''------

  ``Ye tauld me sae already,'' replied the incorrigible Andrew.

  ``I'll break your head,'' said the Bailie, rising in wrath, ``if
ye dinna haud your tongue.''

  ``A hadden tongue,'' replied Andrew, ``makes a slabbered
mouth.''

  It was now necessary I should interfere, which I did by commanding
Andrew, with an authoritative tone, to be silent at
his peril.

  ``I am silent,'' said Andrew. ``I'se do a' your lawfu' bidding
without a nay-say. My puir mother used aye to tell me,

	Be it better, be it worse,
	Be ruled by him that has the purse.

Sae ye may e'en speak as lang as ye like, baith the tane and
the tither o' you, for Andrew.''

  Mr. Jarvie took the advantage of his stopping after quoting
the above proverb, to give him the requisite instructions.
``Now, sir, it's as muckle as your life's worth---that wad be
dear o' little siller, to be sure---but it is as muckle as a' our
lives are worth, if ye dinna mind what I sae to ye. In this
public whar we are gaun to, and whar it is like we may hae to
stay a' night, men o' a' clans and kindred---Hieland and Lawland
---tak up their quarters---And whiles there are mair drawn
dirks than open Bibles amang them, when the usquebaugh gets
uppermost. See ye neither meddle nor mak, nor gie nae offence
wi' that clavering tongue o' yours, but keep a calm sough, and
let ilka cock fight his ain battle.''

  ``Muckle needs to tell me that,'' said Andrew, contemptuously,
``as if I had never seen a Hielandman before, and ken'd nae
how to manage them. Nae man alive can cuitle up Donald
better than mysell---I hae bought wi' them, sauld wi' them,
eaten wi' them, drucken wi' them''------

  ``Did ye ever fight wi' them?'' said Mr. Jarvie.

  ``Na, na,'' answered Andrew, ``I took care o' that: it wad
ill hae set me, that am an artist and half a scholar to my trade,
to be fighting amang a wheen kilted loons that dinna ken the
name o' a single herb or flower in braid Scots, let abee in the
Latin tongue.''

  ``Then,'' said Mr. Jarvie, ``as ye wad keep either your tongue
in your mouth, or your lugs in your head (and ye might miss
them, for as saucy members as they are), I charge ye to say nae
word, gude or bad, that ye can weel get by, to onybody that
may be in the Clachan. And ye'll specially understand that
ye're no to be bleezing and blasting about your master's name
and mine, or saying that this is Mr. Bailie Nicol Jarvie o' the
Saut Market, son o' the worthy Deacon Nicol Jarvie, that a'
body has heard about; and this is Mr. Frank Osbaldistone, son
of the managing partner of the great house of Osbaldistone and
Tresham, in the City.''

  ``Eneueh said,'' answered Andrew---``eneueh said. What
need ye think I wad be speaking about your names for?---I hae
mony things o' mair importance to speak about, I trow.''

  ``It's thae very things of importance that I am feared for, ye
blethering goose; ye maunna speak ony thing, gude or bad, that
ye can by any possibility help.''

  ``If ye dinna think me fit,'' replied Andrew, in a huff, ``to
speak like ither folk, gie me my wages and my board-wages, and
I'se gae back to Glasgow---There's sma' sorrow at our parting,
as the auld mear said to the broken cart.''

  Finding Andrew's perverseness again rising to a point which
threatened to occasion me inconvenience, I was under the
necessity of explaining to him, that he might return if he
thought proper, but that in that case I would not pay him a
single farthing for his past services. The argument _ad crumenam,_
as it has been called by jocular logicians, has weight with
the greater part of mankind, and Andrew was in that particular
far from affecting any trick of singularity. He ``drew in his
horns,'' to use the Bailie's phrase, on the instant, professed no
intention whatever to disoblige, and a resolution to be guided
by my commands, whatever they might be.

  Concord being thus happily restored to our small party, we
continued to pursue our journey. The road, which had ascended
for six or seven English miles, began now to descend for about
the same space, through a country which neither in fertility
nor interest could boast any advantage over that which we had
passed already, and which afforded no variety, unless when
some tremendous peak of a Highland mountain appeared at a
distance. We continued, however, to ride on without pause
and even when night fell and overshadowed the desolate wilds
which we traversed, we were, as I understood from Mr. Jarvie,
still three miles and a bittock distant from the place where we
were to spend the night.
