




		CHAPTER THIRTY-EIGHTH.



	His master's gone, and no one now
	  Dwells in the halls of Ivor;
	Men, dogs, and horses, all are dead,
	  He is the sole survivor.
				Wordsworth.



  There are few more melancholy sensations than those with
which we regard scenes of past pleasure when altered and deserted.
In my ride to Osbaldistone Hall, I passed the same
objects which I had seen in company with Miss Vernon on the
day of our memorable ride from Inglewood Place. Her spirit
seemed to keep me company on the way; and when I approached
the spot where I had first seen her, I almost listened for the cry
of the hounds and the notes of the horn, and strained my eye
on the vacant space, as if to descry the fair huntress again
descend like an apparition from the hill. But all was silent,
and all was solitary. When I reached the Hall, the closed
doors and windows, the grass-grown pavement, the courts,
which were now so silent, presented a strong contrast to the gay
and bustling scene I had so often seen them exhibit, when the
merry hunters were going forth to their morning sport, or
returning to the daily festival. The joyous bark of the fox-hounds
as they were uncoupled, the cries of the huntsmen, the
clang of the horses' hoofs, the loud laugh of the old knight at
the head of his strong and numerous descendants, were all
silenced now and for ever.

  While I gazed round the scene of solitude and emptiness, I
was inexpressibly affected, even by recollecting those whom,
when alive, I had no reason to regard with affection. But the
thought that so many youths of goodly presence, warm with
life, health, and confidence, were within so short a time cold in
the grave, by various, yet all violent and unexpected modes of
death, afforded a picture of mortality at which the mind
trembled. It was little consolation to me, that I returned a
proprietor to the halls which I had left almost like a fugitive.
My mind was not habituated to regard the scenes around as
my property, and I felt myself an usurper, at least an intruding
stranger, and could hardly divest myself of the idea, that some
of the bulky forms of my deceased kinsmen were, like the
gigantic spectres of a romance, to appear in the gateway, and
dispute my entrance.

  While I was engaged in these sad thoughts, my follower
Andrew, whose feelings were of a very different nature, exerted
himself in thundering alternately on every door in the building,
calling, at the same time, for admittance, in a tone so loud as
to intimate, that _he,_ at least, was fully sensible of his newly
acquired importance, as squire of the body to the new lord of
the manor. At length, timidly and reluctantly, Anthony
Syddall, my uncle's aged butler and major-domo, presented
himself at a lower window, well fenced with iron bars, and
inquired our business.

  ``We are come to tak your charge aff your hand, my auld
friend,'' said Andrew Fairservice; ``ye may gie up your keys
as sune as ye like---ilka dog has his day. I'll tak the plate and
napery aff your hand. Ye hae had your ain time o't, Mr.
Syddall; but ilka bean has its black, and ilka path has its
puddle; and it will just set you henceforth to sit at the board-end,
as weel as it did Andrew lang syne.''

  Checking with some difficulty the forwardness of my follower,
I explained to Syddall the nature of my right, and the title I
had to demand admittance into the Hall, as into my own property.
The old man seemed much agitated and distressed, and
testified manifest reluctance to give me entrance, although it
was couched in a humble and submissive tone. I allowed for
the agitation of natural feelings, which really did the old man
honour; but continued peremptory in my demand of admittance,
explaining to him that his refusal would oblige me to
apply for Mr. Inglewood's warrant, and a constable.

  ``We are come from Mr. Justice Inglewood's this morning,''
said Andrew, to enforce the menace;---``and I saw Archie
Rutledge, the constable, as I came up by;---the country's no to
be lawless as it has been, Mr. Syddall, letting rebels and papists
gang on as they best listed.''

  The threat of the law sounded dreadful in the old man's
ears, conscious as he was of the suspicion under which he himself
lay, from his religion and his devotion to Sir Hildebrand
and his sons. He undid, with fear and trembling, one of the
postern entrances, which was secured with many a bolt and
bar, and humbly hoped that I would excuse him for fidelity in
the discharge of his duty.---I reassured him, and told him I had
the better opinion of him for his caution.

  ``Sae have not I,'' said Andrew; ``Syddall is an auld sneck-drawer;
he wadna be looking as white as a sheet, and his knees
knocking thegither, unless it were for something mair than he's
like to tell us.''

  ``Lord forgive you, Mr. Fairservice,'' replied the butler, ``to
say such things of an old friend and fellow-servant!---Where''---
following me humbly along the passage---``where would it be
your honour's pleasure to have a fire lighted? I fear me you
will find the house very dull and dreary---But perhaps you
mean to ride back to Inglewood Place to dinner?''

  ``Light a fire in the library,'' I replied.

  ``In the library!'' answered the old man;---``nobody has sat
there this many a day, and the room smokes, for the daws have
built in the chimney this spring, and there were no young men
about the Hall to pull them down.''

  ``Our ain reekes better than other folk's fire,'' said Andrew.
``His honour likes the library;---he's nane o' your Papishers,
that delight in blinded ignorance, Mr. Syddall.''

  Very reluctantly as it appeared to me, the butler led the way
to the library, and, contrary to what he had given me to expect,
the interior of the apartment looked as if it had been lately
arranged, and made more comfortable than usual. There was
a fire in the grate, which burned clearly, notwithstanding what
Syddall had reported of the vent. Taking up the tongs, as if
to arrange the wood, but rather perhaps to conceal his own
confusion, the butler observed, ``it was burning clear now, but
had smoked woundily in the morning.''

  Wishing to be alone, till I recovered myself from the first
painful sensations which everything around me recalled, I
desired old Syddall to call the land-steward, who lived at about
a quarter of a mile from the Hall. He departed with obvious
reluctance. I next ordered Andrew to procure the attendance
of a couple of stout fellows upon whom he could rely, the
population around being Papists, and Sir Rashleigh, who was
capable of any desperate enterprise, being in the neighbourhood.
Andrew Fairservice undertook this task with great cheerfulness,
and promised to bring me up from Trinlay-Knowe, ``twa true-blue
Presbyterians like himself, that would face and out-face
baith the Pope, the Devil, and the Pretender---and blythe will
I be o' their company mysell, for the very last night that I was
at Osbaldistone Hall, the blight be on ilka blossom in my bit
yard, if I didna see that very picture'' (pointing to the full-length
portrait of Miss Vernon's grandfather) ``walking by moonlight
in the garden! I tauld your honour I was fleyed wi' a bogle
that night, but ye wadna listen to me---I aye thought there was
witchcraft and deevilry amang the Papishers, but I ne'er saw't
wi' bodily een till that awfu' night.''

  ``Get along, sir,'' said I, ``and bring the fellows you talk of;
and see they have more sense than yourself, and are not
frightened at their own shadow.''

  ``I hae been counted as gude a man as my neighbours ere
now,'' said Andrew, petulantly; ``but I dinna pretend to deal
wi' evil spirits.'' And so he made his exit, as Wardlaw the
land-steward made his appearance.

  He was a man of sense and honesty, without whose careful
management my uncle would have found it difficult to have
maintained himself a housekeeper so long as he did. He examined
the nature of my right of possession carefully, and
admitted it candidly. To any one else the succession would
have been a poor one, so much was the land encumbered with
debt and mortgage. Most of these, however, were already vested
in my father's person, and he was in a train of acquiring the
rest; his large gains by the recent rise of the funds having
made it a matter of ease and convenience for him to pay off the
debt which affected his patrimony.

  I transacted much necessary business with Mr. Wardlaw,
and detained him to dine with me. We preferred taking our
repast in the library, although Syddall strongly recommended
our removing to the stone-hall, which he had put in order
for the occasion. Meantime Andrew made his appearance
with his true-blue recruits, whom he recommended in the
highest terms, as ``sober decent men, weel founded in doctrinal
points, and, above all, as bold as lions.'' I ordered them something
to drink, and they left the room. I observed old Syddall
shake his head as they went out, and insisted upon knowing the
reason.

  ``I maybe cannot expect,'' he said, ``that your honour should
put confidence in what I say, but it is Heaven's truth for all
that---Ambrose Wingfield is as honest a man as lives, but if
there is a false knave in the country, it is his brother Lancie;
---the whole country knows him to be a spy for Clerk Jobson
on the poor gentlemen that have been in trouble---But he's a
dissenter, and I suppose that's enough now-a-days.''

  Having thus far given vent to his feelings,---to which, however,
I was little disposed to pay attention,---and having placed
the wine on the table, the old butler left the apartment.

  Mr. Wardlaw having remained with me until the evening was
somewhat advanced, at length bundled up his papers, and removed
himself to his own habitation, leaving me in that confused
state of mind in which we can hardly say whether we
desire company or solitude. I had not, however, the choice
betwixt them; for I was left alone in the room of all others
most calculated to inspire me with melancholy reflections.

  As twilight was darkening the apartment, Andrew had the
sagacity to advance his head at the door,---not to ask if I wished
for lights, but to recommend them as a measure of precaution
against the bogles which still haunted his imagination. I rejected
his proffer somewhat peevishly, trimmed the wood-fire,
and placing myself in one of the large leathern chairs which
flanked the old Gothic chimney, I watched unconsciously the
bickering of the blaze which I had fostered. ``And this,'' said
I alone, ``is the progress and the issue of human wishes! Nursed
by the merest trifles, they are first kindled by fancy---nay, are
fed upon the vapour of hope, till they consume the substance
which they inflame; and man, and his hopes, passions, and desires,
sink into a worthless heap of embers and ashes!''

  There was a deep sigh from the opposite side of the room,
which seemed to reply to my reflections. I started up in amazement
---Diana Vernon stood before me, resting on the arm of a
figure so strongly resembling that of the portrait so often mentioned,
that I looked hastily at the frame, expecting to see it
empty. My first idea was, either that I had gone suddenly
distracted, or that the spirits of the dead had arisen and been
placed before me. A second glance convinced me of my being
in my senses, and that the forms which stood before me were
real and substantial. It was Diana herself, though paler and
thinner than her former self; and it was no tenant of the grave
who stood beside her, but Vaughan, or rather Sir Frederick
Vernon, in a dress made to imitate that of his ancestor, to whose
picture his countenance possessed a family resemblance. He
was the first that spoke, for Diana kept her eyes fast fixed on
the ground, and astonishment actually riveted my tongue to
the roof of my mouth.

  ``We are your suppliants, Mr. Osbaldistone,'' he said, ``and
we claim the refuge and protection of your roof till we can
pursue a journey where dungeons and death gape for me at every
step.''

  ``Surely,'' I articulated with great difficulty---``Miss Vernon
cannot suppose---you, sir, cannot believe, that I have forgot
your interference in my difficulties, or that I am capable of
betraying any one, much less you?''

  ``I know it,'' said Sir Frederick; ``yet it is with the most
inexpressible reluctance that I impose on you a confidence, disagreeable
perhaps---certainly dangerous---and which I would
have specially wished to have conferred on some one else. But
my fate, which has chased me through a life of perils and escapes,
is now pressing me hard, and I have no alternative.''

  At this moment the door opened, and the voice of the officious
Andrew was heard---``A'm bringin' in the caunles---Ye can
light them gin ye like---Can do is easy carried about wi' ane.''

  I ran to the door, which, as I hoped, I reached in time to
prevent his observing who were in the apartment, I turned
him out with hasty violence, shut the door after him, and locked
it---then instantly remembering his two companions below,
knowing his talkative humour, and recollecting Syddall's remark,
that one of them was supposed to be a spy, I followed him as
fast as I could to the servants' hall, in which they were assembled.
Andrew's tongue was loud as I opened the door, but
my unexpected appearance silenced him.

  ``What is the matter with you, you fool?'' said I; ``you stare
and look wild, as if you had seen a ghost.''

  ``N---n---no---nothing,'' said Andrew.---``but your worship
was pleased to be hasty.''

  ``Because you disturbed me out of a sound sleep, you fool.
Syddall tells me he cannot find beds for these good fellows tonight,
and Mr. Wardlaw thinks there will be no occasion to
detain them. Here is a crown-piece for them to drink my
health, and thanks for their good-will. You will leave the Hall
immediately, my good lads.''

  The men thanked me for my bounty, took the silver, and
withdrew, apparently unsuspicious and contented. I watched
their departure until I was sure they could have no further intercourse
that night with honest Andrew. And so instantly
had I followed on his heels, that I thought he could not have
had time to speak two words with them before I interrupted
him. But it is wonderful what mischief may be done by only
two words. On this occasion they cost two lives.

  Having made these arrangements, the best which occurred to
me upon the pressure of the moment, to secure privacy for my
guests, I returned to report my proceedings, and added, that I
had desired Syddall to answer every summons, concluding that it
was by his connivance they had been secreted in the Hall.
Diana raised her eyes to thank me for the caution.

  ``You now understand my mystery,'' she said;---``you know,
doubtless, how near and dear that relative is, who has so often
found shelter here; and will be no longer surprised that Rashleigh,
having such a secret at his command, should rule me with
a rod of iron.''

  Her father added, ``that it was their intention to trouble me
with their presence as short a time as was possible.''

  I entreated the fugitives to waive every consideration but
what affected their safety, and to rely on my utmost exertions
to promote it. This led to an explanation of the circumstances
under which they stood.

  ``I always suspected Rashleigh Osbaldistone,'' said Sir Frederick;
``but his conduct towards my unprotected child, which
with difficulty I wrung from her, and his treachery in your
father's affairs, made me hate and despise him. In our last interview
I concealed not my sentiments, as I should in prudence
have attempted to do; and in resentment of the scorn with
which I treated him, he added treachery and apostasy to his
catalogue of crimes. I at that time fondly hoped that his defection
would be of little consequence. The Earl of Mar had a
gallant army in Scotland, and Lord Derwentwater, with Forster,
Kenmure, Winterton, and others, were assembling forces on the
Border. As my connections with these English nobility and
gentry were extensive, it was judged proper that I should accompany
a detachment of Highlanders, who, under Brigadier MacIntosh
of Borlum, crossed the Firth of Forth, traversed the low
country of Scotland, and united themselves on the Borders with
the English insurgents. My daughter accompanied me through
the perils and fatigues of a march so long and difficult.''

  ``And she will never leave her dear father!'' exclaimed Miss
Vernon, clinging fondly to his arm.

  ``I had hardly joined our English friends, when I became
sensible that our cause was lost. Our numbers diminished instead
of increasing, nor were we joined by any except of our own persuasion.
The Tories of the High Church remained in general
undecided, and at length we were cooped up by a superior force
in the little town of Preston. We defended ourselves resolutely
for one day. On the next, the hearts of our leaders failed, and
they resolved to surrender at discretion. To yield myself up on
such terms, were to have laid my head on the block. About
twenty or thirty gentlemen were of my mind: we mounted our
horses, and placed my daughter, who insisted on sharing my fate,
in the centre of our little party. My companions, struck with
her courage and filial piety, declared that they would die rather
than leave her behind. We rode in a body down a street called
Fishergate, which leads to a marshy ground or meadow, extending
to the river Ribble, through which one of our party promised
to show us a good ford. This marsh had not been strongly invested
by the enemy, so that we had only an affair with a patrol
of Honeywood's dragoons, whom we dispersed and cut to pieces.
We crossed the river, gained the high road to Liverpool, and then
dispersed to seek several places of concealment and safety. My
fortune led me to Wales, where there are many gentlemen of my
religious and political opinions. I could not, however, find a safe
opportunity of escaping by sea, and found myself obliged again
to draw towards the North. A well-tried friend has appointed to
meet me in this neighbourhood, and guide me to a seaport on the
Solway, where a sloop is prepared to carry me from my native
country for ever. As Osbaldistone Hall was for the present uninhabited,
and under the charge of old Syddall, who had been
our confidant on former occasions, we drew to it as to a place of
known and secure refuge. I resumed a dress which had been
used with good effect to scare the superstitious rustics, or
domestics, who chanced at any time to see me; and we expected
from time to time to hear by Syddall of the arrival of our friendly
guide, when your sudden coming hither, and occupying this apartment,
laid us under the necessity of submitting to your mercy.''

  Thus ended Sir Fredericks story, whose tale sounded to me
like one told in a vision; and I could hardly bring myself to
believe that I saw his daughter's form once more before me in
flesh and blood, though with diminished beauty and sunk spirits.
The buoyant vivacity with which she had resisted every touch
of adversity, had now assumed the air of composed and submissive,
but dauntless resolution and constancy. Her father, though
aware and jealous of the effect of her praises on my mind, could
not forbear expatiating upon them.

  ``She has endured trials,'' he said, ``which might have dignified
the history of a martyr;---she has faced danger and death
in various shapes;---she has undergone toil and privation, from
which men of the strongest frame would have shrunk;---she has
spent the day in darkness, and the night in vigil, and has never
breathed a murmur of weakness or complaint. In a word, Mr.
Osbaldistone,'' he concluded, ``she is a worthy offering to that
God, to whom'' (crossing himself) ``I shall dedicate her, as all
that is left dear or precious to Frederick Vernon.''

  There was a silence after these words, of which I well understood
the mournful import. The father of Diana was still as
anxious to destroy my hopes of being united to her now as he
had shown himself during our brief meeting in Scotland.

  ``We will now,'' said he to his daughter, ``intrude no farther
on Mr. Osbaldistone's time, since we have acquainted him with the
circumstances of the miserable guests who claim his protection.''

  I requested them to stay, and offered myself to leave the
apartment. Sir Frederick observed, that my doing so could
not but excite my attendant's suspicion; and that the place of
their retreat was in every respect commodious, and furnished by
Syddall with all they could possibly want. ``We might perhaps
have even contrived to remain there, concealed from your observation;
but it would have been unjust to decline the most
absolute reliance on your honour.''

  ``You have done me but justice,'' I replied.---``To you, Sir
Frederick, I am but little known; but Miss Vernon, I am sure,
will bear me witness that''------

  ``I do not want my daughter's evidence,'' he said, politely,
but yet with an air calculated to prevent my addressing myself
to Diana, ``since I am prepared to believe all that is worthy of
Mr. Francis Osbaldistone. Permit us now to retire; we must
take repose when we can, since we are absolutely uncertain when
we may be called upon to renew our perilous journey.''

  He drew his daughter's arm within his, and with a profound
reverence, disappeared with her behind the tapestry.
