




		CHAPTER TWENTY-FOURTH.


	
	``Will it please your worship to accept of my poor service? I beseech
	that I may feed upon your bread, though it be the brownest, and
	drink of your drink, though it be of the smallest; for I will do your
	Worship as much service for forty shillings as another man shall for
	three pounds.''
							Greene's _Tu Quoque.




  I remembered the honest Bailie's parting charge, but did not
conceive there was any incivility in adding a kiss to the half-crown
with which I remunerated Mattie's attendance;---nor did
her ``Fie for shame, sir!'' express any very deadly resentment of
the affront. Repeated knocking at Mrs. Flyter's gate awakened
in due order, first, one or two stray dogs, who began to bark
with all their might; next two or three night-capped heads,
which were thrust out of the neighbouring windows to reprehend
me for disturbing the solemnity of the Sunday night by that
untimely noise. While I trembled lest the thunders of their
wrath might dissolve in showers like that of Xantippe, Mrs.
Flyter herself awoke, and began, in a tone of objurgation not
unbecoming the philosophical spouse of Socrates, to scold one
or two loiterers in her kitchen, for not hastening to the door to
prevent a repetition of my noisy summons.

  These worthies were, indeed, nearly concerned in the fracas
which their laziness occasioned, being no other than the faithful
Mr. Fairservice, with his friend Mr. Hammorgaw, and another
person, whom I afterwards found to be the town-crier, who
were sitting over a cog of ale, as they called it (at my expense,
as my bill afterwards informed me), in order to devise the
terms and style of a proclamation to be made through the
streets the next day, in order that ``the unfortunate young
gentleman,'' as they had the impudence to qualify me, might
be restored to his friends without farther delay. It may be
supposed that I did not suppress my displeasure at this impertinent
interference with my affairs; but Andrew set up
such ejaculations of transport at my arrival, as fairly drowned
my expressions of resentment. His raptures, perchance, were
partly political; and the tears of joy which he shed had
certainly their source in that noble fountain of emotion, the
tankard. However, the tumultuous glee which he felt, or
pretended to feel, at my return, saved Andrew the broken head
which I had twice destined him;---first, on account of the
colloquy he had held with the precentor on my affairs; and
secondly, for the impertinent history he had thought proper to
give of me to Mr. Jarvie. I however contented myself with
slapping the door of my bedroom in his face as he followed
me, praising Heaven for my safe return, and mixing his joy
with admonitions to me to take care how I walked my own
ways in future. I then went to bed, resolving my first business
in the morning should be to discharge this troublesome, pedantic,
self-conceited coxcomb, who seemed so much disposed to constitute
himself rather a preceptor than a domestic.

  Accordingly in the morning I resumed my purpose, and
calling Andrew into my, apartment, requested to know his
charge for guiding and attending me as far as Glasgow. Mr.
Fairservice looked very blank at this demand, justly considering
it as a presage to approaching dismission.

  ``Your honour,'' he said, after some hesitation, ``wunna think
---wunna think''------

  ``Speak out, you rascal, or I'll break your head,'' said I, as
Andrew, between the double risk of losing all by asking too
much, or a part, by stating his demand lower than what I might
be willing to pay, stood gasping in the agony of doubt and
calculation.

  Out it came with a bolt, however, at my threat; as the kind
violence of a blow on the back sometimes delivers the windpipe
from an intrusive morsel.---``Aughteen pennies sterling per
diem---that is, by the day---your honour wadna think unconscionable.''

  ``It is double what is usual, and treble what you merit,
Andrew; but there's a guinea for you, and get about your
business.''

  ``The Lord forgi'e us! Is your honour mad?'' exclaimed
Andrew.

  ``No; but I think you mean to make me so---I give you a
third above your demand, and you stand staring and expostulating
there as if I were cheating you. Take your money, and
go about your business.''

  ``Gude safe us!'' continued Andrew, ``in what can I hae
offended your honour? Certainly a' flesh is but as the flowers
of the field; but if a bed of camomile hath value in medicine,
of a surety the use of Andrew Fairservice to your honour is
nothing less evident---it's as muckle as your life's worth to part
wi' me.''

  ``Upon my honour,'' replied I, ``it is difficult to say whether
you are more knave or fool. So you intend then to remain
with me whether I like it or no?''

  ``Troth, I was e'en thinking sae,'' replied Andrew, dogmatically;
``for if your honour disna ken when ye hae a gude
servant, I ken when I hae a gude master, and the deil be in my
feet gin I leave ye---and there's the brief and the lang o't
besides I hae received nae regular warning to quit my place.''

  ``Your place, sir!'' said I;---``why, you are no hired servant
of mine,---you are merely a guide, whose knowledge of the
country I availed myself of on my road.''

  ``I am no just a common servant, I admit, sir,'' remonstrated
Mr. Fairservice; ``but your honour kens I quitted a gude place
at an hour's notice, to comply wi' your honour's solicitations.
A man might make honestly, and wi' a clear conscience, twenty
sterling pounds per annum, weel counted siller, o' the garden
at Osbaldistone Hall, and I wasna likely to gi'e up a' that for a
guinea, I trow---I reckoned on staying wi' your honour to the
term's end at the least o't; and I account my wage, board-wage,
fee and bountith,---ay, to that length o't at the least.''

  ``Come, come, sir,'' replied I, ``these impudent pretensions
won't serve your turn; and if I hear any more of them, I shall
convince you that Squire Thorncliff is not the only one of my
name that can use his fingers.''

  While I spoke thus, the whole matter struck me as so ridiculous,
that, though really angry, I had some difficulty to forbear
laughing at the gravity with which Andrew supported a
plea so utterly extravagant. The rascal, aware of the impression
he had made on my muscles, was encouraged to perseverance.
He judged it safer, however, to take his pretensions a peg lower,
in case of overstraining at the same time both his plea and my
patience.

  ``Admitting that my honour could part with a faithful servant,
that had served me and mine by day and night for twenty years,
in a strange place, and at a moment's warning, he was weel
assured,'' he said, ``it wasna in my heart, nor in no true gentleman's,
to pit a puir lad like himself, that had come forty or fifty,
or say a hundred miles out o' his road purely to bear my honour
company, and that had nae handing but his penny-fee, to sic a
hardship as this comes to.''

  I think it was you, Will, who once told me, that, to be an
obstinate man, I am in certain things the most gullable and
malleable of mortals. The fact is, that it is only contradiction
which makes me peremptory, and when I do not feel myself
called on to give battle to any proposition, I am always willing
to grant it, rather than give myself much trouble. I knew this
fellow to be a greedy, tiresome, meddling coxcomb; still, however,
I must have some one about me in the quality of guide
and domestic, and I was so much used to Andrew's humour,
that on some occasions it was rather amusing. In the state of
indecision to which these reflections led me, I asked Fairservice
if he knew the roads, towns, etc., in the north of Scotland, to
which my father's concerns with the proprietors of Highland
forests were likely to lead me. I believe if I had asked him the
road to the terrestrial paradise, he would have at that moment
undertaken to guide me to it; so that I had reason afterwards
to think myself fortunate in finding that his actual knowledge
did not fall very much short of that which he asserted himself
to possess. I fixed the amount of his wages, and reserved to
myself the privilege of dismissing him when I chose, on paying
him a week in advance. I gave him finally a severe lecture on
his conduct of the preceding day, and then dismissed him rejoicing
at heart, though somewhat crestfallen in countenance, to
rehearse to his friend the precentor, who was taking his morning
draught in the kitchen, the mode in which he had ``cuitled up
the daft young English squire.''

  Agreeable to appointment, I went next to Bailie Nicol Jarvie's,
where a comfortable morning's repast was arranged in the parlour,
which served as an apartment of all hours, and almost all
work, to that honest gentleman. The bustling and benevolent
magistrate had been as good as his word. I found my friend
Owen at liberty, and, conscious of the refreshments and purification
of brush and basin, was of course a very different person
from Owen a prisoner, squalid, heart-broken, and hopeless. Yet
the sense of pecuniary difficulties arising behind, before, and
around him, had depressed his spirit, and the almost paternal
embrace which the good man gave me, was embittered by a sigh
of the deepest anxiety. And when he sate down, the heaviness
in his eye and manner, so different from the quiet composed
satisfaction which they usually exhibited, indicated that he was
employing his arithmetic in mentally numbering up the days,
the hours, the minutes, which yet remained as an interval between
the dishonour of bills and the downfall of the great commercial
establishment of Osbaldistone and Tresham. It was
left to me, therefore, to do honour to our landlord's hospitable
cheer---to his tea, right from China, which he got in a present
from some eminent ship's-husband at Wapping---to his coffee,
from a snug plantation of his own, as he informed us with a
wink, called Saltmarket Grove, in the island of Jamaica---to
his English toast and ale, his Scotch dried salmon, his Lochfine
herrings, and even to the double-damask table-cloth, ``wrought
by no hand, as you may guess,'' save that of his deceased father
the worthy Deacon Jarvie.

  Having conciliated our good-humoured host by those little
attentions which are great to most men, I endeavoured in my
turn to gain from him some information which might be useful
for my guidance, as well as for the satisfaction of my curiosity.
We had not hitherto made the least allusion to the transactions
of the preceding night, a circumstance which made my question
sound somewhat abrupt, when, without any previous introduction
of the subject, I took advantage of a pause when the history
of the table-cloth ended, and that of the napkins was about to
commence, to inquire, ``Pray, by the by, Mr. Jarvie, who may
this Mr. Robert Campbell be, whom we met with last night?''

  The interrogatory seemed to strike the honest magistrate,
to use the vulgar phrase, ``all of a heap,'' and instead of answering,
he returned the question---``Whae's Mr. Robert Campbell?
---ahem! ahay! Whae's Mr. Robert Campbell, quo' he?''

  ``Yes,'' said I, ``I mean who and what is he?''

  ``Why, he's---ahay!---he's---ahem!---Where did ye meet with
Mr. Robert Campbell, as ye ca' him?''

  ``I met him by chance,'' I replied, ``some months ago in the
north of England.''

  ``Ou then, Mr. Osbaldistone,'' said the Bailie, doggedly, ``ye'll
ken as muckle about him as I do.''

  ``I should suppose not, Mr. Jarvie,'' I replied;---``you are his
relation, it seems, and his friend.''

  ``There is some cousin-red between us, doubtless,'' said the
Bailie reluctantly; ``but we hae seen little o' ilk other since
Rob gae tip the cattle-line o' dealing, poor fallow! he was
hardly guided by them might hae used him better---and they
haena made their plack a bawbee o't neither. There's mony
ane this day wad rather they had never chased puir Robin frae
the Cross o' Glasgow---there's mony ane wad rather see him
again at the tale o' three hundred kyloes, than at the head o'
thirty waur cattle.''

  ``All this explains nothing to me, Mr. Jarvie, of Mr. Campbell's
rank, habits of life, and means of subsistence,'' I replied.

  ``Rank?'' said Mr. Jarvie; ``he's a Hieland gentleman, nae
doubt---better rank need nane to be;---and for habit, I judge
he wears the Hieland habit amang the hills, though he has
breeks on when he comes to Glasgow;---and as for his subsistence,
what needs we care about his subsistence, sae lang as he
asks naething frae us, ye ken? But I hae nae time for clavering
about him e'en now, because we maun look into your father's
concerns wi' all speed.''

  So saying, he put on his spectacles, and sate down to examine
Mr. Owen's states, which the other thought it most prudent to
communicate to him without reserve. I knew enough of business
to be aware that nothing could be more acute and sagacious
than the views which Mr. Jarvie entertained of the matters
submitted to his examination; and, to do him justice, it was
marked by much fairness, and even liberality. He scratched
his ear indeed repeatedly on observing the balance which stood
at the debit of Osbaldistone and Tresham in account with himself
personally.

  ``It may be a dead loss,'' he observed; ``and, conscience!
whate'er ane o' your Lombard Street goldsmiths may say to it,
it's a snell ane in the Saut-Market<*> o' Glasgow. It will be a

* [The Saltmarket. This ancient street, situate in the heart of Glasgow,
* has of late been almost entirely renovated.]

heavy deficit---a staff out o' my bicker, I trow. But what
then?---I trust the house wunna coup the crane for a' that's
come and gane yet; and if it does, I'll never bear sae base a
mind as thae corbies in the Gallowgate---an I am to lose by ye,
I'se ne'er deny I hae won by ye mony a fair pund sterling---Sae,
an it come to the warst, I'se een lay the head o' the sow to the
tail o' the grice.''<*>

* _Anglice,_ the head of the sow to the tail of the pig.


  I did not altogether understand the proverbial arrangement
with which Mr. Jarvie consoled himself, but I could easily see
that he took a kind and friendly interest in the arrangement
of my father's affairs, suggested several expedients, approved
several plans proposed by Owen, and by his countenance and
counsel greatly abated the gloom upon the brow of that afflicted
delegate of my father's establishment.

  As I was an idle spectator on this occasion, and, perhaps, as
I showed some inclination more than once to return to the prohibited,
and apparently the puzzling subject of Mr. Campbell,
Mr. Jarvie dismissed me with little formality, with an advice to
``gang up the gate to the college, where I wad find some chields
could speak Greek and Latin weel---at least they got plenty o'
siller for doing deil haet else, if they didna do that; and where
I might read a spell o' the worthy Mr. Zachary Boyd's translation
o' the Scriptures---better poetry need nane to be, as he had
been tell'd by them that ken'd or suld hae ken'd about sic
things.'' But he seasoned this dismission with a kind and
hospitable invitation ``to come back and take part o' his family-chack
at ane preceesely---there wad be a leg o' mutton, and, it
might be, a tup's head, for they were in season;'' but above all,
I was to return at ``ane o'clock preceesely---it was the hour he
and the deacon his father aye dined at---they pat it off for
naething nor for naebody.''
