




		CHAPTER THIRTIETH.



		------ General,
	Hear me, and mark me well, and look upon me
	Directly in my face---my woman's face---
	See if one fear, one shadow of a terror,
	One paleness dare appear, but from my anger,
	To lay hold on your mercies.
					Bonduca.



  We were permitted to slumber out the remainder of the night
in the best manner that the miserable accommodations of the
alehouse permitted. The Bailie, fatigued with his journey and
the subsequent scenes---less interested also in the event of our
arrest, which to him could only be a matter of temporary inconvenience---
perhaps less nice than habit had rendered me about
the cleanliness or decency of his couch,---tumbled himself into
one of the cribs which I have already described, and soon was
heard to snore soundly. A broken sleep, snatched by intervals,
while I rested my head upon the table, was my only refreshment.
In the course of the night I had occasion to observe that there
seemed to be some doubt and hesitation in the motions of the
soldiery. Men were sent out, as if to obtain intelligence,
and returned apparently without bringing any satisfactory
information to their commanding officer. He was obviously
eager and anxious, and again despatched small parties of two
or three men, some of whom, as I could understand from what
the others whispered to each other, did not return again to the
Clachan.

  The morning had broken, when a corporal and two men
rushed into the hut, dragging after them, in a sort of triumph,
a Highlander, whom I immediately recognised as my acquaintance
the ex-turnkey. The Bailie, who started up at the noise
with which they entered, immediately made the same discovery,
and exclaimed---``Mercy on us! they hae grippit the puir
creature Dougal.---Captain, I will put in bail---sufficient bail,
for that Dougal creature.''

  To this offer, dictated undoubtedly by a grateful recollection
of the late interference of the Highlander in his behalf, the
Captain only answered by requesting Mr. Jarvie to ``mind his
own affairs, and remember that he was himself for the present
a prisoner.''

  ``I take you to witness, Mr. Osbaldistone,'' said the Bailie,
who was probably better acquainted with the process in civil
than in military cases, ``that he has refused sufficient bail.
It's my opinion that the creature Dougal will have a good
action of wrongous imprisonment and damages agane him, under
the Act seventeen hundred and one, and I'll see the creature
righted.''

  The officer, whose name I understood was Thornton, paying
no attention to the Bailie's threats or expostulations, instituted
a very close inquiry into Dougal's life and conversation, and
compelled him to admit, though with apparent reluctance, the
successive facts,---that he knew Rob Roy MacGregor---that he
had seen him within these twelve months---within these six
months---within this month---within this week; in fine, that he
had parted from him only an hour ago. All this detail came like
drops of blood from the prisoner, and was, to all appearance,
only extorted by the threat of a halter and the next tree, which
Captain Thornton assured him should be his doom, if he did not
give direct and special information.

  ``And now, my friend,'' said the officer, ``you will please
inform me how many men your master has with him at
present.''

  Dougal looked in every direction except at the querist, and
began to answer, ``She canna just be sure about that.''

  ``Look at me, you Highland dog,'' said the officer, ``and
remember your life depends on your answer. How many
rogues had that outlawed scoundrel with him when you left
him?''

  ``Ou, no aboon sax rogues when I was gane.''

  ``And where are the rest of his banditti?''

  ``Gane wi' the Lieutenant agane ta westland carles.''

  ``Against the westland clans?'' said the Captain. ``Umph
---that is likely enough; and what rogue's errand were you
despatched upon?''

  ``Just to see what your honour and ta gentlemen red-coats
were doing doun here at ta Clachan.''

  ``The creature will prove fause-hearted, after a','' said the
Bailie, who by this time had planted himself close behind me;
``it's lucky I didna pit mysell to expenses anent him.''

  ``And now, my friend,'' said the Captain, ``let us understand
each other. You have confessed yourself a spy, and should
string up to the next tree---But come, if you will do me one
good turn, I will do you another. You, Donald---you shall
just, in the way of kindness, carry me and a small party to the
place where you left your master, as I wish to speak a few words
with him on serious affairs; and I'll let you go about your
business, and give you five guineas to boot.''

  ``Oigh! oigh!'' exclaimed Dougal, in the extremity of distress
and perplexity; ``she canna do tat---she canna do tat; she'll
rather be hanged.''

  ``Hanged, then, you shall be, my friend'' said the officer;
``and your blood be upon your own head. Corporal Cramp, do
you play Provost-Marshal---away with him!''

  The corporal had confronted poor Dougal for some time,
ostentatiously twisting a piece of cord which he had found in
the house into the form of a halter. He now threw it about
the culprit's neck, and, with the assistance of two soldiers, had
dragged Dougal as far as the door, when, overcome with the
terror of immediate death, he exclaimed, ``Shentlemans, stops
---stops! She'll do his honour's bidding---stops!''

  ``Awa' wi' the creature!'' said the Bailie, ``he deserves hanging
mair now than ever; awa' wi' him, corporal. Why dinna
ye tak him awa'?''

  ``It's my belief and opinion, honest gentleman,'' said the
corporal, ``that if you were going to be hanged yourself, you
would be in no such d---d hurry.'

  This by-dialogue prevented my hearing what passed between
the prisoner and Captain Thornton; but I heard the former
snivel out, in a very subdued tone, ``And ye'll ask her to gang
nae farther than just to show ye where the MacGregor is?---
Ohon! ohon!''

  ``Silence your howling, you rascal---No; I give you my word
I will ask you to go no farther.---Corporal, make the men fall
in, in front of the houses. Get out these gentlemen's horses;
we must carry them with us. I cannot spare any men to guard
them here. Come, my lads, get under arms.''

  The soldiers bustled about, and were ready to move. We
were led out, along with Dougal, in the capacity of prisoners.
As we left the hut, I heard our companion in captivity remind
the Captain of ``ta foive kuineas.''

  ``Here they are for you,'' said the officer, putting gold into
his hand; ``but observe, that if you attempt to mislead me, I
will blow your brains out with my own hand.''

  ``The creature,'' said the Bailie, ``is waur than I judged him
---it is a warldly and a perfidious creature. O the filthy lucre
of gain that men gies themsells up to! My father the deacon
used to say, the penny siller slew mair souls than the naked
sword slew bodies.''

  The landlady now approached, and demanded payment of
her reckoning, including all that had been quaffed by Major
Galbraith and his Highland friends. The English officer
remonstrated, but Mrs. MacAlpine declared, if ``she hadna
trusted to his honour's name being used in their company, she
wad never hae drawn them a stoup o' liquor; for Mr. Galbraith,
she might see him again, or she might no, but weel did she wot
she had sma' chance of seeing her siller---and she was a puir
widow, had naething but her custom to rely on.''

  Captain Thornton put a stop to her remonstrances by paying
the charge, which was only a few English shillings, though the
amount sounded very formidable in Scottish denominations.
The generous officer would have included Mr. Jarvie and me in
this general acquittance; but the Bailie, disregarding an intimation
from the landlady to ``make as muckle of the Inglishers
as we could, for they were sure to gie us plague eneugh,'' went
into a formal accounting respecting our share of the reckoning,
and paid it accordingly. The Captain took the opportunity to
make us some slight apology for detaining us. ``If we were loyal
and peaceable subjects,'' he said, ``we would not regret being
stopt for a day, when it was essential to the king's service; if
otherwise, he was acting according to his duty.''

  We were compelled to accept an apology which it would have
served no purpose to refuse, and we sallied out to attend him on
his march.

  I shall never forget the delightful sensation with which I
exchanged the dark, smoky, smothering atmosphere of the
Highland hut, in which we had passed the night so uncomfortably,
for the refreshing fragrance of the morning air, and
the glorious beams of the rising sun, which, from a tabernacle
of purple and golden clouds, were darted full on such a scene
of natural romance and beauty as had never before greeted my
eyes. To the left lay the valley, down which the Forth wandered
on its easterly course, surrounding the beautiful detached
hill, with all its garland of woods. On the right, amid a
profusion of thickets, knolls, and crags, lay the bed of a broad
mountain lake, lightly curled into tiny waves by the breath
of the morning breeze, each glittering in its course under the
influence of the sunbeams. High hills, rocks, and banks,
waving with natural forests of birch and oak, formed the
borders of this enchanting sheet of water; and, as their leaves
rustled to the wind and twinkled in the sun, gave to the depth
of solitude a sort of life and vivacity. Man alone seemed to be
placed in a state of inferiority, in a scene where all the ordinary
features of nature were raised and exalted. The miserable
little _bourocks,_ as the Bailie termed them, of which about a
dozen formed the village called the Clachan of Aberfoil, were
composed of loose stones, cemented by clay instead of mortar,
and thatched by turfs, laid rudely upon rafters formed of native
and unhewn birches and oaks from the woods around. The
roofs approached the ground so nearly, that Andrew Fairservice
observed we might have ridden over the village the night before,
and never found out we were near it, unless our horses' feet had
``gane through the riggin'.''

  From all we could see, Mrs. MacAlpine's house, miserable as
were the quarters it afforded, was still by far the best in the
hamlet; and I dare say (if my description gives you any
curiosity to see it) you will hardly find it much improved
at the present day, for the Scotch are not a people who speedily
admit innovation, even when it comes in the shape of improvement.<*>

* Note I. Clachan of Aberfoil.


  The inhabitants of these miserable dwellings were disturbed
by the noise of our departure; and as our party of about twenty
soldiers drew up in rank before marching off, we were reconnoitred
by many a beldam from the half-opened door of her
cottage. As these sibyls thrust forth their grey heads, imperfectly
covered with close caps of flannel, and showed their
shrivelled brows, and long skinny arms, with various gestures,
shrugs, and muttered expressions in Gaelic addressed to each
other, my imagination recurred to the witches of Macbeth, and
I imagined I read in the features of these crones the malevolence
of the weird sisters. The little children also, who began to
crawl forth, some quite naked, and others very imperfectly
covered with tatters of tartan stuff, clapped their tiny hands,
and grinned at the English soldiers, with an expression of
national hate and malignity which seemed beyond their years.
I remarked particularly that there were no men, nor so much
as a boy of ten or twelve years old, to be seen among the inhabitants
of a village which seemed populous in proportion to its
extent; and the idea certainly occurred to me, that we were
likely to receive from them, in the course of our journey, more
effectual tokens of ill-will than those which lowered on the
visages, and dictated the murmurs, of the women and children.
It was not until we commenced our march that the malignity
of the elder persons of the community broke forth into expressions.
The last file of men had left the village, to pursue a
small broken track, formed by the sledges in which the natives
transported their peats and turfs, and which led through the
woods that fringed the lower end of the lake, when a shrilly
sound of female exclamation broke forth, mixed with the
screams of children, the whooping of boys, and the clapping of
hands, with which the Highland dames enforce their notes,
whether of rage or lamentation. I asked Andrew, who looked
as pale as death, what all this meant.

  ``I doubt we'll ken that ower sune,'' said he. ``Means? It
means that the Highland wives are cursing and banning the
red-coats, and wishing ill-luck to them, and ilka ane that ever
spoke the Saxon tongue. I have heard wives flyte in England
and Scotland---it's nae marvel to hear them flyte ony gate; but
sic ill-scrapit tongues as thae Highland carlines'---and sic grewsome
wishes, that men should be slaughtered like sheep---and
that they may lapper their hands to the elbows in their heart's
blude---and that they suld dee the death of Walter Cuming of
Guiyock,<*> wha hadna as muckle o' him left thegither as would

* A great feudal oppressor, who, riding on some cruel purpose through
* the forest of Guiyock, was thrown from his horse, and his foot being caught
* in the stirrup, was dragged along by the frightened animal till he was torn
* to pieces. The expression, ``Walter of Guiyock's curse,'' is proverbial.

supper a messan-dog---sic awsome language as that I ne'er
heard out o' a human thrapple;---and, unless the deil wad rise
amang them to gie them a lesson, I thinkna that their talent at
cursing could be amended. The warst o't is, they bid us aye
gang up the loch, and see what we'll land in.''

  Adding Andrew's information to what I had myself observed,
I could scarce doubt that some attack was meditated upon our
party. The road, as we advanced, seemed to afford every
facility for such an unpleasant interruption. At first it winded
apart from the lake through marshy meadow ground, overgrown
with copsewood, now traversing dark and close thickets which
would have admitted an ambuscade to be sheltered within a
few yards of our line of march, and frequently crossing rough
mountain torrents, some of which took the soldiers up to the
knees, and ran with such violence, that their force could only
be stemmed by the strength of two or three men holding fast
by each other's arms. It certainly appeared to me, though
altogether unacquainted with military affairs, that a sort of
half-savage warriors, as I had heard the Highlanders asserted
to be, might, in such passes as these, attack a party of regular
forces with great advantage. The Bailie's good sense and shrewd
observation had led him to the same conclusion, as I understood
from his requesting to speak with the captain, whom he addressed
nearly in the following terms:---``Captain, it's no to fleech ony
favour out o' ye, for I scorn it---and it's under protest that I
reserve my action and pleas of oppression and wrongous imprisonment;---
but, being a friend to King George and his army, I
take the liberty to speer---Dinna ye think ye might tak a better
time to gang up this glen? If ye are seeking Rob Roy, he's
ken'd to be better than half a hunder men strong when he's at
the fewest; an if he brings in the Glengyle folk, and the Glenfinlas
and Balquhidder lads, he may come to gie you your kail
through the reek; and it's my sincere advice, as a king's friend,
ye had better tak back again to the Clachan, for thae women at
Aberfoil are like the scarts and seamaws at the Cumries---there's
aye foul weather follows their skirting.''

  ``Make yourself easy, sir,'' replied Captain Thornton; ``I
am in the execution of my orders. And as you say you are
a friend to King George, you will be glad to learn that it is
impossible that this gang of ruffians, whose license has disturbed
the country so long, can escape the measures now taken to
suppress them. The horse squadron of militia, commanded by
Major Galbraith, is already joined by two or more troops of
cavalry, which will occupy all the lower passes of this wild
country; three hundred Highlanders, under the two gentlemen
you saw at the inn, are in possession of the upper part, and
various strong parties from the garrison are securing the hills
and glens in different directions. Our last accounts of Rob
Roy correspond with what this fellow has confessed, that,
finding himself surrounded on all sides, he had dismissed the
greater part of his followers, with the purpose either of lying
concealed, or of making his escape through his superior knowledge
of the passes.''

  ``I dinna ken,'' said the Bailie; ``there's mair brandy than
brains in Garschattachin's head this morning---And I wadna,
an I were you, Captain, rest my main dependence on the
Hielandmen---hawks winna pike out hawks' een. They may
quarrel among themsells, and gie ilk ither ill names, and maybe
a slash wi' a claymore; but they are sure to join in the lang
run, against a' civilised folk, that wear breeks on their hinder
ends, and hae purses in their pouches.''

  Apparently these admonitions were not altogether thrown
away on Captain Thornton. He reformed his line of march,
commanded his soldiers to unsling their firelocks and fix their
bayonets, and formed an advanced and rear-guard, each consisting
of a non-commissioned officer and two soldiers, who
received strict orders to keep an alert look-out. Dougal
underwent another and very close examination, in which he
steadfastly asserted the truth of what he had before affirmed;
and being rebuked on account of the suspicious and dangerous
appearance of the route by which he was guiding them, he
answered with a sort of testiness that seemed very natural,
``Her nainsell didna mak ta road; an shentlemans likit grand
roads, she suld hae pided at Glasco.''

  All this passed off well enough, and we resumed our progress.

  Our route, though leading towards the lake, had hitherto
been so much shaded by wood, that we only from time to time
obtained a glimpse of that beautiful sheet of water. But the
road now suddenly emerged from the forest ground, and, winding
close by the margin of the loch, afforded us a full view of
its spacious mirror, which now, the breeze having totally subsided,
reflected in still magnificence the high dark heathy
mountains, huge grey rocks, and shaggy banks, by which it is
encircled. The hills now sunk on its margin so closely, and
were so broken and precipitous, as to afford no passage except
just upon the narrow line of the track which we occupied, and
which was overhung with rocks, from which we might have
been destroyed merely by rolling down stones, without much
possibility of offering resistance. Add to this, that, as the road
winded round every promontory and bay which indented the
lake, there was rarely a possibility of seeing a hundred yards
before us. Our commander appeared to take some alarm at
the nature of the pass in which he was engaged, which displayed
itself in repeated orders to his soldiers to be on the alert,
and in many threats of instant death to Dougal, if he should
be found to have led them into danger. Dougal received
these threats with an air of stupid impenetrability, which
might arise either from conscious innocence, or from dogged
resolution.

  ``If shentlemans were seeking ta Red Gregarach,'' he said,
``to be sure they couldna expect to find her without some wee
danger.''

  Just as the Highlander uttered these words, a halt was made
by the corporal commanding the advance, who sent back one of
the file who formed it, to tell the Captain that the path in front
was occupied by Highlanders, stationed on a commanding point
of particular difficulty. Almost at the same instant a soldier
from the rear came to say, that they heard the sound of a bagpipe
in the woods through which we had just passed. Captain
Thornton, a man of conduct as well as courage, instantly resolved
to force the pass in front, without waiting till he was assailed
from the rear; and, assuring his soldiers that the bagpipes which
they heard were those of the friendly Highlanders who were
advancing to their assistance, he stated to them the importance
of advancing and securing Rob Roy, if possible, before these
auxiliaries should come up to divide with them the honour, as
well as the reward which was placed on the head of this celebrated
freebooter. He therefore ordered the rearguard to join
the centre, and both to close up to the advance, doubling his
files so as to occupy with his column the whole practicable part
of the road, and to present such a front as its breadth admitted.
Dougal, to whom he said in a whisper, ``You dog, if you have
deceived me, you shall die for it!'' was placed in the centre,
between two grenadiers, with positive orders to shoot him if he
attempted an escape. The same situation was assigned to us,
as being the safest, and Captain Thornton, taking his half-pike
from the soldier who carried it, placed himself at the
head of his little detachment, and gave the word to march
forward.

  The party advanced with the firmness of English soldiers.
Not so Andrew Fairservice, who was frightened out of his wits;
and not so, if truth must be told, either the Bailie or I myself,
who, without feeling the same degree of trepidation, could not
with stoical indifference see our lives exposed to hazard in a
quarrel with which we had no concern. But there was neither
time for remonstrance nor remedy.

  We approached within about twenty yards of the spot where
the advanced guard had seen some appearance of an enemy.
It was one of those promontories which run into the lake, and
round the base of which the road had hitherto winded in the
manner I have described. In the present case, however, the
path, instead of keeping the water's edge, sealed the promontory
by one or two rapid zigzags, carried in a broken track along the
precipitous face of a slaty grey rock, which would otherwise
have been absolutely inaccessible. On the top of this rock, only
to be approached by a road so broken, so narrow, and so precarious,
the corporal declared he had seen the bonnets and long-barrelled
guns of several mountaineers, apparently couched
among the long heath and brushwood which crested the eminence.
Captain Thornton ordered him to move forward with
three files, to dislodge the supposed ambuscade, while, at a more
slow but steady pace, he advanced to his support with the rest
of his party.

  The attack which he meditated was prevented by the unexpected
apparition of a female upon the summit of the rock.

  ``Stand!'' she said, with a commanding tone, ``and tell me what
ye seek in MacGregor's country?''

  I have seldom seen a finer or more commanding form than
this woman. She might be between the term of forty and fifty
years, and had a countenance which must once have been of a
masculine cast of beauty; though now, imprinted with deep
lines by exposure to rough weather, and perhaps by the wasting
influence of grief and passion, its features were only strong,
harsh, and expressive. She wore her plaid, not drawn around
her head and shoulders, as is the fashion of the women in
Scotland, but disposed around her body as the Highland soldiers
wear theirs. She had a man's bonnet, with a feather in it, an
unsheathed sword in her hand, and a pair of pistols at her girdle.

  ``It's Helen Campbell, Rob's wife,'' said the Bailie, in a
whisper of considerable alarm; ``and there will be broken heads
amang us or it's lang.''

  ``What seek ye here?'' she asked again of Captain Thornton,
who had himself advanced to reconnoitre.

  ``We seek the outlaw, Rob Roy MacGregor Campbell,''
answered the officer, ``and make no war on women; therefore
offer no vain opposition to the king's troops, and assure yourself
of civil treatment.''

  ``Ay,'' retorted the Amazon, ``I am no stranger to your
tender mercies. Ye have left me neither name nor fame---my
mother's bones will shrink aside in their grave when mine are
laid beside them---Ye have left me neither house nor hold,
blanket nor bedding, cattle to feed us, or flocks to clothe us---
Ye have taken from us all---all!---The very name of our ancestors
have ye taken away, and now ye come for our lives.''

  ``I seek no man's life,'' replied the Captain; ``I only execute
my orders. If you are alone, good woman, you have nought to
fear---if there are any with you so rash as to offer useless resistance,
their own blood be on their own heads. Move forward,
sergeant.''

  ``Forward! march!'' said the non-commissioned officer.
``Huzza, my boys, for Rob Roy's head and a purse of gold.''

  He quickened his pace into a run, followed by the six
soldiers; but as they attained the first traverse of the ascent,
the flash of a dozen of firelocks from various parts of the pass
parted in quick succession and deliberate aim. The sergeant,
shot through the body, still struggled to gain the ascent, raised
himself by his hands to clamber up the face of the rock, but
relaxed his grasp, after a desperate effort, and falling, rolled
from the face of the cliff into the deep lake, where he perished.
Of the soldiers, three fell, slain or disabled; the others retreated
on their main body, all more or less wounded.

  ``Grenadiers, to the front!'' said Captain Thornton.---You
are to recollect, that in those days this description of soldiers
actually carried that destructive species of firework from which
they derive their name. The four grenadiers moved to the
front accordingly. The officer commanded the rest of the party
to be ready to support them, and only saying to us, ``Look to
your safety, gentlemen,'' gave, in rapid succession, the word to
the grenadiers---``Open your pouches---handle your grenades---
blow your matches---fall on.''

  The whole advanced with a shout, headed by Captain Thornton,
---the grenadiers preparing to throw their grenades among
the bushes where the ambuscade lay, and the musketeers to
support them by an instant and close assault. Dougal, forgotten
in the scuffle, wisely crept into the thicket which overhung
that part of the road where we had first halted, which he
ascended with the activity of a wild cat. I followed his example,
instinctively recollecting that the fire of the Highlanders
would sweep the open track. I clambered until out of breath;
for a continued spattering fire, in which every shot was multiplied
by a thousand echoes, the hissing of the kindled fusees of
the grenades, and the successive explosion of those missiles,
mingled with the huzzas of the soldiers, and the yells and cries
of their Highland antagonists, formed a contrast which added---
I do not shame to own it---wings to my desire to reach a place
of safety. The difficulties of the ascent soon increased so much,
that I despaired of reaching Dougal, who seemed to swing
himself from rock to rock, and stump to stump, with the facility
of a squirrel, and I turned down my eyes to see what had
become of my other companions.   Both were brought to a very
awkward standstill.

  The Bailie, to whom I suppose fear had given a temporary
share of agility, had ascended about twenty feet from the path,
when his foot slipping, as he straddled from one huge fragment
of rock to another, he would have slumbered with his father the
deacon, whose acts and words he was so fond of quoting, but
for a projecting branch of a ragged thorn, which, catching hold
of the skirts of his riding-coat, supported him in mid-air, where
he dangled not unlike to the sign of the Golden Fleece over the
door of a mercer in the Trongate of his native city.

  As for Andrew Fairservice, he had advanced with better
success, until he had attained the top of a bare cliff, which,
rising above the wood, exposed him, at least in his own opinion,
to all the dangers of the neighbouring skirmish, while, at the
same time, it was of such a precipitous and impracticable
nature, that he dared neither to advance nor retreat. Footing
it up and down upon the narrow space which the top of the
cliff afforded (very like a fellow at a country-fair dancing upon
a trencher), he roared for mercy in Gaelic and English alternately,
according to the side on which the scale of victory
seemed to predominate, while his exclamations were only
answered by the groans of the Bailie, who suffered much, not
only from apprehension, but from the pendulous posture in
which he hung suspended by the loins.

  On perceiving the Bailie's precarious situation, my first idea
was to attempt to render him assistance; but this was impossible
without the concurrence of Andrew, whom neither sign,
nor entreaty, nor command, nor expostulation, could inspire with
courage to adventure the descent from his painful elevation,
where, like an unskilful and obnoxious minister of state, unable
to escape from the eminence to which he had presumptuously
ascended, he continued to pour forth piteous prayers for mercy,
which no one heard, and to skip to and fro, writhing his body
into all possible antic shapes to avoid the balls which he conceived
to be whistling around him.

  In a few minutes this cause of terror ceased, for the fire, at
first so well sustained, now sunk at once---a sure sign that the
conflict was concluded. To gain some spot from which I could
see how the day had gone was now my object, in order to
appeal to the mercy of the victors, who, I trusted (whichever
side might be gainers), would not suffer the honest Bailie to
remain suspended, like the coffin of Mahomet, between heaven
and earth, without lending a hand to disengage him. At length,
by dint of scrambling, I found a spot which commanded a view
of the field of battle. It was indeed ended; and, as my mind
already augured, from the place and circumstances attending
the contest, it had terminated in the defeat of Captain Thornton.
I saw a party of Highlanders in the act of disarming that
officer, and the scanty remainder of his party. They consisted
of about twelve men most of whom were wounded, who, surrounded
by treble their number, and without the power either
to advance or retreat, exposed to a murderous and well-aimed
fire, which they had no means of returning with effect, had at
length laid down their arms by the order of their officer, when
he saw that the road in his rear was occupied, and that protracted
resistance would be only wasting the lives of his brave
followers. By the Highlanders, who fought under cover, the
victory was cheaply bought, at the expense of one man slain
and two wounded by the grenades. All this I learned afterwards.
At present I only comprehended the general result of
the day, from seeing the English officer, whose face was covered
with blood, stripped of his hat and arms, and his men, with
sullen and dejected countenances which marked their deep
regret, enduring, from the wild and martial figures who surrounded
them, the severe measures to which the laws of war
subject the vanquished for security of the victors.
