




		CHAPTER TWENTY-FIFTH.



	So stands the Thracian herdsman with his spear
	Full in the gap, and hopes the hunted bear;
	And hears him in the rustling wood, and sees
	His course at distance by the bending trees,
	And thinks---Here comes my mortal enemy,
	And either he must fall in fight, or I.
					Palamon and Arcite.



  I took the route towards the college, as recommended by
Mr. Jarvie, less with the intention of seeking for any object of
interest or amusement, than to arrange my own ideas, and
meditate on my future conduct. I wandered from one quadrangle
of old-fashioned buildings to another, and from thence
to the College-yards, or walking ground, where, pleased with
the solitude of the place, most of the students being engaged in
their classes, I took several turns, pondering on the waywardness
of my own destiny.

  I could not doubt, from the circumstances attending my first
meeting with this person Campbell, that he was engaged in
some strangely desperate courses; and the reluctance with which
Mr. Jarvie alluded to his person or pursuits, as well as all the
scene of the preceding night, tended to confirm these suspicions.
Yet to this man Diana Vernon had not, it would seem, hesitated
to address herself in my behalf; and the conduct of the magistrate
himself towards him showed an odd mixture of kindness,
and even respect, with pity and censure. Something there
must be uncommon in Campbell's situation and character; and
what was still more extraordinary, it seemed that his fate was
doomed to have influence over, and connection with, my own.
I resolved to bring Mr. Jarvie to close quarters on the first
proper opportunity, and learn as much as was possible on the
subject of this mysterious person, in order that I might judge
whether it was possible for me, without prejudice to my reputation,
to hold that degree of farther correspondence with him to
which he seemed to invite.

  While I was musing on these subjects, my attention was
attracted by three persons who appeared at the upper end of
the walk through which I was sauntering, seemingly engaged
in very earnest conversation. That intuitive impression which
announces to us the approach of whomsoever we love or hate
with intense vehemence, long before a more indifferent eye can
recognise their persons, flashed upon my mind the sure conviction
that the midmost of these three men was Rashleigh Osbaldistone.
To address him was my first impulse;---my second
was, to watch him until he was alone, or at least to reconnoitre
his companions before confronting him. The party was still
at such distance, and engaged in such deep discourse, that I
had time to step unobserved to the other side of a small hedge,
which imperfectly screened the alley in which I was walking.
It was at this period the fashion of the young and gay to
wear, in their morning walks, a scarlet cloak, often laced and
embroidered, above their other dress, and it was the trick of the
time for gallants occasionally to dispose it so as to muffle a
part of the face. The imitating this fashion, with the degree
of shelter which I received from the hedge, enabled me to meet
my cousin, unobserved by him or the others, except perhaps as
a passing stranger. I was not a little startled at recognising in
his companions that very Morris on whose account I had been
summoned before Justice Inglewood, and Mr. MacVittie the
merchant, from whose starched and severe aspect I had recoiled
on the preceding day.

  A more ominous conjunction to my own affairs, and those of
my father, could scarce have been formed. I remembered
Morris's false accusation against me, which he might be as easily
induced to renew as he had been intimidated to withdraw; I
recollected the inauspicious influence of MacVittie over my
father's affairs, testified by the imprisonment of Owen;---and
I now saw both these men combined with one, whose talent for
mischief I deemed little inferior to those of the great author of
all ill, and my abhorrence of whom almost amounted to dread.

  When they had passed me for some paces, I turned and
followed them unobserved. At the end of the walk they
separated, Morris and MacVittie leaving the gardens, and
Rashleigh returning alone through the walks. I was now
determined to confront him, and demand reparation for the
injuries he had done my father, though in what form redress
was likely to be rendered remained to be known. This, however,
I trusted to chance; and flinging back the cloak in which
I was muffled, I passed through a gap of the low hedge, and
presented myself before Rashleigh, as, in a deep reverie, he
paced down the avenue.

  Rashleigh was no man to be surprised or thrown off his guard
by sudden occurrences. Yet he did not find me thus close to
him, wearing undoubtedly in my face the marks of that indignation
which was glowing in my bosom, without visibly starting
at an apparition so sudden and menacing.

  ``You are well met, sir,'' was my commencement; ``I was
about to take a long and doubtful journey in quest of you.''

  ``You know little of him you sought then,'' replied Rashleigh,
with his usual undaunted composure. ``I am easily found by
my friends---still more easily by my foes;---your manner compels
me to ask in which class I must rank Mr. Francis
Osbaldistone?''

  ``In that of your foes, sir,'' I answered---``in that of your
mortal foes, unless you instantly do justice to your benefactor,
my father, by accounting for his property.''

  ``And to whom, Mr. Osbaldistone,'' answered Rashleigh, ``am
I, a member of your father's commercial establishment, to be
compelled to give any account of my proceedings in those
concerns, which are in every respect identified with my own?---
Surely not to a young gentleman whose exquisite taste for
literature would render such discussions disgusting and unintelligible.''

  ``Your sneer, sir, is no answer; I will not part with you
until I have full satisfaction concerning the fraud you meditate
---you shall go with me before a magistrate.''

  ``Be it so,'' said Rashleigh, and made a step or two as if to
accompany me; then pausing, proceeded---``Were I inclined to
do so as you would have me, you should soon feel which of us
had most reason to dread the presence of a magistrate. But I
have no wish to accelerate your fate. Go, young man! amuse
yourself in your world of poetical imaginations, and leave the
business of life to those who understand and can conduct it.''

  His intention, I believe, was to provoke me, and he succeeded.
``Mr. Osbaldistone,'' I said, ``this tone of calm insolence
shall not avail you. You ought to be aware that the
name we both bear never submitted to insult, and shall not in
my person be exposed to it.''

  ``You remind me,'' said Rashleigh, with one of his blackest
looks, ``that it was dishonoured in my person!---and you remind
me also by whom! Do you think I have forgotten the evening
at Osbaldistone Hall when you cheaply and with impunity played
the bully at my expense? For that insult---never to be washed
out but by blood!---for the various times you have crossed my
path, and always to my prejudice---for the persevering folly
with which you seek to traverse schemes, the importance of
which you neither know nor are capable of estimating,---for all
these, sir, you owe me a long account, for which there shall
come an early day of reckoning.''

  ``Let it come when it will,'' I replied, ``I shall be willing
and ready to meet it. Yet you seem to have forgotten the
heaviest article---that I had the pleasure to aid Miss Vernon's
good sense and virtuous feeling in extricating her from your
infamous toils.''

  I think his dark eyes flashed actual fire at this home-taunt,
and yet his voice retained the same calm expressive tone with
which he had hitherto conducted the conversation.

  ``I had other views with respect to you, young man,'' was his
answer: ``less hazardous for you, and more suitable to my
present character and former education. But I see you will
draw on yourself the personal chastisement your boyish insolence
so well merits.  Follow me to a more remote spot, where
we are less likely to be interrupted.''

  I followed him accordingly, keeping a strict eye on his
motions, for I believed him capable of the very worst actions.
We reached an open spot in a sort of wilderness, laid out in the
Dutch taste, with clipped hedges, and one or two statues. I
was on my guard, and it was well with me that I was so; for
Rashleigh's sword was out and at my breast ere I could throw
down my cloak, or get my weapon unsheathed, so that I only
saved my life by springing a pace or two backwards. He had
some advantage in the difference of our weapons; for his sword,
as I recollect, was longer than mine, and had one of those
bayonet or three-cornered blades which are now generally worn;
whereas mine was what we then called a Saxon blade---narrow,
flat, and two-edged, and scarcely so manageable as that of my
enemy. In other respects we were pretty equally matched:
for what advantage I might possess in superior address and
agility, was fully counterbalanced by Rashleigh's great strength
and coolness. He fought, indeed, more like a fiend than a
man---with concentrated spite and desire of blood, only allayed
by that cool consideration which made his worst actions appear
yet worse from the air of deliberate premeditation which seemed
to accompany them. His obvious malignity of purpose never
for a moment threw him off his guard, and he exhausted every
feint and stratagem proper to the science of defence; while, at
the same time, he meditated the most desperate catastrophe to
our rencounter.

  On my part, the combat was at first sustained with more
moderation. My passions, though hasty, were not malevolent;
and the walk of two or three minutes' space gave me time to
reflect that Rashleigh was my father's nephew, the son of an
uncle, who after his fashion had been kind to me, and that his
falling by my hand could not but occasion much family distress.
My first resolution, therefore, was to attempt to disarm
my antagonist---a man<oe>uvre in which, confiding in my superiority
of skill and practice, I anticipated little difficulty. I
found, however, I had met my match; and one or two foils
which I received, and from the consequences of which I narrowly
escaped, obliged me to observe more caution in my mode of
fighting. By degrees I became exasperated at the rancour with
which Rashleigh sought my life, and returned his passes with
an inveteracy resembling in some degree his own; so that the
combat had all the appearance of being destined to have a tragic
issue. That issue had nearly taken place at my expense. My
foot slipped in a full lounge which I made at my adversary,
and I could not so far recover myself as completely to parry
the thrust with which my pass was repaid. Yet it took but
partial effect, running through my waistcoat, grazing my ribs,
and passing through my coat behind. The hilt of Rashleigh's
sword, so great was the vigour of his thrust, struck against my
breast with such force as to give me great pain, and confirm me
in the momentary belief that I was mortally wounded. Eager
for revenge, I grappled with my enemy, seizing with my left
hand the hilt of his sword, and shortening my own with the
purpose of running him through the body. Our death-grapple
was interrupted by a man who forcibly threw himself between
us, and pushing us separate from each other, exclaimed, in a
loud and commanding voice, ``What! the sons of those fathers
who sucked the same breast shedding each others bluid as
it were strangers'!---By the hand of my father, I will cleave
to the brisket the first man that mints another stroke!''

  I looked up in astonishment. The speaker was no other
than Campbell. He had a basket-hilted broadsword drawn in
his hand, which he made to whistle around his head as he
spoke, as if for the purpose of enforcing his mediation. Rashleigh
and I stared in silence at this unexpected intruder, who
proceeded to exhort us alternately:---``Do you, Maister Francis,
opine that ye will re-establish your father's credit by cutting
your kinsman's thrapple, or getting your ain sneckit instead
thereof in the College-yards of Glasgow?---Or do you, Mr
Rashleigh, think men will trust their lives and fortunes wi' ane,
that, when in point of trust and in point of confidence wi' a great
political interest, gangs about brawling like a drunken gillie?---
Nay, never look gash or grim at me, man---if ye're angry, ye
ken how to turn the buckle o' your belt behind you.''

  ``You presume on my present situation,'' replied Rashleigh,
``or you would have hardly dared to interfere where my honour
is concerned.''

  ``Hout! tout! tout!---Presume? And what for should it be
presuming?---Ye may be the richer man, Mr. Osbaldistone, as
is maist likely; and ye may be the mair learned man, whilk I
dispute not: but I reckon ye are neither a prettier man nor a
better gentleman than mysell---and it will be news to me when
I hear ye are as gude. And _dare_ too? Muckle daring there's
about it---I trow, here I stand, that hae slashed as het a haggis
as ony o' the twa o' ye, and thought nae muckle o' my morning's
wark when it was dune. If my foot were on the heather as it's
on the causeway, or this pickle gravel, that's little better, I hae
been waur mistrysted than if I were set to gie ye baith your
ser'ing o't.''

  Rashleigh had by this time recovered his temper completely.
``My kinsman,'' he said, ``will acknowledge he forced this
quarrel on me. It was none of my seeking. I am glad we
are interrupted before I chastised his forwardness more severely.''

  ``Are ye hurt, lad?'' inquired Campbell of me, with some
appearance of interest.

  ``A very slight scratch,'' I answered, ``which my kind cousin
would not long have boasted of had not you come between us.''

  ``In troth, and that's true, Maister Rashleigh,'' said Campbell;
``for the cauld iron and your best bluid were like to hae
become acquaint when I mastered Mr. Frank's right hand.
But never look like a sow playing upon a trump for the luve of
that, man---come and walk wi' me. I hae news to tell ye, and
ye'll cool and come to yourself, like MacGibbon's crowdy, when
he set it out at the window-bole.''

  ``Pardon me, sir,'' said I. ``Your intentions have seemed
friendly to me on more occasions than one; but I must not, and
will not, quit sight of this person until he yields up to me those
means of doing justice to my father's engagements, of which he
has treacherously possessed himself.''

  ``Ye're daft, man,'' replied Campbell; ``it will serve ye naething
to follow us e'enow; ye hae just enow o' ae man---wad ye
bring twa on your head, and might bide quiet?''

  ``Twenty,'' I replied, ``if it be necessary.''

  I laid my hand on Rashleigh's collar, who made no resistance,
but said, with a sort of scornful smile, ``You hear him, MacGregor!
he rushes on his fate---will it be my fault if he falls
into it?---The warrants are by this time ready, and all is
prepared.''

  The Scotchman was obviously embarrassed. He looked
around, and before, and behind him, and then said---``The
ne'er a bit will I yield my consent to his being ill-guided for
standing up for the father that got him---and I gie God's
malison and mine to a' sort o' magistrates, justices, bailies.,
sheriffs, sheriff-officers, constables, and sic-like black cattle, that
hae been the plagues o' puir auld Scotland this hunder year.---
it was a merry warld when every man held his ain gear wi' his
ain grip, and when the country side wasna fashed wi' warrants
and poindings and apprizings, and a' that cheatry craft. And
ance mair I say it, my conscience winna see this puir thoughtless
lad ill-guided, and especially wi' that sort o' trade. I wad
rather ye fell till't again, and fought it out like douce honest
men.''

  ``Your conscience, MacGregor!'' said Rashleigh; ``you forget
how long you and I have known each other.''

  ``Yes, my conscience,'' reiterated Campbell, or MacGregor,
or whatever was his name; ``I hae such a thing about me,
Maister Osbaldistone; and therein it may weel chance that I
hae the better o' you. As to our knowledge of each other,---if
ye ken what I am, ye ken what usage it was made me what I
am; and, whatever you may think, I would not change states
with the proudest of the oppressors that hae driven me to tak
the heather-bush for a beild. What _you_ are, Maister Rashleigh,
and what excuse ye hae for being _what_ you are, is between your
ain heart and the lang day.---And now, Maister Francis, let go
his collar; for he says truly, that ye are in mair danger from a
magistrate than he is, and were your cause as straight as an
arrow, he wad find a way to put you wrang---So let go his craig,
as I was saying.''

  He seconded his words with an effort so sudden and unexpected,
that he freed Rashleigh from my hold, and securing me,
notwithstanding my struggles, in his own Herculean gripe, he
called out---``Take the bent, Mr. Rashleigh---Make ae pair o'
legs worth twa pair o' hands; ye hae dune that before now.''

  ``You may thank this gentleman, kinsman,'' said Rashleigh,
``if I leave any part of my debt to you unpaid; and if I quit
you now, it is only in the hope we shall soon meet again without
the possibility of interruption.''

  He took up his sword, wiped it, sheathed it, and was lost
among the bushes.

  The Scotchman, partly by force, partly by remonstrance, prevented
my following him; indeed I began to be of opinion my
doing so would be to little purpose.

  ``As I live by bread,'' said Campbell, when, after one or two
struggles in which he used much forbearance towards me, he
perceived me inclined to stand quiet, ``I never saw sae daft a
callant! I wad hae gien the best man in the country the
breadth o' his back gin he had gien me sic a kemping as ye
hae dune. What wad ye do?---Wad ye follow the wolf to his
den? I tell ye, man, he has the auld trap set for ye---He has
got the collector-creature Morris to bring up a' the auld story
again, and ye maun look for nae help frae me here, as ye got
at Justice Inglewood's;---it isna good for my health to come in
the gate o' the whigamore bailie bodies. Now gang your ways
hame, like a gude bairn---jouk and let the jaw gae by---Keep
out o' sight o' Rashleigh, and Morris, and that MacVittie animal
---Mind the Clachan of Aberfoil, as I said before, and by the
word of a gentleman, I wunna see ye wranged. But keep a calm
sough till we meet again---I maun gae and get Rashleigh out o'
the town afore waur comes o't, for the neb o' him's never out o'
mischief---Mind the Clachan of Aberfoil.''

  He turned upon his heel, and left me to meditate on the
singular events which had befallen me. My first care was to
adjust my dress and reassume my cloak, disposing it so as to conceal
the blood which flowed down my right side. I had scarcely
accomplished this, when, the classes of the college being dismissed,
the gardens began to be filled with parties of the students.
I therefore left them as soon as possible; and in my way towards
Mr. Jarvie's, whose dinner hour was now approaching, I stopped
at a small unpretending shop, the sign of which intimated the
indweller to be Christopher Neilson, surgeon and apothecary.
I requested of a little boy who was pounding some stuff in a
mortar, that he would procure me an audience of this learned
pharmacopolist. He opened the door of the back shop, where
I found a lively elderly man, who shook his head incredulously
at some idle account I gave him of having been wounded accidentally
by the button breaking off my antagonist's foil while I
was engaged in a fencing match. When he had applied some
lint and somewhat else he thought proper to the trifling wound
I had received, he observed---``There never was button on the
foil that made this hurt. Ah! young blood! young blood!---
But we surgeons are a secret generation---If it werena for hot
blood and ill blood, what wad become of the twa learned
faculties?''

  With which moral reflection he dismissed me; and I experienced
very little pain or inconvenience afterwards from the
scratch I had received.

