



			CHAPTER TENTH.



	In the wide pile, by others heeded not,
	Hers was one sacred solitary spot,
	Whose gloomy aisles and bending shelves contain
	For moral hunger food, and cures for moral pain.
						Anonymous.



  The library at Osbaldistone Hall was a gloomy room, whose
antique oaken shelves bent beneath the weight of the ponderous
folios so dear to the seventeenth century, from which, under
favour be it spoken, we have distilled matter for our quartos
and octavos, and which, once more subjected to the alembic,
may, should our sons be yet more frivolous than ourselves, be
still farther reduced into duodecimos and pamphlets. The
collection was chiefly of the classics, as well foreign as ancient
history, and, above all, divinity. It was in wretched order.
The priests, who in succession had acted as chaplains at the
Hall, were, for many years, the only persons who entered its
precincts, until Rashleigh's thirst for reading had led him to
disturb the venerable spiders, who had muffled the fronts of
the presses with their tapestry. His destination for the church
rendered his conduct less absurd in his father's eyes, than if any
of his other descendants had betrayed so strange a propensity,
and Sir Hildebrand acquiesced in the library receiving some
repairs, so as to fit it for a sitting-room. Still an air of dilapidation,
as obvious as it was uncomfortable, pervaded the large
apartment, and announced the neglect from which the knowledge
which its walls contained had not been able to exempt it.
The tattered tapestry, the worm-eaten shelves, the huge and
clumsy, yet tottering, tables, desks, and chairs, the rusty grate,
seldom gladdened by either sea-coal or faggots, intimated the
contempt of the lords of Osbaldistone Hall for learning, and
for the volumes which record its treasures.

  ``You think this place somewhat disconsolate, I suppose?''
said Diana, as I glanced my eye round the forlorn apartment;
``but to me it seems like a little paradise, for I call it my own,
and fear no intrusion. Rashleigh was joint proprietor with me,
while we were friends.''

  ``And are you no longer so?'' was my natural question.
Her fore-finger immediately touched her dimpled chin, with an
arch look of prohibition.

  ``We are still _allies,_'' she continued, ``bound, like other confederate
powers, by circumstances of mutual interest; but I am
afraid, as will happen in other cases, the treaty of alliance has
survived the amicable dispositions in which it had its origin.
At any rate, we live less together; and when he comes through
that door there, I vanish through this door here; and so, having
made the discovery that we two were one too many for this apartment,
as large as it seems, Rashleigh, whose occasions frequently
call him elsewhere, has generously made a cession of his rights in
my favour; so that I now endeavour to prosecute alone the
studies in which he used formerly to be my guide.''

  ``And what are those studies, if I may presume to ask?''

  ``Indeed you may, without the least fear of seeing my fore-finger
raised to my chin. Science and history are my principal
favourites; but I also study poetry and the classics.''

  ``And the classics? Do you read them in the original?''

  ``Unquestionably. Rashleigh, who is no contemptible scholar,
taught me Greek and Latin, as well as most of the languages of
modern Europe. I assure you there has been some pains taken
in my education, although I can neither sew a tucker, nor work
cross-stitch, nor make a pudding, nor---as the vicar's fat wife,
with as much truth as elegance, good-will, and politeness, was
pleased to say in my behalf---do any other useful thing in the
varsal world.''

  ``And was this selection of studies Rashleigh's choice, or your
own, Miss Vernon?'' I asked.

  ``Um!'' said she, as if hesitating to answer my question,---
``It's not worth while lifting my finger about, after all. Why,
partly his and partly mine. As I learned out of doors to ride
a horse, and bridle and saddle him in cue of necessity, and to
clear a five-barred gate, and fire a gun without winking, and all
other of those masculine accomplishments that my brute cousins
run mad after, I wanted, like my rational cousin, to read Greek
and Latin within doors, and make my complete approach to the
tree of knowledge, which you men-scholars would engross to
yourselves, in revenge, I suppose, for our common mother's share
in the great original transgression.''

  ``And Rashleigh indulged your propensity to learning?''

  ``Why, he wished to have me for his scholar, and he could
but teach me that which he knew himself---he was not likely to
instruct me in the mysteries of washing lace-ruffles, or hemming
cambric handkerchiefs, I suppose.''

  ``I admit the temptation of getting such a scholar, and have
no doubt that it made a weighty consideration on the tutor's
part.''

  ``Oh, if you begin to investigate Rashleigh's motives, my
finger touches my chin once more. I can only be frank where
my own are inquired into. But to resume---he has resigned the
library in my favour, and never enters without leave had and
obtained; and so I have taken the liberty to make it the place
of deposit for some of my own goods and chattels, as you may see
by looking round you.''

  ``I beg pardon, Miss Vernon, but I really see nothing around
these walls which I can distinguish as likely to claim you as
mistress.''

  ``That is, I suppose, because you neither see a shepherd or
shepherdess wrought in worsted, and handsomely framed in
black ebony, or a stuffed parrot,---or a breeding-cage, full of
canary birds,---or a housewife-case, broidered with tarnished
silver,---or a toilet-table with a nest of japanned boxes, with as
many angles as Christmas minced-pies,---or a broken-backed
spinet,---or a lute with three strings,---or rock-work,---or shell-work,
---or needle-work, or work of any kind,---or a lap-dog with
a litter of blind puppies---None of these treasures do I possess,''
she continued, after a pause, in order to recover the breath she
had lost in enumerating them---``But there stands the sword of
my ancestor Sir Richard Vernon, slain at Shrewsbury, and sorely
slandered by a sad fellow called Will Shakspeare, whose Lancastrian
partialities, and a certain knack at embodying them, has
turned history upside down, or rather inside out;---and by that
redoubted weapon hangs the mail of the still older Vernon,
squire to the Black Prince, whose fate is the reverse of his
descendant's, since he is more indebted to the bard who took the
trouble to celebrate him, for good-will than for talents,---

	Amiddes the route you may discern one
	Brave knight, with pipes on shield, ycleped Vernon
	Like a borne fiend along the plain he thundered,
	Prest to be carving throtes, while others plundered.

Then there is a model of a new martingale, which I invented
myself---a great improvement on the Duke of Newcastle's; and
there are the hood and bells of my falcon Cheviot, who spitted
himself on a heron's bill at Horsely-moss---poor Cheviot, there
is not a bird on the perches below, but are kites and riflers compared
to him; and there is my own light fowling-piece, with an
improved firelock; with twenty other treasures, each more
valuable than another---And there, that speaks for itself.''

  She pointed to the carved oak frame of a full-length portrait
by Vandyke, on which were inscribed, in Gothic letters, the
words _Vernon semper viret._ I looked at her for explanation.
``Do you not know,'' said she, with some surprise, ``our motto---
the Vernon motto, where,

	Like the solemn vice iniquity,
	We moralise two meanings in one word

And do you not know our cognisance, the pipes?'' pointing to the
armorial bearings sculptured on the oaken scutcheon, around
which the legend was displayed.

  ``Pipes!---they look more like penny-whistles---But, pray, do
not be angry with my ignorance,'' I continued, observing the
colour mount to her cheeks, ``I can mean no affront to your
armorial bearings, for I do not even know my own.''

  ``You an Osbaldistone, and confess so much!'' she exclaimed.
``Why, Percie, Thornie, John, Dickon---Wilfred himself, might
be your instructor. Even ignorance itself is a plummet over
you.''

  ``With shame I confess it, my dear Miss Vernon, the mysteries
couched under the grim hieroglyphics of heraldry are to me as
unintelligible as those of the pyramids of Egypt.''

  ``What! is it possible?---Why, even my uncle reads Gwillym
sometimes of a winter night---Not know the figures of heraldry!
---of what could your father be thinking?''

  ``Of the figures of arithmetic,'' I answered; ``the most insignificant
unit of which he holds more highly than all the
blazonry of chivalry. But, though I am ignorant to this inexpressible
degree, I have knowledge and taste enough to admire
that splendid picture, in which I think I can discover a family
likeness to you. What ease and dignity in the attitude!---what
richness of colouring---what breadth and depth of shade!''

  ``Is it really a fine painting?'' she asked.

  ``I have seen many works of the renowned artist,'' I replied,
``but never beheld one more to my liking!''

  ``Well, I know as little of pictures as you do of heraldry,''
replied Miss Vernon; ``yet I have the advantage of you, because
I have always admired the painting without understanding its
value.''

  ``While I have neglected pipes and tabors, and all the
whimsical combinations of chivalry, still I am informed that
they floated in the fields of ancient fame. But you will allow
their exterior appearance is not so peculiarly interesting to the
uninformed spectator as that of a fine painting.---Who is the person
here represented?''

  ``My grandfather. He shared the misfortunes of Charles I.,
and, I am sorry to add, the excesses of his son. Our patrimonial
estate was greatly impaired by his prodigality, and was
altogether lost by his successor, my unfortunate father. But
peace be with them who have got it!---it was lost in the cause
of loyalty.''

  ``Your father, I presume, suffered in the political dissensions
of the period?''

  ``He did indeed;---he lost his all. And hence is his child a
dependent orphan---eating the bread of others---subjected to
their caprices, and compelled to study their inclinations; yet
prouder of having had such a father, than if, playing a more
prudent but less upright part, he had left me possessor of all
the rich and fair baronies which his family once possessed.''

  As she thus spoke, the entrance of the servants with dinner
cut off all conversation but that of a general nature.

  When our hasty meal was concluded, and the wine placed
on the table, the domestic informed us, ``that Mr. Rashleigh
had desired to be told when our dinner was removed.''

  ``Tell him,'' said Miss Vernon, ``we shall be happy to see
him if he will step this way---place another wineglass and chair,
and leave the room.---You must retire with him when he goes
away, she continued, addressing herself to me; ``even _my_ liberality
cannot spare a gentleman above eight hours out of the
twenty-four; and I think we have been together for at least
that length of time.''

  ``The old scythe-man has moved so rapidly,'' I answered,
``that I could not count his strides.''

  ``Hush!'' said Miss Vernon, ``here comes Rashleigh;'' and
she drew off her chair, to which I had approached mine rather
closely, so as to place a greater distance between us.
A modest tap at the door,---a gentle manner of opening when
invited to enter,---a studied softness and humility of step and
deportment, announced that the education of Rashleigh Osbaldistone
at the College of St. Omers accorded well with the ideas I
entertained of the manners of an accomplished Jesuit. I need
not add, that, as a sound Protestant, these ideas were not the
most favourable. ``Why should you use the ceremony of knocking,''
said Miss Vernon, ``when you knew that I was not alone?''

  This was spoken with a burst of impatience, as if she had felt
that Rashleigh's air of caution and reserve covered some insinuation
of impertinent suspicion. ``You have taught me the form
of knocking at this door so perfectly, my fair cousin,'' answered
Rashleigh, without change of voice or manner, ``that habit has
become a second nature.''

  ``I prize sincerity more than courtesy, sir, and you know I
do,'' was Miss Vernon's reply.

  ``Courtesy is a gallant gay, a courtier by name and by profession,''
replied Rashleigh, ``and therefore most fit for a lady's
bower.''

  ``But Sincerity is the true knight,'' retorted Miss Vernon,
``and therefore much more welcome, cousin. But to end a debate
not over amusing to your stranger kinsman, sit down, Rashleigh,
and give Mr. Francis Osbaldistone your countenance to his
glass of wine. I have done the honours of the dinner, for the
credit of Osbaldistone Hall.''

  Rashleigh sate down, and filled his glass, glancing his eye from
Diana to me, with an embarrassment which his utmost efforts
could not entirely disguise. I thought he appeared to be uncertain
concerning the extent of confidence she might have reposed
in me, and hastened to lead the conversation into a channel which
should sweep away his suspicion that Diana might have betrayed
any secrets which rested between them. ``Miss Vernon,'' I said,
``Mr. Rashleigh, has recommended me to return my thanks to
you for my speedy disengagement from the ridiculous accusation
of Morris; and, unjustly fearing my gratitude might not be
warm enough to remind me of this duty, she has put my curiosity
on its side, by referring me to you for an account, or rather explanation,
of the events of the day.''

  ``Indeed?'' answered Rashleigh; ``I should have thought''
(looking keenly at Miss Vernon) ``that the lady herself might
have stood interpreter;'' and his eye, reverting from her face,
sought mine, as if to search, from the expression of my features,
whether Diana's communication had been as narrowly limited as
my words had intimated. Miss Vernon retorted his inquisitorial
glance with one of decided scorn; while I, uncertain whether to
deprecate or resent his obvious suspicion, replied, ``If it is your
pleasure, Mr. Rashleigh, as it has been Miss Vernon's, to leave
me in ignorance, I must necessarily submit; but, pray, do not
withhold your information from me on the ground of imagining
that I have already obtained any on the subject. For I tell you,
as a man of honour, I am as ignorant as that picture of anything
relating to the events I have witnessed to-day, excepting that I
understand from Miss Vernon, that you have been kindly active
in my favour.''

  ``Miss Vernon has overrated my humble efforts,'' said Rashleigh,
``though I claim full credit for my zeal. The truth is,
that as I galloped back to get some one of our family to join me.
in becoming your bail, which was the most obvious, or, indeed,
I may say, the only way of serving you which occurred to my
stupidity, I met the man Cawmil---Colville---Campbell, or whatsoever
they call him. I had understood from Morris that he
was present when the robbery took place, and had the good fortune
to prevail on him (with some difficulty, I confess) to tender
his evidence in your exculpation---which I presume was the
means of your being released from an unpleasant situation.''

  ``Indeed?---I am much your debtor for procuring such a
seasonable evidence in my behalf. But I cannot see why (having
been, as he said, a fellow-sufferer with Morris) it should have
required much trouble to persuade him to step forth and bear
evidence, whether to convict the actual robber, or free an innocent
person.''

  ``You do not know the genius of that man's country, sir,''
answered Rashleigh;---``discretion, prudence, and foresight, are
their leading qualities; these are only modified by a narrow-spirited,
but yet ardent patriotism, which forms as it were the
outmost of the concentric bulwarks with which a Scotchman fortifies
himself against all the attacks of a generous philanthropical
principle. Surmount this mound, you find an inner and still
dearer barrier---the love of his province, his village, or, most
probably, his clan; storm this second obstacle, you have a third
---his attachment to his own family---his father, mother, sons,
daughters, uncles, aunts, and cousins, to the ninth generation.
It is within these limits that a Scotchman's social affection
expands itself, never reaching those which are outermost, till
all means of discharging itself in the interior circles have been
exhausted. It is within these circles that his heart throbs,
each pulsation being fainter and fainter, till, beyond the widest
boundary, it is almost unfelt. And what is worst of all, could
you surmount all these concentric outworks, you have an inner
citadel, deeper, higher, and more efficient than them all---a
Scotchman's love for himself.''

  ``All this is extremely eloquent and metaphorical, Rashleigh,''
said Miss Vernon, who listened with unrepressed impatience;
``there are only two objections to it: first, it is _not_ true; secondly,
if true, it is nothing to the purpose.''

  ``It _is_ true, my fairest Diana,'' returned Rashleigh; ``and
moreover, it is most instantly to the purpose. It is true, because
you cannot deny that I know the country and people intimately,
and the character is drawn from deep and accurate consideration
---and it is to the purpose, because it answers Mr. Francis Osbaldistone's
question, and shows why this same wary Scotchman,
considering our kinsman to be neither his countryman, nor a
Campbell, nor his cousin in any of the inextricable combinations
by which they extend their pedigree; and, above all, seeing no
prospect of personal advantage, but, on the contrary, much hazard
of loss of time and delay of business''------

  ``With other inconveniences, perhaps, of a nature yet more
formidable,'' interrupted Miss Vernon.

  ``Of which, doubtless, there might be many,'' said Rashleigh,
continuing in the same tone---``In short, my theory shows why
this man, hoping for no advantage, and afraid of some inconvenience,
might require a degree of persuasion ere he could be
prevailed on to give his testimony in favour of Mr. Osbaldistone.''

  ``It seems surprising to me,'' I observed, ``that during the
glance I cast over the declaration, or whatever it is termed, of
Mr. Morris, he should never have mentioned that Campbell was
in his company when he met the marauders.''

  ``I understood from Campbell, that he had taken his solemn
promise not to mention that circumstance,'' replied Rashleigh:
``his reason for exacting such an engagement you may guess from
what I have hinted---he wished to get back to his own country,
undelayed and unembarrassed by any of the judicial inquiries
which he would have been under the necessity of attending, had
the fact of his being present at the robbery taken air while he
was on this side of the Border. But let him once be as distant
as the Forth, Morris will, I warrant you, come forth with all he
knows about him, and, it may be, a good deal more. Besides,
Campbell is a very extensive dealer in cattle, and has often
occasion to send great droves into Northumberland; and, when
driving such a trade, he would be a great fool to embroil himself
with our Northumbrian thieves, than whom no men who
live are more vindictive.''

  ``I dare be sworn of that,'' said Miss Vernon, with a tone
which implied something more than a simple acquiescence in
the proposition.

  ``Still,'' said I, resuming the subject, ``allowing the force of
the reasons which Campbell might have for desiring that Morris
should be silent with regard to his promise when the robbery
was committed, I cannot yet see how he could attain such an
influence over the man, as to make him suppress his evidence
in that particular, at the manifest risk of subjecting his story to
discredit.''

  Rashleigh agreed with me, that it was very extraordinary,
and seemed to regret that he had not questioned the Scotchman
more closely on that subject, which he allowed looked extremely
mysterious. ``But,'' he asked, immediately after this acquiescence, 
``are you very sure the circumstance of Morris's being
accompanied by Campbell is really not alluded to in his examination?''

  ``I read the paper over hastily,'' said I; ``but it is my strong
impression that no such circumstance is mentioned;---at least,
it must have been touched on very slightly, since it failed to
catch my attention.''

  ``True, true,'' answered Rashleigh, forming his own inference
while he adopted my words; ``I incline to think with you, that
the circumstance must in reality have been mentioned, but so
slightly that it failed to attract your attention. And then, as
to Campbell's interest with Morris, I incline to suppose that it
must have been gained by playing upon his fears. This chicken-hearted
fellow, Morris, is bound, I understand, for Scotland,
destined for some little employment under Government; and,
possessing the courage of the wrathful dove, or most magnanimous
mouse, he may have been afraid to encounter the ill-will
of such a kill-cow as Campbell, whose very appearance would
be enough to fright him out of his little wits. You observed
that Mr. Campbell has at times a keen and animated manner---
something of a martial cast in his tone and bearing.''

  ``I own,'' I replied, ``that his expression struck me as being
occasionally fierce and sinister, and little adapted to his peaceable
professions. Has he served in the army?''

  ``Yes---no---not, strictly speaking, _served;_ but he has been,
I believe, like most of his countrymen, trained to arms. Indeed,
among the hills, they carry them from boyhood to the grave.
So, if you know anything of your fellow-traveller, you will easily
judge, that, going to such a country, he will take cue to avoid
a quarrel, if he can help it, with any of the natives. But, come,
I see you decline your wine---and I too am a degenerate Osbaldistone,
so far as respects the circulation of the bottle. If
you will go to my room, I will hold you a hand at piquet.''

  We rose to take leave of Miss Vernon, who had from time
to time suppressed, apparently with difficulty, a strong temptation
to break in upon Rashleigh's details. As we were about
to leave the room, the smothered fire broke forth.

  ``Mr. Osbaldistone,'' she said, ``your own observation will
enable you to verify the justice, or injustice, of Rashleigh's
suggestions concerning such individuals as Mr. Campbell and
Mr. Morris. But, in slandering Scotland, he has borne false
witness against a whole country; and I request you will allow
no weight to his evidence.''

  ``Perhaps,'' I answered, ``I may find it somewhat difficult
to obey your injunction, Miss Vernon; for I must own I was
bred up with no very favourable idea of our northern neighbours.''

  ``Distrust that part of your education, sir,'' she replied, ``and
let the daughter of a Scotchwoman pray you to respect the land
which gave her parent birth, until your own observation has
proved them to be unworthy of your good opinion. Preserve
your hatred and contempt for dissimulation, baseness, and
falsehood, wheresoever they are to be met with. You will find
enough of all without leaving England.---Adieu, gentlemen, I
wish you good evening.''

  And she signed to the door, with the manner of a princess
dismissing her train.

  We retired to Rashleigh's apartment, where a servant brought
us coffee and cards. I had formed my resolution to press
Rashleigh no farther on the events of the day. A mystery,
and, as I thought, not of a favourable complexion, appeared to
hang over his conduct; but to ascertain if my suspicions were
just, it was necessary to throw him off his guard. We cut for
the deal, and were soon earnestly engaged in our play. I
thought I perceived in this trifling for amusement (for the
stake which Rashleigh proposed was a mere trifle) something
of a fierce and ambitious temper. He seemed perfectly to
understand the beautiful game at which he played, but preferred,
as it were on principle, the risking bold and precarious strokes
to the ordinary rules of play; and neglecting the minor and
better-balanced chances of the game, he hazarded everything
for the chance of piqueing, repiqueing, or capoting his adversary.
So soon as the intervention of a game or two at piquet, like the
music between the acts of a drama, had completely interrupted
our previous course of conversation, Rashleigh appeared to tire
of the game, and the cards were superseded by discourse, in
which he assumed the lead.

  More learned than soundly wise---better acquainted with
men's minds than with the moral principles that ought to
regulate them, he had still powers of conversation which I have
rarely seen equalled, never excelled. Of this his manner implied
some consciousness; at least, it appeared to me that he had
studied hard to improve his natural advantages of a melodious
voice, fluent and happy expression, apt language, and fervid
imagination. He was never loud, never overbearing, never so
much occupied with his own thoughts as to outrun either the
patience or the comprehension of those he conversed with.
His ideas succeeded each other with the gentle but unintermitting
flow of a plentiful and bounteous spring; while I have
heard those of others, who aimed at distinction in conversation,
rush along like the turbid gush from the sluice of a mill-pond,
as hurried, and as easily exhausted. It was late at night ere I
could part from a companion so fascinating; and, when I gained
my own apartment, it cost me no small effort to recall to my
mind the character of Rashleigh, such as I had pictured him
previous to this _t<e^>te-<a`>-t<e^>te._

  So effectual, my dear Tresham, does the sense of being
pleased and amused blunt our faculties of perception and discrimination
of character, that I can only compare it to the
taste of certain fruits, at once luscious and poignant, which
renders our palate totally unfit for relishing or distinguishing
the viands which are subsequently subjected to its criticism.

