



			CHAPTER NINTH.



	One of the thieves come back again! I'll stand close,
	He dares not wrong me now, so near the house,
	And call in vain 'tis, till I see him offer it.
						The Widow.



  ``A stranger!'' echoed the Justice---``not upon business, I
trust, for I'll be''------

  His protestation was cut short by the answer of the man
himself. ``My business is of a nature somewhat onerous and
particular,'' said my acquaintance, Mr. Campbell---for it was
he, the very Scotchman whom I had seen at Northallerton---
``and I must solicit your honour to give instant and heedful
consideration to it.---I believe, Mr. Morris,'' he added, fixing
his eye on that person with a look of peculiar firmness and
almost ferocity---``I believe ye ken brawly what I am---I believe
ye cannot have forgotten what passed at our last meeting on
the road?'' Morris's jaw dropped---his countenance became
the colour of tallow---his teeth chattered, and he gave visible
signs of the utmost consternation. ``Take heart of grace,
man,'' said Campbell, ``and dinna sit clattering your jaws
there like a pair of castanets! I think there can be nae difficulty
in your telling Mr. Justice, that ye have seen me of
yore, and ken me to be a cavalier of fortune, and a man of
honour. Ye ken fu' weel ye will be some time resident in my
vicinity, when I may have the power, as I will possess the
inclination, to do you as good a turn.''

  ``Sir---sir---I believe you to be a man of honour, and, as you
say, a man of fortune. Yes, Mr. Inglewood,'' he added, clearing
his voice, ``I really believe this gentleman to be so.''

  ``And what are this gentleman's commands with me?''
said the Justice, somewhat peevishly. ``One man introduces
another, like the rhymes in the `house that Jack built,' and I
get company without either peace or conversation!''

  ``Both shall be yours, sir,'' answered Campbell, ``in a brief
period of time. I come to release your mind from a piece of
troublesome duty, not to make increment to it.''

  ``Body o' me! then you are welcome as ever Scot was to
England, and that's not saying much. But get on, man---let's
hear what you have got to say at once.''

  ``I presume, this gentleman,'' continued the North Briton,
``told you there was a person of the name of Campbell with him,
when he had the mischance to lose his valise?''

  ``He has not mentioned such a name, from beginning to end
of the matter,'' said the Justice.

  ``Ah! I conceive---I conceive,'' replied Mr. Campbell;---
``Mr. Morris was kindly afeared of committing a stranger into
collision wi' the judicial forms of the country; but as I understand
my evidence is necessary to the compurgation of one
honest gentleman here, Mr. Francis Osbaldistone, wha has been
most unjustly suspected, I will dispense with the precaution.
Ye will therefore'' (he added addressing Morris with the same
determined look and accent) ``please tell Mr. Justice Inglewood,
whether we did not travel several miles together on the road,
in consequence of your own anxious request and suggestion,
reiterated ance and again, baith on the evening that we were
at Northallerton, and there declined by me, but afterwards
accepted, when I overtook ye on the road near Cloberry Allers,
and was prevailed on by you to resign my ain intentions of
proceeding to Rothbury; and, for my misfortune, to accompany
you on your proposed route.''

  ``It's a melancholy truth,'' answered Morris, holding down
his head, as he gave this general assent to the long and leading
question which Campbell put to him, and seemed to acquiesce
in the statement it contained with rueful docility.

  ``And I presume you can also asseverate to his worship, that
no man is better qualified than I am to bear testimony in this
case, seeing that I was by you, and near you, constantly during
the whole occurrence.''

  ``No man better qualified, certainly,'' said Morris, with a
deep and embarrassed sigh.

  ``And why the devil did you not assist him, then,'' said the
Justice, ``since, by Mr. Morris's account, there were but two
robbers; so you were two to two, and you are both stout likely
men?''

  ``Sir, if it please your worship,'' said Campbell, ``I have been
all my life a man of peace and quietness, noways given to broils
or batteries. Mr. Morris, who belongs, as I understand, or hath
belonged, to his Majesty's army, might have used his pleasure
in resistance, he travelling, as I also understand, with a great
charge of treasure; but, for me, who had but my own small
peculiar to defend, and who am, moreover, a man of a pacific
occupation, I was unwilling to commit myself to hazard in the
matter.''

  I looked at Campbell as he muttered these words, and never
recollect to have seen a more singular contrast than that
between the strong daring sternness expressed in his harsh
features, and the air of composed meekness and simplicity which
his language assumed. There was even a slight ironical smile
lurking about the corners of his mouth, which seemed, involuntarily
as it were, to intimate his disdain of the quiet and
peaceful character which he thought proper to assume, and
which led me to entertain strange suspicions that his concern in
the violence done to Morris had been something very different
from that of a fellow-sufferer, or even of a mere spectator.

  Perhaps some suspicious crossed the Justice's mind at the
moment, for he exclaimed, as if by way of ejaculation, ``Body
o' me! but this is a strange story.''

  The North Briton seemed to guess at what was passing in
his mind; for he went on, with a change of manner and tone,
dismissing from his countenance some part of the hypocritical
affectation of humility which had made him obnoxious to
suspicion, and saying, with a more frank and unconstrained
air, ``To say the truth, I am just ane o' those canny folks wha
care not to fight but when they hae gotten something to fight
for, which did not chance to be my predicament when I fell in
wi' these loons. But that your worship may know that I am a
person of good fame and character, please to cast your eye over
that billet.''

  Mr. Inglewood took the paper from his hand, and read, half
aloud, ``These are to certify, that the bearer, Robert Campbell
of---of some place which I cannot pronounce,'' interjected the
Justice---``is a person of good lineage, and peaceable demeanour,
travelling towards England on his own proper affairs, &c.
&c. &c. Given under our hand, at our Castle of Inver---Invera
---rara---Argyle.''

  ``A slight testimonial, sir, which I thought fit to impetrate
from that worthy nobleman'' (here he raised his hand to his
head, as if to touch his hat), ``MacCallum More.''

  ``MacCallum who, sir?'' said the Justice.

  ``Whom the Southern call the Duke of Argyle.''

  ``I know the Duke of Argyle very well to be a nobleman of
great worth and distinction, and a true lover of his country. I
was one of those that stood by him in 1714, when he unhorsed
the Duke of Marlborough out of his command. I wish we had
more noblemen like him. He was an honest Tory in those
days, and hand and glove with Ormond. And he has acceded
to the present Government, as I have done myself, for the peace
and quiet of his country; for I cannot presume that great man
to have been actuated, as violent folks pretend, with the fear of
losing his places and regiment. His testimonial, as you call it,
Mr. Campbell, is perfectly satisfactory; and now, what have
you got to say to this matter of the robbery?''

  ``Briefly this, if it please your worship,---that Mr. Morris
might as weel charge it against the babe yet to be born, or
against myself even, as against this young gentleman, Mr.
Osbaldistone; for I am not only free to depone that the person
whom he took for him was a shorter man, and a thicker man,
but also, for I chanced to obtain a glisk of his visage, as his
fause-face slipped aside, that he was a man of other features
and complexion than those of this young gentleman, Mr.
Osbaldistone. And I believe,'' he added, turning round with
a natural, yet somewhat sterner air, to Mr. Morris, ``that the
gentleman will allow I had better opportunity to take cognisance
wha were present on that occasion than he, being, I believe,
much the cooler o' the twa.''

  ``I agree to it, sir---I agree to it perfectly,'' said Morris,
shrinking back as Campbell moved his chair towards him to
fortify his appeal---``And I incline, sir,'' he added, addressing
Mr. Inglewood, ``to retract my information as to Mr. Osbaldistone;
and I request, sir, you will permit him, sir, to go
about his business, and me to go about mine also; your worship
may have business to settle with Mr. Campbell, and I am
rather in haste to be gone.''

  ``Then, there go the declarations,'' said the Justice, throwing
them into the fire---``And now you are at perfect liberty, Mr
Osbaldistone. And you, Mr. Morris, are set quite at your ease.''

  ``Ay,'' said Campbell, eyeing Morris as he assented with a
rueful grin to the Justice's observations, ``much like the ease
of a tod under a pair of harrows---But fear nothing, Mr.
Morris; you and I maun leave the house thegither. I will see
you safe---I hope you will not doubt my honour, when I say
sae---to the next highway, and then we part company; and
if we do not meet as friends in Scotland, it will be your ain
fault.''

  With such a lingering look of terror as the condemned criminal
throws, when he is informed that the cart awaits him, Morris
arose; but when on his legs, appeared to hesitate. ``I tell
thee, man, fear nothing,'' reiterated Campbell; ``I will keep
my word with you---Why, thou sheep's heart, how do ye ken
but we may can pick up some speerings of your valise, if ye
will be amenable to gude counsel?---Our horses are ready. Bid
the Justice fareweel, man, and show your Southern breeding.''

  Morris, thus exhorted and encouraged, took his leave, under
the escort of Mr. Campbell; but, apparently, new scruples and
terrors had struck him before they left the house, for I heard
Campbell reiterating assurances of safety and protection as they
left the ante-room---``By the soul of my body, man, thou'rt as
safe as in thy father's kailyard---Zounds! that a chield wi' sic a
black beard should hae nae mair heart than a hen-partridge!---
Come on wi' ye, like a frank fallow, anes and for aye.''

  The voices died away, and the subsequent trampling of their
horses announced to us that they had left the mansion of Justice
Inglewood.

  The joy which that worthy magistrate received at this easy
conclusion of a matter which threatened him with some trouble
in his judicial capacity, was somewhat damped by reflection on
what his clerk's views of the transaction might be at his return.
``Now, I shall have Jobson on my shoulders about these d---d
papers---I doubt I should not have destroyed them, after all---
But hang it! it is only paying his fees, and that will make all
smooth---And now, Miss Die Vernon, though I have liberated
all the others, I intend to sign a writ for committing you to the
custody of Mother Blakes, my old housekeeper, for the evening,
and we will send for my neighbour Mrs. Musgrave, and the
Miss Dawkins, and your cousins, and have old Cobs the fiddler,
and be as merry as the maids; and Frank Osbaldistone and I
will have a carouse that will make us fit company for you in
half-an-hour.''

  ``Thanks, most worshipful,'' returned Miss Vernon; ``but, as
matters stand, we must return instantly to Osbaldistone Hall,
where they do not know what has become of us, and relieve my
uncle of his anxiety on my cousin's account, which is just the
same as if one of his own sons were concerned.''

  ``I believe it truly,'' said the Justice; ``for when his eldest
son, Archie, came to a bad end, in that unlucky affair of Sir
John Fenwick's, old Hildebrand used to hollo out his name
as readily as any of the remaining six, and then complain that
he could not recollect which of his sons had been hanged. So,
pray hasten home, and relieve his paternal solicitude, since go
you must. But hark thee hither, heath-blossom,'' he said, pulling
her towards him by the hand, and in a good-humoured tone
of admonition, ``another time let the law take its course, without
putting your pretty finger into her old musty pie, all full of
fragments of law gibberish---French and dog-Latin---And, Die,
my beauty, let young fellows show each other the way through
the moors, in case you should lose your own road, while you are
pointing out theirs, my pretty Will o' the Wisp.''

  With this admonition, he saluted and dismissed Miss Vernon,
and took an equally kind farewell of me.

  ``Thou seems to be a good tight lad, Mr. Frank, and I remember
thy father too---he was my playfellow at school. Hark
thee, lad,---ride early at night, and don't swagger with chance
passengers on the king's highway. What, man! all the king's
liege subjects are not bound to understand joking, and it's ill
cracking jests on matters of felony. And here's poor Die Vernon
too---in a manner alone and deserted on the face of this wide
earth, and left to ride, and run, and scamper, at her own silly
pleasure. Thou must be careful of Die, or, egad, I will turn a
young fellow again on purpose, and fight thee myself, although
I must own it would be a great deal of trouble. And now, get
ye both gone, and leave me to my pipe of tobacco, and my
meditations; for what says the song---

	The Indian leaf doth briefly burn;
	So doth man's strength to weakness turn
	The fire of youth extinguished quite,
	Comes age, like embers, dry and white.
	    Think of this as you take tobacco.''<*>

* [The lines here quoted belong to or were altered from a set of verses at one
* time very popular in England, beginning, _Tobacco that is withered quite._ In Scotland,
* the celebrated Ralph Erskine, author of the _Gospel Sonnets,_ published what
* he called ``_Smoking Spiritualized,_ in two parts. The first part being an Old Meditation
* upon Smoking Tobacco.'' It begins---
*
*	This Indian weed now withered quite,
*	Tho' green at noon, cut down at night,
*	    Shows thy decay;
*	    All flesh is hay.
*	Thus thank, and smoke tobacco.]


  I was much pleased with the gleams of sense and feeling
which escaped from the Justice through the vapours of sloth
and self-indulgence, assured him of my respect to his admonitions,
and took a friendly farewell of the honest magistrate and
his hospitable mansion.

  We found a repast prepared for us in the ante-room, which
we partook of slightly, and rejoined the same servant of Sir
Hildebrand who had taken our horses at our entrance, and who
had been directed, as he informed Miss Vernon, by Mr. Rashleigh,
to wait and attend upon us home. We rode a little way
in silence, for, to say truth, my mind was too much bewildered
with the events of the morning, to permit me to be the first to
break it. At length Miss Vernon exclaimed, as if giving vent
to her own reflections, ``Well, Rashleigh is a man to be feared
and wondered at, and all but loved; he does whatever he
pleases, and makes all others his puppets---has a player ready
to perform every part which he imagines, and an invention and
readiness which supply expedients for every emergency.''

  ``You think, then,'' said I, answering rather to her meaning,
than to the express words she made use of, ``that this Mr.
Campbell, whose appearance was so opportune, and who trussed
up and carried off my accuser as a falcon trusses a partridge,
was an agent of Mr. Rashleigh Osbaldistone's?''

  ``I do guess as much,'' replied Diana; ``and shrewdly suspect,
moreover, that he would hardly have appeared so very much in
the nick of time, if I had not happened to meet Rashleigh in
the hall at the Justice's.''

  ``In that case, my thanks are chiefly due to you, my fair
preserver.''

  ``To be sure they are,'' returned Diana; ``and pray, suppose
them paid, and accepted with a gracious smile, for I do not
care to be troubled with hearing them in good earnest, and am
much more likely to yawn than to behave becoming. In short,
Mr. Frank, I wished to serve you, and I have fortunately been
able to do so, and have only one favour to ask in return, and
that is, that you will say no more about it.---But who comes
here to meet us, `bloody with spurring, fiery-red with haste?'
It is the subordinate man of law, I think---no less than Mr.
Joseph Jobson.''

  And Mr. Joseph Jobson it proved to be, in great haste, and,
as it speedily appeared, in most extreme bad humour. He
came up to us, and stopped his horse, as we were about to pass
with a slight salutation.

  ``So, sir---so, Miss Vernon---ay, I see well enough how it is
---bail put in during my absence, I suppose---I should like to
know who drew the recognisance, that's all. If his worship uses
this form of procedure often, I advise him to get another clerk,
that's all, for I shall certainly demit.''

  ``Or suppose he get this present clerk stitched to his sleeve,
Mr. Jobson,'' said Diana; ``would not that do as well? And
pray, how does Farmer Rutledge, Mr. Jobson? I hope you
found him able to sign, seal, and deliver?''

  This question seemed greatly to increase the wrath of the man
of law. He looked at Miss Vernon with such an air of spite
and resentment, as laid me under a strong temptation to knock
him off his horse with the butt-end of my whip, which I only
suppressed in consideration of his insignificance.

  ``Farmer Rutledge, ma'am?'' said the clerk, as soon as his
indignation permitted him to articulate, ``Farmer Rutledge is
in as handsome enjoyment of his health as you are---it's all a
bam, ma'am---all a bamboozle and a bite, that affair of his illness;
and if you did not know as much before, you know it
now, ma'am.''

  ``La you there now!'' replied Miss Vernon, with an affectation
of extreme and simple wonder, ``sure you don't say so, Mr.
Jobson?''

  ``But I _do_ say so, ma'am,'' rejoined the incensed scribe;
``and moreover I say, that the old miserly clod-breaker called
me pettifogger---pettifogger, ma'am---and said I came to hunt
for a job, ma'am---which I have no more right to have said to
me than any other gentleman of my profession, ma'am---
especially as I am clerk to the peace, having and holding said
office under _Trigesimo Septimo Henrici Octavi_ and _Primo Gulielmi,_
the first of King William, ma'am, of glorious and immortal
memory---our immortal deliverer from papists and pretenders,
and wooden shoes and warming pans, Miss Vernon.''

  ``Sad things, these wooden shoes and warming pans,'' retorted
the young lady, who seemed to take pleasure in augmenting his
wrath;---``and it is a comfort you don't seem to want a warming
pan at present, Mr. Jobson. I am afraid Gaffer Rutledge
has not confined his incivility to language---Are you sure he did
not give you a beating?''

  ``Beating, ma'am!---no''---(very shortly)---``no man alive
shall beat me, I promise you, ma'am.''

  ``That is according as you happen to merit, sir,'' said I:
``for your mode of speaking to this young lady is so unbecoming,
that, if you do not change your tone, I shall think it worth
while to chastise you myself.''

  ``Chastise, sir? and---me, sir?---Do you know whom you
speak to, sir?''

  ``Yes, sir,'' I replied; ``you say yourself you are clerk of
peace to the county; and Gaffer Rutledge says you are a pettifogger;
and in neither capacity are you entitled to be impertinent
to a young lady of fashion.''

  Miss Vernon laid her hand on my arm, and exclaimed,
``Come, Mr. Osbaldistone, I will have no assaults and battery
on Mr. Jobson; I am not in sufficient charity with him to
permit a single touch of your whip---why, he would live on it
for a term at least. Besides, you have already hurt his feelings
sufficiently---you have called him impertinent.''

  ``I don't value his language, Miss,'' said the clerk, somewhat
crestfallen: ``besides, impertinent is not an actionable word;
but pettifogger is slander in the highest degree, and that I will
make Gaffer Rutledge know to his cost, and all who maliciously
repeat the same, to the breach of the public peace, and the
taking away of my private good name.''

  ``Never mind that, Mr. Jobson,'' said Miss Vernon; ``you
know, where there is nothing, your own law allows that the
king himself must lose his rights; and for the taking away of
your good name, I pity the poor fellow who gets it, and wish
you joy of losing it with all my heart.''

  ``Very well, ma'am---good evening, ma'am---I have no more
to say---only there are laws against papists, which it would be
well for the land were they better executed. There's third and
fourth Edward VI., of antiphoners, missals, grailes, professionals,
manuals, legends, pies, portuasses, and those that have such
trinkets in their possession, Miss Vernon---and there's summoning
of papists to take the oaths---and there are popish recusant
convicts under the first of his present Majesty---ay, and there
are penalties for hearing mass---See twenty-third of Queen
Elizabeth, and third James First, chapter twenty-fifth. And
there are estates to be registered, and deeds and wills to be
enrolled, and double taxes to be made, according to the acts in
that case made and provided''-----

  ``See the new edition of the Statutes at Large, published
under the careful revision of Joseph Jobson, Gent., Clerk of the
Peace,'' said Miss Vernon.

  ``Also, and above all,'' continued Jobson,---``for I speak to
your warning---you, Diana Vernon, spinstress, not being a
_femme couverte,_ and being a convict popish recusant, are bound
to repair to your own dwelling, and that by the nearest way,
under penalty of being held felon to the king---and diligently
to seek for passage at common ferries, and to tarry there but
one ebb and flood; and unless you can have it in such places,
to walk every day into the water up to the knees, assaying to
pass over.''

  ``A sort of Protestant penance for my Catholic errors, I
suppose,'' said Miss Vernon, laughing.---``Well, I thank you
for the information, Mr. Jobson, and will hie me home as fast
as I can, and be a better housekeeper in time coming. Good-night,
my dear Mr. Jobson, thou mirror of clerical courtesy.''

  ``Good-night, ma'am, and remember the law is not to be
trifled with.''

  And we rode on our separate ways.

  ``There he goes for a troublesome mischief-making tool,'' said
Miss Vernon, as she gave a glance after him; it is hard that
persons of birth and rank and estate should be subjected to the
official impertinence of such a paltry pickthank as that, merely
for believing as the whole world believed not much above a
hundred years ago---for certainly our Catholic Faith has the
advantage of antiquity at least.''

  ``I was much tempted to have broken the rascal's head,'' I
replied.

  ``You would have acted very like a hasty young man,'' said
Miss Vernon; ``and yet, had my own hand been an ounce
heavier than it is, I think I should have laid its weight upon
him. Well, it does not signify complaining, but there are
three things for which I am much to be pitied, if any one
thought it worth while to waste any compassion upon me.''

  ``And what are these three things, Miss Vernon, may I ask?''

  ``Will you promise me your deepest sympathy, if I tell you?''

  ``Certainly;---can you doubt it?'' I replied, closing my horse
nearer to hers as I spoke, with an expression of interest which
I did not attempt to disguise.

  ``Well, it is very seducing to be pitied, after all; so here are
my three grievances: In the first place, I am a girl, and not a
young fellow, and would be shut up in a mad-house if I did
half the things that I have a mind to;---and that, if I had
your happy prerogative of acting as you list, would make all
the world mad with imitating and applauding me.''

  ``I can't quite afford you the sympathy you expect upon this
score,'' I replied; ``the misfortune is so general, that it belongs
to one half of the species; and the other half''------

  ``Are so much better cared for, that they are jealous of their
prerogatives,'' interrupted Miss Vernon---``I forgot you were a
party interested. Nay,'' she said, as I was going to speak,
``that soft smile is intended to be the preface of a very pretty
compliment respecting the peculiar advantages which Die
Vernon's friends and kinsmen enjoy, by her being born one of
their Helots; but spare me the utterance, my good friend, and
let us try whether we shall agree better on the second count of
my indictment against fortune, as that quill-driving puppy
would call it. I belong to an oppressed sect and antiquated
religion, and, instead of getting credit for my devotion, as is
due to all good girls beside, my kind friend, Justice Inglewood,
may send me to the house of correction, merely for worshipping
God in the way of my ancestors, and say, as old Pembroke did
to the Abbess of Wilton,<*> when he usurped her convent and

* Note F. The Abbess of Wilton.

establishment, `Go spin, you jade,---Go spin.' ''

  ``This is not a cureless evil,'' said I gravely. ``Consult some
of our learned divines, or consult your own excellent understanding,
Miss Vernon; and surely the particulars in which
our religious creed differs from that in which you have been
educated''------

  ``Hush!'' said Diana, placing her fore-finger on her mouth,
---``Hush! no more of that. Forsake the faith of my gallant
fathers! I would as soon, were I a man, forsake their banner
when the tide of battle pressed hardest against it, and turn,
like a hireling recreant, to join the victorious enemy.''

  ``I honour your spirit, Miss Vernon; and as to the inconveniences
to which it exposes you, I can only say, that wounds
sustained for the sake of conscience carry their own balsam
with the blow.''

  ``Ay; but they are fretful and irritating, for all that. But I
see, hard of heart as you are, my chance of beating hemp, or
drawing out flax into marvellous coarse thread, affects you as
little as my condemnation to coif and pinners, instead of beaver
and cockade; so I will spare myself the fruitless pains of telling
my third cause of vexation.''

  ``Nay, my dear Miss Vernon, do not withdraw your confidence,
and I will promise you, that the threefold sympathy due
to your very unusual causes of distress shall be all duly and
truly paid to account of the third, providing you assure me,
that it is one which you neither share with all womankind, nor
even with every Catholic in England, who, God bless you, are
still a sect more numerous than we Protestants, in our zeal for
church and state, would desire them to be.''

  ``It is indeed,'' said Diana, with a manner greatly altered,
and more serious than I had yet seen her assume, ``a misfortune
that well merits compassion. I am by nature, as you
may easily observe, of a frank and unreserved disposition---a
plain true-hearted girl, who would willingly act openly and
honestly by the whole world, and yet fate has involved me in
such a series of nets and toils, and entanglements, that I dare
hardly speak a word for fear of consequences---not to myself,
but to others.''

  ``That is indeed a misfortune, Miss Vernon, which I do
most sincerely compassionate, but which I should hardly have
anticipated. ''

  ``O, Mr. Osbaldistone, if you but knew---if any one knew,
what difficulty I sometimes find in hiding an aching heart with
a smooth brow, you would indeed pity me. I do wrong, perhaps,
in speaking to you even thus far on my own situation; but you
are a young man of sense and penetration---you cannot but
long to ask me a hundred questions on the events of this day---
on the share which Rashleigh has in your deliverance from this
petty scrape---upon many other points which cannot but excite
your attention; and I cannot bring myself to answer with the
necessary falsehood and finesse---I should do it awkwardly, and
lose your good opinion, if I have any share of it, as well as my
own. It is best to say at once, Ask me no questions,---I have
it not in my power to reply to them.''

  Miss Vernon spoke these words with a tone of feeling
which could not but make a corresponding impression upon
me. I assured her she had neither to fear my urging her with
impertinent questions, nor my misconstruing her declining to
answer those which might in themselves be reasonable, or at
least natural.

  ``I was too much obliged,'' I said, ``by the interest she had
taken in my affairs, to misuse the opportunity her goodness had
afforded me of prying into hers---I only trusted and entreated,
that if my services could at any time be useful, she would command
them without doubt or hesitation.''

  ``Thank you---thank you,'' she replied; ``your voice does
not ring the cuckoo chime of compliment, but speaks like
that of one who knows to what he pledges himself. If---but
it is impossible---but yet, if an opportunity should occur, I
will ask you if you remember this promise; and I assure you,
I shall not be angry if I find you have forgotten it, for it is
enough that you are sincere in your intentions just now---much
may occur to alter them ere I call upon you, should that
moment ever come, to assist Die Vernon, as if you were Die
Vernon's brother.''

  ``And if I were Die Vernon's brother,'' said I, ``there could
not be less chance that I should refuse my assistance---And now
I am afraid I must not ask whether Rashleigh was willingly
accessory to my deliverance?''

  ``Not of me; but you may ask it of himself, and depend
upon it, he will say _yes;_ for rather than any good action should
walk through the world like an unappropriated adjective in an
ill-arranged sentence, he is always willing to stand noun substantive
to it himself.''

  ``And I must not ask whether this Campbell be himself the
party who eased Mr. Morris of his portmanteau,---or whether
the letter, which our friend the attorney received, was not a
finesse to withdraw him from the scene of action, lest he should
have marred the happy event of my deliverance? And I must
not ask''------

  ``You must ask nothing of me,'' said Miss Vernon; ``so it is
quite in vain to go on putting cases. You are to think just as
well of me as if I had answered all these queries, and twenty
others besides, as glibly as Rashleigh could have done; and
observe, whenever I touch my chin just so, it is a sign that I
cannot speak upon the topic which happens to occupy your
attention. I must settle signals of correspondence with you,
because you are to be my confidant and my counsellor, only you
are to know nothing whatever of my affairs.''

  ``Nothing can be more reasonable,'' I replied, laughing; ``and
the extent of your confidence will, you may rely upon it, only
be equalled by the sagacity of my counsels.''

  This sort of conversation brought us, in the highest good-humour
with each other, to Osbaldistone Hall, where we found
the family far advanced in the revels of the evening.

  ``Get some dinner for Mr. Osbaldistone and me in the library,''
said Miss Vernon to a servant.---``I must have some compassion
upon you,'' she added, turning to me, ``and provide against your
starving in this mansion of brutal abundance; otherwise I am
not sure that I should show you my private haunts. This same
library is my den---the only corner of the Hall-house where I
am safe from the Ourang-Outangs, my cousins. They never
venture there, I suppose for fear the folios should fall down
and crack their skulls; for they will never affect their heads in
any other way---So follow me.''

  And I followed through hall and bower, vaulted passage and
winding stair, until we reached the room where she had ordered
our refreshments.

