




		CHAPTER THIRTY-FIFTH.



	A hopeless darkness settles o'er my fate;
	I've seen the last look of her heavenly eyes,---
	I've heard the last sound of her blessed voice,---
	I've seen her fair form from my sight depart;
	My doom is closed.
						Count Basil.



  ``I ken not what to make of you, Mr. Osbaldistone,'' said
MacGregor, as he pushed the flask towards me. ``You eat not,
you show no wish for rest; and yet you drink not, though that
flask of Bourdeaux might have come out of Sir Hildebrand's
ain cellar. Had you been always as abstinent, you would have
escaped the deadly hatred of your cousin Rashleigh.''

  ``Had I been always prudent,'' said I, blushing at the scene
he recalled to my recollection, ``I should have escaped a worse
evil---the reproach of my own conscience.''

  MacGregor cast a keen and somewhat fierce glance on me,
as if to read whether the reproof, which he evidently felt, had
been intentionally conveyed. He saw that I was thinking of
myself, not of him, and turned his face towards the fire with a
deep sigh. I followed his example, and each remained for a
few minutes wrapt in his own painful reverie. All in the hut
were now asleep, or at least silent, excepting ourselves.

  MacGregor first broke silence, in the tone of one who takes
up his determination to enter on a painful subject. ``My cousin
Nicol Jarvie means well,'' he said, ``but he presses ower hard
on the temper and situation of a man like me, considering what
I have been---what I have been forced to become---and, above
all, that which has forced me to become what I am.''

  He paused; and, though feeling the delicate nature of the
discussion in which the conversation was likely to engage me, I
could not help replying, that I did not doubt his present situation
had much which must be most unpleasant to his feelings.

  ``I should be happy to learn,'' I added, ``that there is an honourable
chance of your escaping from it.''

  ``You speak like a boy,'' returned MacGregor, in a low tone
that growled like distant thunder---``like a boy, who thinks the
auld gnarled oak can be twisted as easily as the young sapling.
Can I forget that I have been branded as an outlaw---stigmatised
as a traitor---a price set on my head as if I had been a
wolf---my family treated as the dam and cubs of the hill-fox,
whom all may torment, vilify, degrade, and insult---the very
name which came to me from a long and noble line of martial
ancestors, denounced, as if it were a spell to conjure up the
devil with?''

  As he went on in this manner, I could plainly see, that, by
the enumeration of his wrongs, he was lashing himself up into
a rage, in order to justify in his own eyes the errors they had
led him into. In this he perfectly succeeded; his light grey
eyes contracting alternately and dilating their pupils, until they
seemed actually to flash with flame, while he thrust forward
and drew back his foot, grasped the hilt of his dirk, extended
his arm, clenched his fist, and finally rose from his seat.

  ``And they _shall_ find,'' he said, in the same muttered but
deep tone of stifled passion, ``that the name they have dared
to proscribe---that the name of MacGregor---_is_ a spell to raise
the wild devil withal. _They_ shall hear of my vengeance, that
would scorn to listen to the story of my wrongs---The miserable
Highland drover, bankrupt, barefooted,---stripped of all, dishonoured
and hunted down, because the avarice of others
grasped at more than that poor all could pay, shall burst on
them in an awful change. They that scoffed at the grovelling
worm, and trode upon him, may cry and howl when they see
the stoop of the flying and fiery-mouthed dragon.---But why do
I speak of all this?'' he said, sitting down again, and in a
calmer tone---``Only ye may opine it frets my patience, Mr.
Osbaldistone, to be hunted like an otter, or a sealgh, or a salmon
upon the shallows, and that by my very friends and neighbours;
and to have as many sword-cuts made, and pistols flashed at
me, as I had this day in the ford of Avondow, would try a
saint's temper, much more a Highlander's, who are not famous
for that gude gift, as ye may hae heard, Mr. Osbaldistone.---
But as thing bides wi' me o' what Nicol said;---I'm vexed for
the bairns---I'm vexed when I think o' Hamish and Robert
living their father's life.'' And yielding to despondence on
account of his sons, which he felt not upon his own, the father
rested his head upon his hand.

  I was much affected, Will. All my life long I have been
more melted by the distress under which a strong, proud, and
powerful mind is compelled to give way, than by the more
easily excited sorrows of softer dispositions. The desire of
aiding him rushed strongly on my mind, notwithstanding the
apparent difficulty, and even impossibility, of the task.

  ``We have extensive connections abroad,'' said I: ``might
not your sons, with some assistance---and they are well entitled
to what my father's house can give---find an honourable resource
in foreign service?''

  I believe my countenance showed signs of sincere emotion;
but my companion, taking me by the hand, as I was going to
speak farther, said---``I thank---I thank ye---but let us say nae
mair o' this. I did not think the eye of man would again have
seen a tear on MacGregor's eye-lash.'' He dashed the moisture
from his long gray eye-lash and shaggy red eye-brow with the
back of his hand. ``To-morrow morning,'' he said, ``we'll talk
of this, and we will talk, too, of your affairs---for we are early
starters in the dawn, even when we have the luck to have good
beds to sleep in. Will ye not pledge me in a grace cup?'' I
declined the invitation.

  ``Then, by the soul of St. Maronoch! I must pledge myself,''
and he poured out and swallowed at least half-a-quart
of wine.

  I laid myself down to repose, resolving to delay my own
inquiries until his mind should be in a more composed state.
Indeed, so much had this singular man possessed himself of my
imagination, that I felt it impossible to avoid watching him for
some minutes after I had flung myself on my heath mattress to
seeming rest. He walked up and down the hut, crossed himself
from time to time, muttering over some Latin prayer of the
Catholic church; then wrapped himself in his plaid, with his
naked sword on one side, and his pistol on the other, so disposing
the folds of his mantle that he could start up at a
moment's warning, with a weapon in either hand, ready for
instant combat. In a few minutes his heavy breathing
announced that he was fast asleep. Overpowered by fatigue,
and stunned by the various unexpected and extraordinary
scenes of the day, I, in my turn, was soon overpowered by a
slumber deep and overwhelming, from which, notwithstanding
every cause for watchfulness, I did not awake until the next
morning.

  When I opened my eyes, and recollected my situation, I
found that MacGregor had already left the hut. I awakened
the Bailie, who, after many a snort and groan, and some heavy
complaints of the soreness of his bones, in consequence of the
unwonted exertions of the preceding day, was at length able to
comprehend the joyful intelligence, that the assets carried off
by Rashleigh Osbaldistone had been safely recovered. The
instant he understood my meaning, he forgot all his grievances,
and, bustling up in a great hurry, proceeded to compare the
contents of the packet which I put into his hands, with Mr.
Owen's memorandums, muttering, as he went on, ``Right,
right---the real thing---Bailie and Whittington---where's Bailie
and Whittington?---seven hundred, six, and eight---exact to a
fraction---Pollock and Peelman---twenty-eight, seven---exact---
Praise be blest!---Grub and Grinder---better men cannot be---
three hundred and seventy---Gliblad---twenty; I doubt Gliblad's
ganging---Slipprytongue; Slipprytongue's gaen---but they
are sma'sums---sma'sums---the rest's a'right---Praise be blest!
we have got the stuff, and may leave this doleful country. I
shall never think on Loch-Ard but the thought will gar me grew
again''

  ``I am sorry, cousin,'' said MacGregor, who entered the hut
during the last observation, ``I have not been altogether in
the circumstances to make your reception sic as I could have
desired---natheless, if you would condescend to visit my puir
dwelling''------

  ``Muckle obliged, muckle obliged,'' answered Mr. Jarvie,
very hastily---``But we maun be ganging---we maun be jogging,
Mr. Osbaldistone and me---business canna wait.''

  ``Aweel, kinsman,'' replied the Highlander, ``ye ken our
fashion---foster the guest that comes---further him that maun
gang. But ye cannot return by Drymen---I must set you on
Loch Lomond, and boat ye down to the Ferry o' Balloch, and
send your nags round to meet ye there. It's a maxim of a wise
man never to return by the same road he came, providing
another's free to him.''

  ``Ay, ay, Rob,'' said the Bailie, ``that's ane o' the maxims ye
learned when ye were a drover;---ye caredna to face the tenants
where your beasts had been taking a rug of their moorland
grass in the by-ganging, and I doubt your road's waur marked
now than it was then.''

  ``The mair need not to travel it ower often, kinsman,'' replied
Rob; ``but I'se send round your nags to the ferry wi' Dougal
Gregor, wha is converted for that purpose into the Bailie's man,
coming---not, as ye may believe, from Aberfoil or Rob Roy's
country, but on a quiet jaunt from Stirling. See, here he is.''

  ``I wadna hae ken'd the creature,'' said Mr. Jarvie; nor
indeed was it easy to recognise the wild Highlander, when he
appeared before the door of the cottage, attired in a hat,
periwig, and riding-coat, which had once called Andrew Fairservice
master, and mounted on the Bailie's horse, and leading
mine. He received his last orders from his master to avoid
certain places where he might be exposed to suspicion---to
collect what intelligence he could in the course of his journey,
and to await our coming at an appointed place, near the Ferry
of Balloch.

  At the same time, MacGregor invited us to accompany him
upon our own road, assuring us that we must necessarily march
a few miles before breakfast, and recommending a dram of
brandy as a proper introduction to the journey, in which he was
pledged by the Bailie, who pronounced it ``an unlawful and
perilous habit to begin the day wi' spirituous liquors, except
to defend the stomach (whilk was a tender part) against the
morning mist; in whilk case his father the deacon had recommended
a dram, by precept and example.''

  ``Very true, kinsman,'' replied Rob, ``for which reason we,
who are Children of the Mist, have a right to drink brandy from
morning till night.''

  The Bailie, thus refreshed, was mounted on a small Highland
pony; another was offered for my use, which, however, I declined;
and we resumed, under very different guidance and
auspices, our journey of the preceding day.

  Our escort consisted of MacGregor, and five or six of the
handsomest, best armed, and most athletic mountaineers of his
band, and whom he had generally in immediate attendance upon
his own person.

  When we approached the pass, the scene of the skirmish of
the preceding day, and of the still more direful deed which
followed it, MacGregor hastened to speak, as if it were rather
to what he knew must be necessarily passing in my mind, than
to any thing I had said---he spoke, in short, to my thoughts, and
not to my words.

  ``You must think hardly of us, Mr. Osbaldistone, and it is
not natural that it should be otherwise. But remember, at
least, we have not been unprovoked. We are a rude and an
ignorant, and it may be a violent and passionate, but we are
not a cruel people. The land might be at peace and in law
for us, did they allow us to enjoy the blessings of peaceful law.
But we have been a persecuted generation.''

  ``And persecution,'' said the Bailie, ``maketh wise men
mad.''

  ``What must it do then to men like us, living as our fathers
did a thousand years since, and possessing scarce more lights
than they did? Can we view their bluidy edicts against us---
their hanging, heading, hounding, and hunting down an ancient
and honourable name---as deserving better treatment than that
which enemies give to enemies?---Here I stand, have been in
twenty frays, and never hurt man but when I was in het bluid;
and yet they wad betray me and hang me like a masterless dog,
at the gate of ony great man that has an ill will at me.''

  I replied, ``that the proscription of his name and family
sounded in English ears as a very cruel and arbitrary law;''
and having thus far soothed him, I resumed my propositions
of obtaining military employment for himself, if he chose it, and
his sons, in foreign parts. MacGregor shook me very cordially
by the hand, and detaining me, so as to permit Mr. Jarvie to
precede us, a man<oe>uvre for which the narrowness of the road
served as an excuse, he said to me---``You are a kind-hearted
and an honourable youth, and understand, doubtless, that which
is due to the feelings of a man of honour. But the heather that
I have trode upon when living, must bloom ower me when I am
dead---my heart would sink, and my arm would shrink and
wither like fern in the frost, were I to lose sight of my native
hills; nor has the world a scene that would console me for the
loss of the rocks and cairns, wild as they are, that you see
around us.---And Helen---what could become of her, were I
to leave her the subject of new insult and atrocity?---or how
could she bear to be removed from these scenes, where the
remembrance of her wrongs is aye sweetened by the recollection
of her revenge?---I was once so hard put at by my Great
enemy, as I may well ca' him, that I was forced e'en to gie way
to the tide, and removed myself and my people and family from
our dwellings in our native land, and to withdraw for a time
into MacCallum More's country---and Helen made a Lament
on our departure, as weel as MacRimmon<*> himsell could hae

* The MacRimmons or MacCrimonds were hereditary pipers to the chiefs
* of MacLeod, and celebrated for their talents. The pibroch said to have
* been composed by Helen MacGregor is still in existence. See the Introduction
* to this Novel.

framed it---and so piteously sad and waesome, that our hearts
amaist broke as we sate and listened to her---it was like the
wailing of one that mourns for the mother that bore him---the
tears came down the rough faces of our gillies as they hearkened;
and I wad not have the same touch of heartbreak again, no,
not to have all the lands that ever were owned by MacGregor.''

  ``But your sons,'' I said---``they are at the age when your
countrymen have usually no objection to see the world?''

  ``And I should be content,'' he replied, ``that they pushed
their fortune in the French or Spanish service, as is the wont
of Scottish cavaliers of honour; and last night your plan
seemed feasible eneugh---But I hae seen his Excellency this
morning before ye were up.''

  ``Did he then quarter so near us?'' said I, my bosom throbbing
with anxiety.

  ``Nearer than ye thought,'' was MacGregor's reply; ``but
he seemed rather in some shape to jalouse your speaking to the
young leddy; and so you see''------

  ``There was no occasion for jealousy,'' I answered, with some
haughtiness;---``I should not have intruded on his privacy.''

  ``But ye must not be offended, or look out from amang your
curls then, like a wildcat out of an ivy-tod, for ye are to understand
that he wishes most sincere weel to you, and has proved it.
And it's partly that whilk has set the heather on fire e'en now.''

  ``Heather on fire?'' said I. ``I do not understand you.''

  ``Why,'' resumed MacGregor, ``ye ken weel eneugh that
women and gear are at the bottom of a' the mischief in this
warld. I hae been misdoubting your cousin Rashleigh since
ever he saw that he wasna to get Die Vernon for his marrow,
and I think he took grudge at his Excellency mainly on that
account. But then came the splore about the surrendering your
papers---and we hae now gude evidence, that, sae soon as he
was compelled to yield them up, he rade post to Stirling, and
tauld the Government all and mair than all, that was gaun
doucely on amang us hill-folk; and, doubtless, that was the
way that the country was laid to take his Excellency and the
leddy, and to make sic an unexpected raid on me. And I hae
as little doubt that the poor deevil Morris, whom he could gar
believe onything, was egged on by him, and some of the Lowland
gentry, to trepan me in the gate he tried to do. But if
Rashleigh Osbaldistone were baith the last and best of his
name, and granting that he and I ever forgather again, the
fiend go down my weasand with a bare blade at his belt, if we
part before my dirk and his best blude are weel acquainted thegither!''

  He pronounced the last threat with an ominous frown, and
the appropriate gesture of his hand upon his dagger.

  ``I should almost rejoice at what has happened,'' said I,
``could I hope that Rashleigh's treachery might prove the
means of preventing the explosion of the rash and desperate
intrigues in which I have long suspected him to be a prime
agen.''

  ``Trow ye na that,'' said Rob Roy; ``traitor's word never yet
hurt honest cause. He was ower deep in our secrets, that's
true; and had it not been so, Stirling and Edinburgh Castles
would have been baith in our hands by this time, or briefly
hereafter, whilk is now scarce to be hoped for. But there are
ower mony engaged, and far ower gude a cause to be gien up
for the breath of a traitor's tale, and that will be seen and heard
of ere it be lang. And so, as I was about to say, the best of
my thanks to you for your offer anent my sons, whilk last night
I had some thoughts to have embraced in their behalf. But I
see that this villain's treason will convince our great folks that
they must instantly draw to a head, and make a blow for it, or
be taen in their houses, coupled up like hounds, and driven up
to London like the honest noblemen and gentlemen in the year
seventeen hundred and seven. Civil war is like a cockatrice;---
we have sitten hatching the egg that held it for ten years, and
might hae sitten on for ten years mair, when in comes Rashleigh,
and chips the shell, and out bangs the wonder amang us,
and cries to fire and sword. Now in sic a matter I'll hae need
o' a' the hands I can mak; and, nae disparagement to the
Kings of France and Spain, whom I wish very weel to, King
James is as gude a man as ony o' them, and has the best right
to Hamish and Rob, being his natural-born subjects.''

  I easily comprehended that these words boded a general
national convulsion; and, as it would have been alike useless
and dangerous to have combated the political opinions of my
guide, at such a place and moment, I contented myself with
regretting the promiscuous scene of confusion and distress likely
to arise from any general exertion in favour of the exiled royal
family.

  ``Let it come, man---let it come,'' answered MacGregor; ``ye
never saw dull weather clear without a shower; and if the
world is turned upside down, why, honest men have the better
chance to cut bread out of it.''

  I again attempted to bring him back to the subject of Diana;
but although on most occasions and subjects he used a freedom
of speech which I had no great delight in listening to, yet upon
that alone which was most interesting to me, he kept a degree
of scrupulous reserve, and contented himself with intimating,
``that he hoped the leddy would be soon in a quieter country
than this was like to be for one while.'' I was obliged to be
content with this answer, and to proceed in the hope that
accident might, as on a former occasion, stand my friend, and
allow me at least the sad gratification of bidding farewell to the
object which had occupied such a share of my affections, so much
beyond even what I had supposed, till I was about to be separated
from her for ever.

  We pursued the margin of the lake for about six English
miles, through a devious and beautifully variegated path, until
we attained a sort of Highland farm, or assembly of hamlets,
near the head of that fine sheet of water, called, if I mistake
not, Lediart, or some such name. Here a numerous party of
MacGregor's men were stationed in order to receive us. The
taste as well as the eloquence of tribes in a savage, or, to speak
more properly, in a rude state, is usually just, because it is
unfettered by system and affectation; and of this I had an
example in the choice these mountaineers had made of a place
to receive their guests. It has been said that a British
monarch would judge well to receive the embassy of a rival
power in the cabin of a man-of-war; and a Highland leader
acted with some propriety in choosing a situation where the
natural objects of grandeur proper to his country might have
their full effect on the minds of his guests.

  We ascended about two hundred yards from the shores of the
lake, guided by a brawling brook, and left on the right hand
four or five Highland huts, with patches of arable land around
them, so small as to show that they must have been worked
with the spade rather than the plough, cut as it were out of the
surrounding copsewood, and waving with crops of barley and
oats. Above this limited space the hill became more steep;
and on its edge we descried the glittering arms and waving
drapery of about fifty of MacGregor's followers. They were
stationed on a spot, the recollection of which yet strikes me
with admiration. The brook, hurling its waters downwards
from the mountain, had in this spot encountered a barrier rock,
over which it had made its way by two distinct leaps. The
first fall, across which a magnificent old oak, slanting out from
the farther bank, partly extended itself as if to shroud the
dusky stream of the cascade, might be about twelve feet high;
the broken waters were received in a beautiful stone basin,
almost as regular as if hewn by a sculptor; and after wheeling
around its flinty margin, they made a second precipitous dash,
through a dark and narrow chasm, at least fifty feet in depth,
and from thence, in a hurried, but comparatively a more gentle
course, escaped to join the lake.

  With the natural taste which belongs to mountaineers, and
especially to the Scottish Highlanders, whose feelings, I have observed,
are often allied with the romantic and poetical, Rob Roy's
wife and followers had prepared our morning repast in a scene
well calculated to impress strangers with some feelings of awe.
They are also naturally a grave and proud people, and, however
rude in our estimation, carry their ideas of form and politeness
to an excess that would appear overstrained, except from the
demonstration of superior force which accompanies the display
of it; for it must be granted that the air of punctilious deference
and rigid etiquette which would seem ridiculous in an
ordinary peasant, has, like the salute of a _corps-de-garde,_ a
propriety when tendered by a Highlander completely armed.
There was, accordingly, a good deal of formality in our approach
and reception.

  The Highlanders, who had been dispersed on the side of the
hill, drew themselves together when we came in view, and,
standing firm and motionless, appeared in close column behind
three figures, whom I soon recognised to be Helen MacGregor
and her two sons. MacGregor himself arranged his attendants
in the rear, and, requesting Mr. Jarvie to dismount where the
ascent became steep, advanced slowly, marshalling us forward
at the head of the troop. As we advanced, we heard the wild
notes of the bagpipes, which lost their natural discord from
being mingled with the dashing sound of the cascade. When
we came close, the wife of MacGregor came forward to meet us.
Her dress was studiously arranged in a more feminine taste than
it had been on the preceding day, but her features wore the
same lofty, unbending, and resolute character; and as she folded
my friend the Bailie in an unexpected and apparently unwelcome
embrace, I could perceive by the agitation of his wig, his
back, and the calves of his legs, that he felt much like to one
who feels himself suddenly in the gripe of a she-bear, without
being able to distinguish whether the animal is in kindness or
in wrath.

  ``Kinsman,'' she said, ``you are welcome---and you, too,
stranger,'' she added, releasing my alarmed companion, who
instinctively drew back and settled his wig, and addressing
herself to me---``you also are welcome. You came,'' she added,
``to our unhappy country, when our bloods were chafed, and
our hands were red. Excuse the rudeness that gave you a
rough welcome, and lay it upon the evil times, and not upon
us.'' All this was said with the manners of a princess, and in
the tone and style of a court. Nor was there the least tincture
of that vulgarity, which we naturally attach to the Lowland
Scottish. There was a strong provincial accentuation, but,
otherwise, the language rendered by Helen MacGregor, out of
the native and poetical Gaelic, into English, which she had
acquired as we do learned tongues, but had probably never
heard applied to the mean purposes of ordinary life, was graceful,
flowing, and declamatory. Her husband, who had in his
time played many parts, used a much less elevated and emphatic
dialect;---but even _his_ language rose in purity of expression, as
you may have remarked, if I have been accurate in recording
it, when the affairs which he discussed were of an agitating and
important nature; and it appears to me in his case, and in
that of some other Highlanders whom I have known, that,
when familiar and facetious, they used the Lowland Scottish
dialect,---when serious and impassioned, their thoughts arranged
themselves in the idiom of their native language; and in the
latter case, as they uttered the corresponding ideas in English,
the expressions sounded wild, elevated, and poetical. In fact,
the language of passion is almost always pure as well as vehement,
and it is no uncommon thing to hear a Scotchman, when
overwhelmed by a countryman with a tone of bitter and fluent
upbraiding, reply by way of taunt to his adversary, ``You have
gotten to your English.''

  Be this as it may, the wife of MacGregor invited us to a
refreshment spread out on the grass, which abounded with all
the good things their mountains could offer, but was clouded
by the dark and undisturbed gravity which sat on the brow of
our hostess, as well as by our deep and anxious recollection of
what had taken place on the preceding day. It was in vain
that the leader exerted himself to excite mirth;---a chill hung
over our minds, as if the feast had been funereal; and every
bosom felt light when it was ended.

  ``Adieu, cousin,'' she said to Mr. Jarvie, as we rose from the
entertainment; ``the best wish Helen MacGregor can give to
a friend is, that he may see her no more.''

  The Bailie struggled to answer, probably with some commonplace
maxim of morality;---but the calm and melancholy sternness
of her countenance bore down and disconcerted the mechanical
and formal importance of the magistrate. He coughed,---
hemmed,---bowed,---and was silent.

  ``For you, stranger,'' she said, ``I have a token, from one
whom you can never''------

  ``Helen!'' interrupted MacGregor, in a loud and stern voice,
``what means this?---have you forgotten the charge?''

  ``MacGregor,'' she replied, ``I have forgotten nought that
is fitting for me to remember. It is not such hands as these,''
and she stretched forth her long, sinewy, and bare arm, ``that
are fitting to convey love-tokens, were the gift connected with
aught but misery. Young man,'' she said, presenting me with
a ring, which I well remembered as one of the few ornaments
that Miss Vernon sometimes wore, ``this comes from one whom
you will never see more. If it is a joyless token, it is well fitted
to pass through the hands of one to whom joy can never be
known. Her last words were---Let him forget me for ever.''

  ``And can she,'' I said, almost without being conscious that
I spoke, ``suppose that is possible?''

  ``All may be forgotten,'' said the extraordinary female who
addressed me,---``all---but the sense of dishonour, and the desire
of vengeance.''

  ``_Seid suas!_''<*> cried the MacGregor, stamping with impatience.

* ``Strike up.''

The bagpipes sounded, and with their thrilling and
jarring tones cut short our conference. Our leave of our hostess
was taken by silent gestures; and we resumed our journey with
an additional proof on my part, that I was beloved by Diana,
and was separated from her for ever.
