




		CHAPTER NINETEENTH.



	Where longs to fall yon rifted spire,
	  As weary of the insulting air,---
	The poet's thoughts, the warrior's fire,
	  The lover's sighs, are sleeping there.
					Langhorne.



  At the first Scotch town which we reached, my guide sought
out his friend and counsellor, to consult upon the proper and
legal means of converting into his own lawful property the
``bonny creature,'' which was at present his own only by one
of those sleight-of-hand arrangements which still sometimes took
place in that once lawless district. I was somewhat diverted
with the dejection of his looks on his return. He had, it seems,
been rather too communicative to his confidential friend, the
attorney; and learned with great dismay, in return for his
unsuspecting frankness, that Mr. Touthope had, during his
absence, been appointed clerk to the peace of the county, and
was bound to communicate to justice all such achievements as
that of his friend Mr. Andrew Fairservice. There was a necessity,
this alert member of the police stated, for arresting the
horse, and placing him in Bailie Trumbull's stable, therein to
remain at livery, at the rate of twelve shillings (Scotch) per
diem, until the question of property was duly tried and debated.
He even talked as if, in strict and rigorous execution of his
duty, he ought to detain honest Andrew himself; but on my
guide's most piteously entreating his forbearance, he not only
desisted from this proposal, but made a present to Andrew of a
broken-winded and spavined pony, in order to enable him to
pursue his journey. It is true, he qualified this act of generosity
by exacting from poor Andrew an absolute cession of his
right and interest in the gallant palfrey of Thorncliff Osbaldistone---
a transference which Mr. Touthope represented as of
very little consequence, since his unfortunate friend, as he facetiously
observed, was likely to get nothing of the mare excepting
the halter.

  Andrew seemed woeful and disconcerted, as I screwed out of
him these particulars; for his northern pride was cruelly
pinched by being compelled to admit that attorneys were
attorneys on both sides of the Tweed; and that Mr. Clerk
Touthope was not a farthing more sterling coin than Mr. Clerk
Jobson.

  ``It wadna hae vexed him half sae muckle to hae been
cheated out o' what might amaist be said to be won with the
peril o' his craig, had it happened amang the Inglishers; but
it was an unco thing to see hawks pike out hawks' e'en, or
ae kindly Scot cheat anither. But nae doubt things were
strangely changed in his country sin' the sad and sorrowfu'
Union;'' an event to which Andrew referred every symptom
of depravity or degeneracy which he remarked among his
countrymen, more especially the inflammation of reckonings,
the diminished size of pint-stoups, and other grievances, which
he pointed out to me during our journey.

  For my own part, I held myself, as things had turned out,
acquitted of all charge of the mare, and wrote to my uncle the
circumstances under which she was carried into Scotland, concluding
with informing him that she was in the hands of justice,
and her worthy representatives, Bailie Trumbull and Mr. Clerk
Touthope, to whom I referred him for farther particulars.
Whether the property returned to the Northumbrian fox-hunter,
or continued to bear the person of the Scottish attorney,
it is unnecessary for me at present to say.

  We now pursued our journey to the north-westward, at a rate
much slower than that at which we had achieved our nocturnal
retreat from England. One chain of barren and uninteresting
hills succeeded another, until the more fertile vale of Clyde
opened upon us; and, with such despatch as we might, we
gained the town, or, as my guide pertinaciously termed it, the
city, of Glasgow. Of late years, I understand, it has fully
deserved the name, which, by a sort of political second sight,
my guide assigned to it. An extensive and increasing trade
with the West Indies and American colonies, has, if I am
rightly informed, laid the foundation of wealth and prosperity,
which, if carefully strengthened and built upon, may one day
support an immense fabric of commercial prosperity; but in
the earlier time of which I speak, the dawn of this splendour
had not arisen. The Union had, indeed, opened to Scotland
the trade of the English colonies; but, betwixt want of capital,
and the national jealousy of the English, the merchants of
Scotland were as yet excluded, in a great measure, from the
exercise of the privileges which that memorable treaty conferred
on them. Glasgow lay on the wrong side of the island for
participating in the east country or continental trade, by which
the trifling commerce as yet possessed by Scotland chiefly supported
itself. Yet, though she then gave small promise of the
commercial eminence to which, I am informed, she seems now
likely one day to attain, Glasgow, as the principal central town
of the western district of Scotland, was a place of considerable
rank and importance. The broad and brimming Clyde, which
flows so near its walls, gave the means of an inland navigation
of some importance. Not only the fertile plains in its immediate
neighbourhood, but the districts of Ayr and Dumfries
regarded Glasgow as their capital, to which they transmitted
their produce, and received in return such necessaries and
luxuries as their consumption required.

  The dusky mountains of the western Highlands often sent
forth wilder tribes to frequent the marts of St. Mungo's favourite
city. Hordes of wild shaggy, dwarfish cattle and ponies, conducted
by Highlanders, as wild, as shaggy, and sometimes as
dwarfish, as the animals they had in charge, often traversed the
streets of Glasgow. Strangers gazed with surprise on the antique
and fantastic dress, and listened to the unknown and dissonant
sounds of their language, while the mountaineers, armed, even
while engaged in this peaceful occupation, with musket and
pistol, sword, dagger, and target, stared with astonishment on
the articles of luxury of which they knew not the use, and with
an avidity which seemed somewhat alarming on the articles
which they knew and valued. It is always with unwillingness
that the Highlander quits his deserts, and at this early period
it was like tearing a pine from its rock, to plant him elsewhere.
Yet even then the mountain glens were over-peopled, although
thinned occasionally by famine or by the sword, and many of
their inhabitants strayed down to Glasgow---there formed settlements---
there sought and found employment, although different,
indeed, from that of their native hills. This supply of a hardy
and useful population was of consequence to the prosperity of
the place, furnished the means of carrying on the few manufactures
which the town already boasted, and laid the foundation
of its future prosperity.

  The exterior of the city corresponded with these promising
circumstances. The principal street was broad and important,
decorated with public buildings, of an architecture rather striking
than correct in point of taste, and running between rows of tall
houses, built of stone, the fronts of which were occasionally richly
ornamented with mason-work---a circumstance which gave the
street an imposing air of dignity and grandeur, of which most
English towns are in some measure deprived, by the slight, insubstantial,
and perishable quality and appearance of the bricks
with which they are constructed.

  In the western metropolis of Scotland, my guide and I arrived
on a Saturday evening, too late to entertain thoughts of business
of any kind. We alighted at the door of a jolly hostler-wife, as
Andrew called her,---the Ostelere of old father Chaucer,---by
whom we were civilly received.

  On the following morning the bells pealed from every steeple,
announcing the sanctity of the day. Notwithstanding, however,
what I had heard of the severity with which the Sabbath is
observed in Scotland, my first impulse, not unnaturally, was to
seek out Owen; but on inquiry I found that my attempt would
be in vain, ``until kirk time was ower.'' Not only did my landlady
and guide jointly assure me that ``there wadna be a living
soul either in the counting-house or dwelling-house of Messrs.
MacVittie, MacFin, and Company,'' to which Owen's letter
referred me, but, moreover, ``far less would I find any of the
partners there. They were serious men, and wad be where a'
gude Christians ought to be at sic a time, and that was in the
Barony Laigh Kirk.''<*>

* [The Laigh Kirk or Crypt of the Cathedral of Glasgow served for more
* than two centuries as the church of the Barony Parish, and, for a time, was
* converted into a burial-place. In the restorations of this grand building
* the crypt was cleared out, and is now admired as one of the richest specimens
* of Early English architecture existing in Scotland.]


  Andrew Fairservice, whose disgust at the law of his country
had fortunately not extended itself to the other learned professions
of his native land, now sung forth the praises of the
preacher who was to perform the duty, to which my hostess
replied with many loud amens. The result was, that I determined
to go to this popular place of worship, as much with the
purpose of learning, if possible, whether Owen had arrived in
Glasgow, as with any great expectation of edification. My
hopes were exalted by the assurance, that if Mr. Ephraim
MacVittie (worthy man) were in the land of life, he would
surely honour the Barony Kirk that day with his presence; and
if he chanced to have a stranger within his gates, doubtless he
would bring him to the duty along with him. This probability
determined my motions, and under the escort of my faithful
Andrew, I set forth for the Barony Kirk.

  On this occasion, however, I had little need of his guidance;
for the crowd, which forced its way up a steep and rough-paved
street, to hear the most popular preacher in the west of Scotland,
would of itself have swept me along with it. On attaining the
summit of the hill, we turned to the left, and a large pair of
folding doors admitted us, amongst others, into the open and
extensive burying-place which surrounds the Minster or Cathedral
Church of Glasgow. The pile is of a gloomy and massive,
rather than of an elegant, style of Gothic architecture; but its
peculiar character is so strongly preserved, and so well suited
with the accompaniments that surround it, that the impression
of the first view was awful and solemn in the extreme. I was
indeed so much struck, that I resisted for a few minutes all
Andrew's efforts to drag me into the interior of the building, so
deeply was I engaged in surveying its outward character.

  Situated in a populous and considerable town, this ancient
and massive pile has the appearance of the most sequestered
solitude. High walls divide it from the buildings of the city
on one side; on the other it is bounded by a ravine, at the
bottom of which, and invisible to the eye, murmurs a wandering
rivulet, adding, by its gentle noise, to the imposing solemnity
of the scene. On the opposite side of the ravine rises a steep
bank, covered with fir-trees closely planted, whose dusky shade
extends itself over the cemetery with an appropriate and gloomy
effect. The churchyard itself had a peculiar character; for
though in reality extensive, it is small in proportion to the
number of respectable inhabitants who are interred within it,
and whose graves are almost all covered with tombstones.
There is therefore no room for the long rank grass, which, in
most cases, partially clothes the surface of those retreats where
the wicked cease from troubling, and the weary are at rest.
The broad flat monumental stones are placed so close to each
other, that the precincts appear to be flagged with them, and,
though roofed only by the heavens, resemble the floor of one of
our old English churches, where the pavement is covered with
sepulchral inscriptions. The contents of these sad records of
mortality, the vain sorrows which they preserve, the stern lesson
which they teach of the nothingness of humanity, the extent
of ground which they so closely cover, and their uniform and
melancholy tenor, reminded me of the roll of the prophet, which
was ``written within and without, and there was written therein
lamentations and mourning and woe.''

  The Cathedral itself corresponds in impressive majesty with
these accompaniments. We feel that its appearance is heavy,
yet that the effect produced would be destroyed were it lighter
or more ornamental. It is the only metropolitan church in
Scotland, excepting, as I am informed, the Cathedral of Kirkwall,
in the Orkneys, which remained uninjured at the Reformation;
and Andrew Fairservice, who saw with great pride
the effect which it produced upon my mind, thus accounted for
its preservation---``Ah! it's a brave kirk---nane o' yere whig-maleeries
and curliewurlies and opensteek hems about it---a'
solid, weel-jointed mason-wark, that will stand as lang as the
warld, keep hands and gunpowther aff it. It had amaist a
douncome lang syne at the Reformation, when they pu'd doun
the kirks of St. Andrews and Perth, and thereawa', to cleanse
them o' Papery, and idolatry, and image worship, and surplices,
and sic like rags o' the muckle hure that sitteth on seven hills,
as if ane wasna braid eneugh for her auld hinder end. Sae the
commons o' Renfrew, and o' the Barony, and the Gorbals and
a' about, they behoved to come into Glasgow no fair morning,
to try their hand on purging the High Kirk o' Popish nick-nackets.
But the townsmen o' Glasgow, they were feared their
auld edifice might slip the girths in gaun through siccan rough
physic, sae they rang the common bell, and assembled the
train-bands wi' took o' drum. By good luck, the worthy James
Rabat was Dean o' Guild that year---(and a gude mason he was
himself, made him the keener to keep up the auld bigging)---
and the trades assembled, and offered downright battle to the
commons, rather than their kirk should coup the crans as others
had done elsewhere. It wasna for luve o' Paperie---na, na!---
nane could ever say that o' the trades o' Glasgow---Sae they sune
came to an agreement to take a' the idolatrous statues of sants
(sorrow be on them) out o' their neuks---and sae the bits o' stane
idols were broken in pieces by Scripture warrant, and flung into
the Molendinar burn, and the auld kirk stood as crouse as a cat
when the flaes are kaimed aff her, and a' body was alike pleased.
And I hae heard wise folk say, that if the same had been done
in ilka kirk in Scotland, the Reform wad just hae been as pure
as it is e'en now, and we wad hae mair Christian-like kirks; for
I hae been sae lang in England, that naething will drived out o'
my head, that the dog-kennel at Osbaldistone Hall is better than
mony a house o' God in Scotland.''

  Thus saying, Andrew led the way into the place of worship.
