




		CHAPTER TWENTY-SIXTH.



	An iron race the mountain-cliffs maintain,
	Foes to the gentler genius of the plain.
	*     *     *     *     *     *     *
	Who while their rocky ramparts round they see,
	The rough abode of want and liberty,
	As lawless force from confidence will grow,
	Insult the plenty of the vales below.
						Gray.



  ``What made ye sae late?'' said Mr. Jarvie, as I entered the
dining-parlour of that honest gentleman; ``it is chappit ane the
best feek o' five minutes by-gane. Mattie has been twice at the
door wi' the dinner, and weel for you it was a tup's head, for
that canna suffer by delay. A sheep's head ower muckle boiled
is rank poison, as my worthy father used to say---he likit the lug
o' ane weel, honest man.''

  I made a suitable apology for my breach of punctuality, and
was soon seated at table, where Mr. Jarvie presided with great
glee and hospitality, compelling, however, Owen and myself to
do rather more justice to the Scottish dainties with which his
board was charged, than was quite agreeable to our southern
palates. I escaped pretty well, from having those habits of society
which enable one to elude this species of well-meant persecution.
But it was ridiculous enough to see Owen, whose ideas of politeness
were more rigorous and formal, and who was willing, in all
acts of lawful compliance, to evince his respect for the friend of
the firm, eating with rueful complaisance mouthful after mouthful
of singed wool, and pronouncing it excellent, in a tone in
which disgust almost overpowered civility.

  When the cloth was removed, Mr. Jarvie compounded with
his own hands a very small bowl of brandy-punch, the first
which I had ever the fortune to see.

  ``The limes,'' he assured us, ``were from his own little farm
yonder-awa'' (indicating the West Indies with a knowing shrug
of his shoulders), ``and he had learned the art of composing the
liquor from auld Captain Coffinkey, who acquired it,'' he added
in a whisper, ```as maist folk thought, among the Buccaniers.
But it's excellent liquor,'' said he, helping us round; ``and good
ware has aften come frae a wicked market. And as for Captain
Coffinkey, he was a decent man when I kent him, only he used
to swear awfully---But he's dead, and gaen to his account, and
I trust he's accepted---I trust he's accepted.''

  We found the liquor exceedingly palatable, and it led to a
long conversation between Owen and our host on the opening
which the Union had afforded to trade between Glasgow and
the British Colonies in America and the West Indies, and on
the facilities which Glasgow possessed of making up sortable
cargoes for that market. Mr. Jarvie answered some objection
which Owen made on the difficulty of sorting a cargo for
America, without buying from England, with vehemence and
volubility.

  ``Na, na, sir, we stand on our ain bottom---we pickle in our
ain pock-neuk---We hae our Stirling serges, Musselburgh stuffs,
Aberdeen hose, Edinburgh shalloons, and the like, for our
woollen or worsted goods---and we hae linens of a' kinds better
and cheaper than you hae in Lunnon itsell---and we can buy
your north o' England wares, as Manchester wares, Sheffield
wares, and Newcastle earthenware, as cheap as you can at
Liverpool---And we are making a fair spell at cottons and
muslins---Na, na! let every herring hing by its ain head, and
every sheep by its ain shank, and ye'll find, sir, us Glasgow
folk no sae far ahint but what we may follow.---This is but poor
entertainment for you, Mr. Osbaldistone'' (observing that I had
been for some time silent); ``but ye ken cadgers maun aye be
speaking about cart-saddles.''

  I apologised, alleging the painful circumstances of my own
situation, and the singular adventures of the morning, as the
causes of my abstraction and absence of mind. In this manner
I gained what I sought---an opportunity of telling my story
distinctly and without interruption. I only omitted mentioning
the wound I had received, which I did not think worthy
of notice. Mr. Jarvie listened with great attention and apparent
interest, twinkling his little grey eyes, taking snuff, and
only interrupting me by brief interjections. When I came to
the account of the rencounter, at which Owen folded his hands
and cast up his eyes to Heaven, the very image of woeful surprise,
Mr. Jarvie broke in upon the narration with ``Wrang
now---clean wrang---to draw a sword on your kinsman is
inhibited by the laws o' God and man; and to draw a sword
on the streets of a royal burgh is punishable by fine and imprisonment---
and the College-yards are nae better privileged---
they should be a place of peace and quietness, I trow. The
College didna get gude <L>600 a year out o' bishops' rents (sorrow
fa' the brood o' bishops and their rents too!), nor yet a lease
o' the archbishopric o' Glasgow the sell o't, that they suld let
folk tuilzie in their yards, or the wild callants bicker there wi'
snaw-ba's as they whiles do, that when Mattie and I gae through,
we are fain to make a baik and a bow, or run the risk o' our
harns being knocked out---it suld be looked to.<*>---But come awa'

* The boys in Scotland used formerly to make a sort of Saturnalia in a
* snow-storm, by pelting passengers with snowballs. But those exposed to
* that annoyance were excused from it on the easy penalty of a baik (courtesy)
* from a female, or a bow from a man. It was only the refractory who
* underwent the storm.

wi' your tale---what fell neist?''

  On my mentioning the appearance of Mr. Campbell, Jarvie
arose in great surprise, and paced the room, exclaiming, ``Robin
again!---Robert's mad---clean wud, and waur---Rob will be
hanged, and disgrace a' his kindred, and that will be seen and
heard tell o'. My father the deacon wrought him his first hose---
Od, I am thinking Deacon Threeplie, the rape-spinner, will be
twisting his last cravat. Ay, ay, puir Robin is in a fair way o'
being hanged---But come awa', come awa'---let's hear the lave
o't.''

  I told the whole story as pointedly as I could; but Mr.
Jarvie still found something lacking to make it clear, until I
went back, though with considerable reluctance, on the whole
story of Morris, and of my meeting with Campbell at the house
of Justice Inglewood. Mr. Jarvie inclined a serious ear to all
this, and remained silent for some time after I had finished my
narrative.

  ``Upon all these matters I am now to ask your advice, Mr.
Jarvie, which, I have no doubt, will point out the best way to
act for my father's advantage and my own honour.''

  ``Ye're right, young man---ye're right,'' said the Bailie.
``Aye take the counsel of those who are aulder and wiser than
yourself, and binna like the godless Rehoboam, who took the
advice o' a wheen beardless callants, neglecting the auld counsellors
who had sate at the feet o' his father Solomon, and, as
it was weel put by Mr. Meiklejohn, in his lecture on the chapter,
were doubtless partakers of his sapience. But I maun hear
naething about honour---we ken naething here but about credit.
Honour is a homicide and a bloodspiller, that gangs about
making frays in the street; but Credit is a decent honest man,
that sits at hame and makes the pat play.''

  ``Assuredly, Mr. Jarvie,'' said our friend Owen, ``credit is
the sum total; and if we can but save that, at whatever
discount''------

  ``Ye are right, Mr. Owen---ye are right; ye speak weel and
wisely; and I trust bowls will row right, though they are a wee
ajee e'enow. But touching Robin, I am of opinion he will
befriend this young man if it is in his power. He has a gude
heart, puir Robin; and though I lost a matter o' twa hundred
punds wi' his former engagements, and haena muckle expectation
ever to see back my thousand punds Scots that he promises
me e'enow, yet I will never say but what Robin means fair by
men.''

  ``I am then to consider him,'' I replied, ``as an honest
man?''

  ``Umph!'' replied Jarvie, with a precautionary sort of cough
---``Ay, he has a kind o' Hieland honesty---he's honest after a
sort, as they say. My father the deacon used aye to laugh when
he tauld me how that by-word came up. Ane Captain Costlett
was cracking crouse about his loyalty to King Charles, and Clerk
Pettigrew (ye'll hae heard mony a tale about him) asked him
after what manner he served the king, when he was fighting
again him at Wor'ster in Cromwell's army; and Captain Costlett
was a ready body, and said that he served him _after a sort._ My
honest father used to laugh weel at that sport---and sae the by-word
came up.''

  ``But do you think,'' I said, ``that this man will be able to
serve me after a sort, or should I trust myself to this place of
rendezvous which he has given me?''

  ``Frankly and fairly, it's worth trying. Ye see yourself
there's some risk in your staying here. This bit body Morris
has gotten a custom-house place doun at Greenock---that's a
port on the Firth doun by here; and tho' a' the world kens
him to be but a twa-leggit creature, wi' a goose's head and a
hen's heart, that goes about on the quay plaguing folk about
permits, and cockits, and dockits, and a' that vexatious trade,
yet if he lodge an information---ou, nae doubt a man in magisterial
duty maun attend to it, and ye might come to be clapped
up between four wa's, whilk wad be ill-convenient to your father's
affairs.''

  ``True,'' I observed; ``yet what service am I likely to render
him by leaving Glasgow, which, it is probable, will be the principal
scene of Rashleigh's machinations, and committing myself
to the doubtful faith of a man of whom I know little but that
he fears justice, and has doubtless good reasons for doing so;
and that, for some secret, and probably dangerous purpose, he
is in close league and alliance with the very person who is like
to be the author of our ruin?''

  ``Ah, but ye judge Rob hardly,'' said the Bailie, ``ye judge
him hardly, puir chield; and the truth is, that ye ken naething
about our hill country, or Hielands, as we ca' them. They are
clean anither set frae the like o' huz;---there's nae bailie-courts
amang them---nae magistrates that dinna bear the sword in vain,
like the worthy deacon that's awa', and, I may say't, like mysell
and other present magistrates in this city---But it's just the laird's
command, and the loon maun loup; and the never another law
hae they but the length o' their dirks---the broadsword's pursuer,
or plaintiff, as you Englishers ca' it, and the target is defender;
the stoutest head bears langest out;---and there's a Hieland plea
for ye.''

  Owen groaned deeply; and I allow that the description did
not greatly increase my desire to trust myself in a country so
lawless as he described these Scottish mountains.

  ``Now, sir,'' said Jarvie, ``we speak little o' thae things,
because they are familiar to oursells; and where's the use o'
vilifying ane's country, and bringing a discredit on ane's kin,
before southrons and strangers? It's an ill bird that files its
ain nest.''

  ``Well, sir, but as it is no impertinent curiosity of mine, but
real necessity, that obliges me to make these inquiries, I hope
you will not be offended at my pressing for a little farther
information. I have to deal, on my father's account, with
several gentlemen of these wild countries, and I must trust
your good sense and experience for the requisite lights upon the
subject.''

  This little morsel of flattery was not thrown out in vain.
``Experience!'' said the Bailie---``I hae had experience, nae
doubt, and I hae made some calculations---Ay, and to speak
quietly amang oursells, I hae made some perquisitions through
Andrew Wylie, my auld clerk; he's wi' MacVittie & Co. now---
but he whiles drinks a gill on the Saturday afternoons wi' his
auld master. And since ye say ye are willing to be guided by
the Glasgow weaver-body's advice, I am no the man that will
refuse it to the son of an auld correspondent, and my father the
deacon was nane sic afore me. I have whiles thought o' letting
my lights burn before the Duke of Argyle, or his brother Lord
Ilay (for wherefore should they be hidden under a bushel?),
but the like o' thae grit men wadna mind the like o' me, a puir
wabster body---they think mair o' wha says a thing, than o'
what the thing is that's said. The mair's the pity---mair's the
pity. Not that I wad speak ony ill of this MacCallum More---
`Curse not the rich in your bedchamber,' saith the son of Sirach,
`for a bird of the air shall carry the clatter, and pint-stoups hae
lang lugs.' ''

  I interrupted these prolegomena, in which Mr. Jarvie was apt
to be somewhat diffuse, by praying him to rely upon Mr. Owen
and myself as perfectly secret and safe confidants.

  ``It's no for that,'' he replied, ``for I fear nae man---what
for suld I?---I speak nae treason---Only thae Hielandmen hae
lang grips, and I whiles gang a wee bit up the glens to see
some auld kinsfolks, and I wadna willingly be in bad blude wi'
ony o' their clans. Howsumever, to proceed---ye maun understand
I found my remarks on figures, whilk as Mr. Owen here
weel kens, is the only true demonstrable root of human knowledge.''

  Owen readily assented to a proposition so much in his own
way, and our orator proceeded.

  ``These Hielands of ours, as we ca' them, gentlemen, are but
a wild kind of warld by themsells, full of heights and howes,
woods, caverns, lochs, rivers, and mountains, that it wad tire
the very deevil's wings to flee to the tap o' them. And in this
country, and in the isles, whilk are little better, or, to speak
the truth, rather waur than the mainland, there are about twa
hunder and thirty parochines, including the Orkneys, where,
whether they speak Gaelic or no I wotna, but they are an
uncivilised people. Now, sirs, I sall haud ilk parochine at the
moderate estimate of eight hunder examinable persons, deducting
children under nine years of age, and then adding one-fifth
to stand for bairns of nine years auld, and under, the whole
population will reach to the sum of---let us add one-fifth to 800
to be the multiplier, and 230 being the multiplicand''------

  ``The product,'' said Mr. Owen, who entered delightedly into
these statistics of Mr. Jarvie, ``will be 230,000.''

  ``Right, sir---perfectly right; and the military array of this
Hieland country, were a' the men-folk between aughteen and
fifty-six brought out that could bear arms, couldna come weel
short of fifty-seven thousand five hundred men. Now, sir, it's
a sad and awfu' truth, that there is neither wark, nor the very
fashion nor appearance of wark, for the tae half of thae puir
creatures; that is to say, that the agriculture, the pasturage,
the fisheries, and every species of honest industry about the
country, cannot employ the one moiety of the population, let
them work as lazily as they like, and they do work as if a
pleugh or a spade burnt their fingers. Aweel, sir, this moiety
of unemployed bodies, amounting to''------

  ``To one hundred and fifteen thousand souls,'' said Owen,
``being the half of the above product.''

  ``Ye hae't, Mr. Owen---ye hae't---whereof there may be
twenty-eight thousand seven hundred able-bodied gillies fit to
bear arms, and that do bear arms, and will touch or look at nae
honest means of livelihood even if they could get it---which,
lack-a-day! they cannot.''

  ``But is it possible,'' said I, ``Mr. Jarvie, that this can be a
just picture of so large a portion of the island of Britain?''

  ``Sir, I'll make it as plain as Peter Pasley's pike-staff. I will
allow that ilk parochine, on an average, employs fifty pleughs,
whilk is a great proportion in sic miserable soil as thae creatures
hae to labour, and that there may be pasture enough for pleugh-horses,
and owsen, and forty or fifty cows; now, to take care o'
the pleughs and cattle, we'se allow seventy-five families of six
lives in ilk family, and we'se add fifty mair to make even
numbers, and ye hae five hundred souls, the tae half o' the
population, employed and maintained in a sort o' fashion, wi'
some chance of sour-milk and crowdie; but I wad be glad to
ken what the other five hunder are to do?''

  ``In the name of God!'' said I, ``what _do_ they do, Mr. Jarvie?
It makes me shudder to think of their situation.''

  ``Sir,'' replied the Bailie, ``ye wad maybe shudder mair if ye
were living near hand them. For, admitting that the tae half
of them may make some little thing for themsells honestly in
the Lowlands by shearing in harst, droving, hay-making, and
the like; ye hae still mony hundreds and thousands o' lang-legged
Hieland gillies that will neither work nor want, and
maun gang thigging and sorning<*> about on their acquaintance,

* _Thigging_ and _sorning_ was a kind of genteel begging, or rather something
* between begging and robbing, by which the needy in Scotland used
* to extort cattle, or the means of subsistence, from those who had any to
* give.

or live by doing the laird's bidding, be't right or be't wrang.
And mair especially, mony hundreds o' them come down to the
borders of the low country, where there's gear to grip, and live
by stealing, reiving, lifting cows, and the like depredations---a
thing deplorable in ony Christian country!---the mair especially,
that they take pride in it, and reckon driving a spreagh (whilk
is, in plain Scotch, stealing a herd of nowte) a gallant, manly
action, and mair befitting of pretty<*> men (as sic reivers will

* The word _pretty_ is or was used in Scotch, in the sense of the German
* _pr<a:>chtig,_ and meant a gallant, alert fellow, prompt and ready at his
* weapons.

ca' themselves), than to win a day's wage by ony honest thrift.
And the lairds are as bad as the loons; for if they dinna bid
them gae reive and harry, the deil a bit they forbid them; and
they shelter them, or let them shelter themselves, in their
woods and mountains, and strongholds, whenever the thing's
dune. And every ane o' them will maintain as mony o' his
ane name, or his clan, as we say, as he can rap and rend means
for; or, whilk's the same thing, as mony as can in ony fashion,
fair or foul, mainteen themsells. And there they are wi' gun
and pistol, dirk and dourlach, ready to disturb the peace o' the
country whenever the laird likes; and that's the grievance of
the Hielands, whilk are, and hae been for this thousand years
by-past, a bike o' the maist lawless unchristian limmers that
ever disturbed a douce, quiet, God-fearing neighbourhood, like
this o' ours in the west here.''

  ``And this kinsman of yours, and friend of mine, is he one of
those great proprietors who maintain the household troops you
speak of?'' I inquired.

  ``Na, na,'' said Bailie Jarvie; ``he's nane o' your great
grandees o' chiefs, as they ca' them, neither. Though he is
weel born, and lineally descended frae auld Glenstrae---I ken
his lineage---indeed he is a near kinsman, and, as I said, of gude
gentle Hieland blude, though ye may think weel that I care
little about that nonsense---it's a' moonshine in water---waste
threads and thrums, as we say---But I could show ye letters
frae his father, that was the third aff Glenstrae, to my father
Deacon Jarvie (peace be wi' his memory!) beginning, Dear
Deacon, and ending, your loving kinsman to command,---they
are amaist a' about borrowed siller, sae the gude deacon, that's
dead and gane, keepit them as documents and evidents---He was
a carefu' man.''

  ``But if he is not,'' I resumed, ``one of their chiefs or
patriarchal leaders, whom I have heard my father talk of, this
kinsman of yours has, at least, much to say in the Highlands, I
presume?''

  ``Ye may say that---nae name better ken'd between the
Lennox and Breadalbane. Robin was ance a weel-doing, painstaking
drover, as ye wad see amang ten thousand---It was a
pleasure to see him in his belted plaid and brogues, wi' his
target at his back, and claymore and dirk at his belt, following
a hundred Highland stots, and a dozen o' the gillies, as rough
and ragged as the beasts they drave. And he was baith civil
and just in his dealings; and if he thought his chapman had
made a hard bargain, he wad gie him a luck-penny to the
mends. I hae ken'd him gie back five shillings out o' the pund
sterling.''

  ``Twenty-five per cent,'' said Owen---``a heavy discount.''

  ``He wad gie it though, sir, as I tell ye; mair especially if
he thought the buyer was a puir man, and couldna stand by a
loss. But the times cam hard, and Rob was venturesome. It
wasna my faut---it wasna my faut; he canna wyte me---I aye
tauld him o't---And the creditors, mair especially some grit
neighbours o' his, gripped to his living and land; and they say
his wife was turned out o' the house to the hill-side, and sair
misguided to the boot. Shamefu'! shamefu'!---I am a peacefu'
man and a magistrate, but if ony ane had guided sae muckle
as my servant quean, Mattie, as it's like they guided Rob's wife,
I think it suld hae set the shabble<*> that my father the deacon

* Cutlass.

had at Bothwell brig a-walking again. Weel, Rob cam hame,
and fand desolation, God pity us! where he left plenty; he
looked east, west, south, north, and saw neither hauld nor hope
---neither beild nor shelter; sae he e'en pu'd the bonnet ower
his brow, belted the broadsword to his side, took to the brae-side,
and became a broken man.''<*>

* An outlaw.


  The voice of the good citizen was broken by his contending
feelings. He obviously, while he professed to contemn the
pedigree of his Highland kinsman, attached a secret feeling of
consequence to the connection, and he spoke of his friend in his
prosperity with an overflow of affection, which deepened his
sympathy for his misfortunes, and his regret for their consequences.

  ``Thus tempted and urged by despair,'' said I, seeing Mr.
Jarvie did not proceed in his narrative, ``I suppose your kinsman
became one of those depredators you have described to
us?''

  ``No sae bad as that,'' said the Glaswegian,---``no a'thegither
and outright sae bad as that; but he became a levier of black-mail,
wider and farther than ever it was raised in our day, a
through the Lennox and Menteith, and up to the gates o'
Stirling Castle.''

  ``Black-mail?---I do not understand the phrase,'' I remarked.

  ``Ou, ye see, Rob soon gathered an unco band o' blue-bonnets
at his back, for he comes o' a rough name when he's kent by
his ain, and a name that's held its ain for mony a lang year,
baith again king and parliament, and kirk too, for aught I ken
---an auld and honourable name, for as sair as it has been
worried and hadden down and oppressed. My mother was a
MacGregor---I carena wha kens it---And Rob had soon a gallant
band; and as it grieved him (he said) to see sic _hership_ and
waste and depredation to the south o' the Hieland line, why,
if ony heritor or farmer wad pay him four punds Scots out of
each hundred punds of valued rent, whilk was doubtless a
moderate consideration, Rob engaged to keep them scaithless;
---let them send to him if they lost sae muckle as a single cloot
by thieving, and Rob engaged to get them again, or pay the
value---and he aye keepit his word---I canna deny but he keepit
his word---a' men allow Rob keeps his word.''

  ``This is a very singular contract of assurance,'' said Mr.
Owen.

  ``It's clean again our statute law, that must be owned,'' said
Jarvie, ``clean again law; the levying and the paying black-mail
are baith punishable: but if the law canna protect my
barn and byre, whatfor suld I no engage wi' a Hieland gentleman
that can?---answer me that.''

  ``But,'' said I, ``Mr. Jarvie, is this contract of black-mail,
as you call it, completely voluntary on the part of the landlord
or farmer who pays the insurance? or what usually happens,
in case any one refuses payment of this tribute?''

  ``Aha, lad!'' said the Bailie, laughing, and putting his finger
to his nose, ``ye think ye hae me there. Troth, I wad advise
ony friends o' mine to gree wi' Rob; for, watch as they like,
and do what they like, they are sair apt to be harried<*> when

* Plundered.

the lang nights come on. Some o' the Grahame and Cohoon
gentry stood out; but what then?---they lost their haill stock
the first winter; sae maist folks now think it best to come into
Rob's terms. He's easy wi' a' body that will be easy wi' him;
but if ye thraw him, ye had better thraw the deevil.''

  ``And by his exploits in these vocations,'' I continued, ``I
suppose he has rendered himself amenable to the laws of the
country?''

  ``Amenable?---ye may say that; his craig wad ken the weight
o' his hurdies if they could get haud o' Rob. But he has gude
friends amang the grit folks; and I could tell ye o' ae grit family
that keeps him up as far as they decently can, to be a them
in the side of another. And then he's sic an auld-farran lang-headed
chield as never took up the trade o' cateran in our time;
mony a daft reik he has played---mair than wad fill a book,
and a queer ane it wad be---as gude as Robin Hood, or William
Wallace---a' fu' o' venturesome deeds and escapes, sic as folk
tell ower at a winter ingle in the daft days. It's a queer thing
o' me, gentlemen, that am a man o' peace mysell, and a peacefu
man's son---for the deacon my father quarrelled wi' nane out o
the town-council---it's a queer thing, I say, but I think the
Hieland blude o' me warms at thae daft tales, and whiles I like
better to hear them than a word o' profit, gude forgie me!
But they are vanities---sinfu' vanities---and, moreover, again
the statute law---again the statute and gospel law.''

  I now followed up my investigation, by inquiring what means
of influence this Mr. Robert Campbell could possibly possess
over my affairs, or those of my father.

  ``Why, ye are to understand,'' said Mr. Jarvie in a very subdued
tone---``I speak amang friends, and under the rose---Ye
are to understand, that the Hielands hae been keepit quiet since
the year aughty-nine---that was Killiecrankie year. But how
hae they been keepit quiet, think ye? By siller, Mr. Owen---
by siller, Mr. Osbaldistone. King William caused Breadalbane
distribute twenty thousand oude punds sterling amang them,
and it's said the auld Hieland Earl keepit a lang lug o't in his
ain sporran. And then Queen Anne, that's dead, gae the
chiefs bits o' pensions, sae they had wherewith to support their
gillies and caterans that work nae wark, as I said afore; and
they lay by quiet eneugh, saying some spreagherie on the Lowlands,
whilk is their use and wont, and some cutting o' thrapples
amang themsells, that nae civilised body kens or cares onything
anent.---Weel, but there's a new warld come up wi' this King
George (I say, God bless him, for ane)---there's neither like to
be siller nor pensions gaun amang them; they haena the means
o' mainteening the clans that eat them up, as ye may guess
frae what I said before; their credit's gane in the Lowlands;
and a man that can whistle ye up a thousand or feifteen hundred
linking lads to do his will, wad hardly get fifty punds on
his band at the Cross o' Glasgow---This canna stand lang---
there will be an outbreak for the Stuarts---there will be an outbreak---
they will come down on the low country like a flood, as
they did in the waefu' wars o' Montrose, and that will be seen
and heard tell o' ere a twalmonth gangs round.''

  ``Yet still,'' I said, ``I do not see how this concerns Mr.
Campbell, much less my father's affairs.''

  ``Rob can levy five hundred men, sir, and therefore war suld
concern him as muckle as maist folk,'' replied the Bailie; ``for
it is a faculty that is far less profitable in time o' peace. Then,
to tell ye the truth, I doubt he has been the prime agent between
some o' our Hieland chiefs and the gentlemen in the
north o' England. We a' heard o' the public money that was
taen frae the chield Morris somewhere about the fit o' Cheviot
by Rob and ane o' the Osbaldistone lads; and, to tell ye the
truth, word gaed that it was yoursell Mr. Francis,---and sorry
was I that your father's son suld hae taen to sic practices---Na,
ye needna say a word about it---I see weel I was mistaen; but
I wad believe onything o' a stage-player, whilk I concluded ye
to be. But now, I doubtna, it has been Rashleigh himself or
some other o' your cousins---they are a' tarred wi' the same stick
---rank Jacobites and papists, and wad think the government
siller and government papers lawfu' prize. And the creature
Morris is sic a cowardly caitiff, that to this hour he daurna say
that it was Rob took the portmanteau aff him; and troth he's
right, for your custom-house and excise cattle are ill liket on a'
sides, and Rob might get a back-handed lick at him, before the
Board, as they ca't, could help him.''

  ``I have long suspected this, Mr. Jarvie,'' said I, ``and perfectly
agree with you. But as to my father's affairs''------

  ``Suspected it?---it's certain---it's certain---I ken them that
saw some of the papers that were taen aff Morris---it's needless
to say where. But to your father's affairs---Ye maun think
that in thae twenty years by-gane, some o' the Hieland lairds
and chiefs hae come to some sma' sense o' their ain interest---
your father and others hae bought the woods of Glen-Disseries,
Glen Kissoch, Tober-na-Kippoch, and mony mair besides, and
your father's house has granted large bills in payment,---and as
the credit o' Osbaldistone and Tresham was gude---for I'll say
before Mr. Owen's face, as I wad behind his back, that, bating
misfortunes o' the Lord's sending, nae men could be mair
honourable in business---the Hieland gentlemen, holders o'
thae bills, hae found credit in Glasgow and Edinburgh---(I
might amaist say in Glasgow wholly, for it's little the pridefu'
Edinburgh folk do in real business)---for all, or the greater part
of the contents o' thae bills. So that---Aha! d'ye see me
now?''

  I confessed I could not quite follow his drift.

  ``Why,'' said he, ``if these bills are not paid, the Glasgow
merchant comes on the Hieland lairds, whae hae deil a boddle
o' siller, and will like ill to spew up what is item a' spent---
They will turn desperate---five hundred will rise that might
hae sitten at hame---the deil will gae ower Jock Wabster---and
the stopping of your father's house will hasten the outbreak
that's been sae lang biding us.''

  ``You think, then,'' said I, surprised at this singular view of
the case, ``that Rashleigh Osbaldistone has done this injury to
my father, merely to accelerate a rising in the Highlands, by
distressing  the gentlemen to whom these bills were originally
granted?''

  ``Doubtless---doubtless---it has been one main reason, Mr.
Osbaldistone. I doubtna but what the ready money he carried
off wi' him might be another. But that makes comparatively
but a sma' part o' your father's loss, though it might make the
maist part o' Rashleigh's direct gain. The assets he carried off
are of nae mair use to him than if he were to light his pipe wi'
them. He tried if MacVittie & Co. wad gie him siller on
them---that I ken by Andro Wylie---but they were ower auld
cats to draw that strae afore them---they keepit aff, and gae
fair words. Rashleigh Osbaldistone is better ken'd than trusted
in Glasgow, for he was here about some jacobitical papistical
troking in seventeen hundred and seven, and left debt ahint
him. Na, na---he canna pit aff the paper here; folk will misdoubt
him how he came by it. Na, na---he'll hae the stuff safe
at some o' their haulds in the Hielands, and I daur say my
cousin Rob could get at it gin he liked.''

  ``But would he be disposed to serve us in this pinch, Mr.
Jarvie?'' said I. ``You have described him as an agent of the
Jacobite party, and deeply connected in their intrigues: will
he be disposed for my sake, or, if you please, for the sake of
justice, to make an act of restitution, which, supposing it in his
power, would, according to your view of the case, materially
interfere with their plans?''

  ``I canna preceesely speak to that: the grandees among
them are doubtfu' o' Rob, and he's doubtfu' o' them.---And he's
been weel friended wi' the Argyle family, wha stand for the
present model of government. If he was freed o' his hornings
and captions, he would rather be on Argyle's side than he wad
be on Breadalbane's, for there's auld ill-will between the
Breadalbane family and his kin and name. The truth is, that
Rob is for his ain hand, as Henry Wynd feught<*>---he'll take

* Two great clans fought out a quarrel with thirty men of a side, in
* presence ot the king, on the North Inch of Perth, on or about the year
* 1392; a man was amissing on one side, whose room was filled by a little
* bandy-legged citizen of Perth. This substitute, Henry Wynd---or, as the
* Highlanders called him, _Gow Chrom,_ that is, the bandy-legged smith---
* fought well, and contributed greatly to the fate of the battle, without
* knowing which side he fought on;---so, ``To fight for your own hand, like
* Henry Wynd,'' passed into a proverb. [This incident forms a conspicuous
* part of the subsequent novel, ``The Fair Maid of Perth.'']

the side that suits him best; if the deil was laird, Rob wad be
for being tenant; and ye canna blame him, puir fallow, considering
his circumstances. But there's ae thing sair again ye---
Rob has a grey mear in his stable at hame.''
 
  ``A grey mare?'' said I. ``What is that to the purpose?''

  ``The wife, man---the wife,---an awfu' wife she is. She
downa bide the sight o' a kindly Scot, if he come frae the Lowlands,
far less of an Inglisher, and she'll be keen for a' that can
set up King James, and ding down King George.''

  ``It is very singular,'' I replied, ``that the mercantile transactions
of London citizens should become involved with revolutions
and rebellions.''

  ``Not at a', man---not at a','' returned Mr. Jarvie; ``that's a'
your silly prejudications. I read whiles in the lang dark nights,
and I hae read in Baker's Chronicle<*> that the merchants o'

* [_The Chronicle of the Kings of England,_ by Sir Richard Baker, with
* continuations, passed through several editions between 1641 and 1733.  
* Whether any of them contain the passage alluded to is doubtful.]

London could gar the Bank of Genoa break their promise to
advance a mighty sum to the King o' Spain, whereby the sailing
of the Grand Spanish Armada was put aff for a haill year
---What think you of that, sir?''

  ``That the merchants did their country golden service, which
ought to be honourably remembered in our histories.''

  ``I think sae too; and they wad do weel, and deserve weal
baith o' the state and o' humanity, that wad save three or four
honest Hieland gentlemen frae louping heads ower heels into
destruction, wi' a' their puir sackless<*> followers, just because

* Sackless, that is, innocent.

they canna pay back the siller they had reason to count upon
as their ain---and save your father's credit---and my ain gude
siller that Osbaldistone and Tresham awes me into the bargain.
I say, if ane could manage a' this, I think it suld be done and
said unto him, even if he were a puir ca'-the-shuttle body, as
unto one whom the king delighteth to honour.''

  ``I cannot pretend to estimate the extent of public gratitude,''
I replied; ``but our own thankfulness, Mr. Jarvie,
would be commensurate with the extent of the obligation.''

  ``Which,'' added Mr. Owen, ``we would endeavour to balance
with a _per contra,_ the instant our Mr. Osbaldistone returns
from Holland.''

  ``I doubtna---I doubtna---he is a very worthy gentleman,
and a sponsible, and wi' some o' my lights might do muckle
business in Scotland---Weel, sir, if these assets could be redeemed
out o' the hands o' the Philistines, they are gude paper
---they are the right stuff when they are in the right hands,
and that's yours, Mr. Owen. And I'se find ye three men in
Glasgow, for as little as ye may think o' us, Mr. Owen---that's
Sandie Steenson in the Trade's-Land, and John Pirie in
Candleriggs, and another that sall be nameless at this present,
sall advance what soums are sufficient to secure the credit of
your house, and seek nae better security.''

  Owen's eyes sparkled at this prospect of extrication; but his
countenance instantly fell on recollecting how improbable it
was that the recovery of the assets, as he technically called them,
should be successfully achieved.

  ``Dinna despair, sir---dinna despair,'' said Mr. Jarvie; ``I
hae taen sae muckle concern wi' your affairs already, that it
maun een be ower shoon ower boots wi' me now. I am just
like my father the deacon (praise be wi' him!) I canna meddle
wi' a friend's business, but I aye end wi' making it my ain---Sae,
I'll e'en pit on my boots the morn, and be jogging ower Drymen
Muir wi' Mr. Frank here; and if I canna mak Rob hear
reason, and his wife too, I dinna ken wha can---I hae been a
kind freend to them afore now, to say naething o' ower-looking
him last night, when naming his name wad hae cost him his life
---I'll be hearing o' this in the council maybe frae Bailie Grahame.
and MacVittie, and some o' them. They hae coost up my
kindred to Rob to me already---set up their nashgabs! I tauld
them I wad vindicate nae man's faults; but set apart what he
had done again the law o' the country, and the hership o' the
Lennox, and the misfortune o' some folk losing life by him, he
was an honester man than stood on ony o' their shanks---And
whatfor suld I mind their clavers? If Rob is an outlaw, to
himsell be it said---there is nae laws now about reset of inter-communed
persons, as there was in the ill times o' the last
Stuarts---I trow I hae a Scotch tongue in my head---if they
speak, I'se answer.''

  It was with great pleasure that I saw the Bailie gradually
surmount the barriers of caution, under the united influence of
public spirit and good-natured interest in our affairs, together
with his natural wish to avoid loss and acquire gain, and not a
little harmless vanity. Through the combined operation of
these motives, he at length arrived at the doughty resolution of
taking the field in person, to aid in the recovery of my father's
property. His whole information led me to believe, that if the
papers were in possession of this Highland adventurer, it might
be possible to induce him to surrender what he could not keep
with any prospect of personal advantage; and I was conscious
that the presence of his kinsman was likely to have considerable
weight with him. I therefore cheerfully acquiesced in
Mr. Jarvie's proposal that we should set out early next morning.

  That honest gentleman was indeed as vivacious and alert in
preparing to carry his purpose into execution, as he had been
slow and cautious in forming it. He roared to Mattie to ``air
his trot-cosey, to have his jack-boots greased and set before the
kitchen-fire all night, and to see that his beast be corned, and a'
his riding gear in order.'' Having agreed to meet him at five
o'clock next morning, and having settled that Owen, whose
presence could be of no use to us upon this expedition, should
await our return at Glasgow, we took a kind farewell of this
unexpectedly zealous friend. I installed Owen in an apartment
in my lodgings, contiguous to my own, and, giving orders to
Andrew Fairservice to attend me next morning at the hour appointed,
I retired to rest with better hopes than it had lately
been my fortune to entertain.
