




			CHAPTER THIRTY-FIRST.



	``Woe to the vanquished!'' was stern Brenno's word,
	When sunk proud Rome beneath the Gallic sword---
	``Woe to the vanquished!'' when his massive blade
	Bore down the scale against her ransom weigh'd;
	And on the field of foughten battle still,
	Woe knows no limits save the victor's will.
						The Gaulliad.



  I anxiously endeavoured to distinguish Dougal among the
victors. I had little doubt that the part he had played was
assumed, on purpose to lead the English officer into the defile, and
I could not help admiring the address with which the ignorant,
and apparently half-brutal savage, had veiled his purpose, and
the affected reluctance with which he had suffered to be extracted
from him the false information which it must have been his purpose
from the beginning to communicate. I foresaw we should
incur some danger on approaching the victors in the first flush of
their success, which was not unstained with cruelty; for one or
two of the soldiers, whose wounds prevented them from rising,
were poniarded by the victors, or rather by some ragged Highland
boys who had mingled with them. I concluded, therefore,
it would be unsafe to present ourselves without some mediator;
and as Campbell, whom I now could not but identify with the
celebrated freebooter Rob Roy, was nowhere to be seen, I resolved
to claim the protection of his emissary, Dougal.

  After gazing everywhere in vain, I at length retraced my steps
to see what assistance I could individually render to my unlucky
friend, when, to my great joy, I saw Mr. Jarvie delivered from
his state of suspense; and though very black in the face, and
much deranged in the garments, safely seated beneath the rock,
in front of which he had been so lately suspended. I hastened
to join him and offer my congratulations, which he was at first
far from receiving in the spirit of cordiality with which they
were offered. A heavy fit of coughing scarce permitted him
breath enough to express the broken hints which he threw out
against my sincerity.

  ``Uh! uh! uh! uh!---they say a friend---uh! uh!---a friend
sticketh closer than a brither---uh! uh! uh! When I came up
here, Maister Osbaldistone, to this country, cursed of God and
man---uh! uh---Heaven forgie me for swearing---on nae man's
errand but yours, d'ye think it was fair---uh! uh! uh!---to leave
me, first, to be shot or drowned atween red-wad Highlanders and
red-coats; and next to be hung up between heaven and earth,
like an auld potato-bogle, without sae muckle as trying---uh!
uh!---sae muckle as trying to relieve me?''

  I made a thousand apologies, and laboured so hard to represent
the impossibility of my affording him relief by my own unassisted
exertions, that at length I succeeded, and the Bailie, who was
as placable as hasty in his temper, extended his favour to me
once more. I next took the liberty of asking him how he had
contrived to extricate himself.

  ``Me extricate! I might hae hung there till the day of judgment
or I could hae helped mysell, wi' my head hinging down on
the tae side, and my heels on the tother, like the yarn-scales in
the weigh-house. It was the creature Dougal that extricated me,
as he did yestreen; he cuttit aff the tails o' my coat wi' his durk,
and another gillie and him set me on my legs as cleverly as if I
had never been aff them. But to see what a thing gude braid
claith is! Had I been in ony o' your rotten French camlets
now, or your drab-de-berries, it would hae screeded like an auld
rag wi' sic a weight as mine. But fair fa' the weaver that
wrought the weft o't---I swung and bobbit yonder as safe as a
gabbart<*> that's moored by a three-ply cable at the Broomielaw.''

* A kind of lighter used in the river Clyde,---probably from the French
* _abare._


  I now inquired what had become of his preserver.

  ``The creature,'' so he continued to call the Highlandman,
``contrived to let me ken there wad be danger in gaun near the
leddy till he came back, and bade me stay here. I am o' the
mind,'' he continued, ``that he's seeking after you---it's a considerate
creature---and troth, I wad swear he was right about
the leddy, as he ca's her, too---Helen Campbell was nane o' the
maist douce maidens, nor meekest wives neither, and folk say
that Rob himsell stands in awe o' her. I doubt she winna ken
me, for it's mony years since we met---I am clear for waiting for
the Dougal creature or we gang near her.''

  I signified my acquiescence in this reasoning; but it was not
the will of fate that day that the Bailie's prudence should profit
himself or any one else.

  Andrew Fairservice, though he had ceased to caper on the
pinnacle upon the cessation of the firing, which had given occasion
for his whimsical exercise, continued, as perched on the
top of an exposed cliff, too conspicuous an object to escape the
sharp eyes of the Highlanders, when they had time to look a
little around them. We were apprized he was discovered, by a
wild and loud halloo set up among the assembled victors, three or
four of whom instantly plunged into the copsewood, and ascended
the rocky side of the hill in different directions towards the place
where they had discovered this whimsical apparition.

  Those who arrived first within gunshot of poor Andrew, did
not trouble themselves to offer him any assistance in the ticklish
posture of his affairs, but levelling their long Spanish-barrelled
guns, gave him to understand, by signs which admitted of no
misconstruction, that he must contrive to come down and submit
himself to their mercy, or to be marked at from beneath, like a
regimental target set up for ball-practice. With such a formidable
hint for venturous exertion, Andrew Fairservice could no
longer hesitate; the more imminent peril overcame his sense of
that which seemed less inevitable, and he began to descend the
cliff at all risks, clutching to the ivy and oak stumps, and projecting
fragments of rock, with an almost feverish anxiety, and
never failing, as circumstances left him a hand at liberty, to extend
it to the plaided gentry below in an attitude of supplication,
as if to deprecate the discharge of their levelled firearms.
In a word, the fellow, under the influence of a counteracting
motive for terror, achieved a safe descent from his perilous
eminence, which, I verily believe, nothing but the fear of instant
death could have moved him to attempt. The awkward mode
of Andrew's descent greatly amused the Highlanders below, who
fired a shot or two while he was engaged in it, without the purpose
of injuring him, as I believe, but merely to enhance the
amusement they derived from his extreme terror, and the superlative
exertions of agility to which it excited him.

  At length he attained firm and comparatively level ground---
or rather, to speak more correctly, his foot slipping at the last
point of descent, he fell on the earth at his full length, and was
raised by the assistance of the Highlanders, who stood to receive
him, and who, ere he gained his legs, stripped him not only of
the whole contents of his pockets, but of periwig, hat, coat,
doublet, stockings, and shoes, performing the feat with such
admirable celerity, that, although he fell on his back a well-clothed
and decent burgher-seeming serving-man, he arose a
forked, uncased, bald-pated, beggarly-looking scarecrow. Without
respect to the pain which his undefended toes experienced
from the sharp encounter of the rocks over which they hurried
him, those who had detected Andrew proceeded to drag him
downward towards the road through all the intervening obstacles.

  In the course of their descent, Mr. Jarvie and I became
exposed to their lynx-eyed observation, and instantly half-a-dozen
of armed Highlanders thronged around us, with drawn dirks and
swords pointed at our faces and throats, and cocked pistols presented
against our bodies. To have offered resistance would
have been madness, especially as we had no weapons capable of
supporting such a demonstration. We therefore submitted to
our fate; and with great roughness on the part of those who
assisted at our toilette, were in the act of being reduced to as
unsophisticated a state (to use King Lear's phrase) as the plume-less
biped Andrew Fairservice, who stood shivering between fear
and cold at a few yards' distance. Good chance, however, saved
us from this extremity of wretchedness; for, just as I had
yielded up my cravat (a smart Steinkirk, by the way, and
richly laced), and the Bailie had been disrobed of the fragments
of his riding-coat---enter Dougal, and the scene was changed.
By a high tone of expostulation, mixed with oaths and threats,
as far as I could conjecture the tenor of his language from the
violence of his gestures, he compelled the plunderers, however
reluctant, not only to give up their further depredations on our
property, but to restore the spoil they had already appropriated.
He snatched my cravat from the fellow who had seized it, and
twisted it (in the zeal of his restitution) around my neck with such
suffocating energy as made me think that he had not only been,
during his residence at Glasgow, a substitute of the jailor, but
must moreover have taken lessons as an apprentice of the hangman.
He flung the tattered remnants of Mr. Jarvie's coat around
his shoulders, and as more Highlanders began to flock towards
us from the high road, he led the way downwards, directing and
commanding the others to afford us, but particularly the Bailie,
the assistance necessary to our descending with comparative ease
and safety. It was, however, in vain that Andrew Fairservice
employed his lungs in obsecrating a share of Dougal's protection,
or at least his interference to procure restoration of his shoes.

  ``Na, na,'' said Dougal in reply, ``she's nae gentle pody, I
trow; her petters hae ganged parefoot, or she's muckle mista'en.''
And, leaving Andrew to follow at his leisure, or rather at such
leisure as the surrounding crowd were pleased to indulge him
with, he hurried us down to the pathway in which the skirmish
had been fought, and hastened to present us as additional
captives to the female leader of his band.

  We were dragged before her accordingly, Dougal fighting,
struggling, screaming, as if he were the party most apprehensive
of hurt, and repulsing, by threats and efforts, all those who
attempted to take a nearer interest in our capture than he
seemed to do himself. At length we were placed before the
heroine of the day, whose appearance, as well as those of the
savage, uncouth, yet martial figures who surrounded us, struck
me, to own the truth, with considerable apprehension. I do
not know if Helen MacGregor had personally mingled in the
fray, and indeed I was afterwards given to understand the
contrary; but the specks of blood on her brow, her hands and
naked arms, as well as on the blade of her sword which she
continued to hold in her hand---her flushed countenance, and
the disordered state of the raven locks which escaped from
under the red bonnet and plume that formed her head-dress,
seemed all to intimate that she had taken an immediate share
in the conflict. Her keen black eyes and features expressed an
imagination inflamed by the pride of gratified revenge, and the
triumph of victory. Yet there was nothing positively sanguinary,
or cruel, in her deportment; and she reminded me,
when the immediate alarm of the interview was over, of some
of the paintings I had seen of the inspired heroines in the
Catholic churches of France. She was not, indeed, sufficiently
beautiful for a Judith, nor had she the inspired expression of
features which painters have given to Deborah, or to the wife
of Heber the Kenite, at whose feet the strong oppressor of
Israel, who dwelled in Harosheth of the Gentiles, bowed down,
fell, and lay a dead man. Nevertheless, the enthusiasm by
which she was agitated gave her countenance and deportment,
wildly dignified in themselves, an air which made her approach
nearly to the ideas of those wonderful artists who gave to the
eye the heroines of Scripture history.

  I was uncertain in what terms to accost a personage so
uncommon, when Mr. Jarvie, breaking the ice with a preparatory
cough (for the speed with which he had been brought
into her presence had again impeded his respiration), addressed
her as follows:---``Uh! uh! &c. &c. I am very happy to have
this _joyful_ opportunity'' (a quaver in his voice strongly belied
the emphasis which he studiously laid on the word joyful)---
``this joyful occasion,'' he resumed, trying to give the adjective
a more suitable accentuation, ``to wish my kinsman
Robin's wife a very good morning---Uh! uh!---How's a' wi' ye?''
(by this time he had talked himself into his usual jog-trot
manner, which exhibited a mixture of familiarity and self-importance)
---``How's a' wi' ye this lang time? Ye'll hae
forgotten me, Mrs. MacGregor Campbell, as your cousin---uh!
uh!---but ye'll mind my father, Deacon Nicol Jarvie, in the
Saut Market o' Glasgow?---an honest man he was, and a
sponsible, and respectit you and yours. Sae, as I said before,
I am right glad to see you, Mrs. MacGregor Campbell, as my
kinsman's wife. I wad crave the liberty of a kinsman to salute
you, but that your gillies keep such a dolefu' fast haud o' my
arms, and, to speak Heaven's truth and a magistrate's, ye
wadna be the waur of a cogfu' o' water before ye welcomed your
friends.''

  There was something in the familiarity of this introduction
which ill suited the exalted state of temper of the person to
whom it was addressed, then busied with distributing dooms of
death, and warm from conquest in a perilous encounter.

  ``What fellow are you,'' she said, ``that dare to claim kindred
with the MacGregor, and neither wear his dress nor speak his
language?---What are you, that have the tongue and the habit
of the hound, and yet seek to lie down with the deer?''

  ``I dinna ken,'' said the undaunted Bailie, ``if the kindred
has ever been weel redd out to you yet, cousin---but it's ken'd,
and can be prov'd. My mother, Elspeth MacFarlane, was the
wife of my father, Deacon Nicol Jarvie---peace be wi' them
baith!---and Elspeth was the daughter of Parlane MacFarlane,
at the Sheeling o' Loch Sloy. Now, this Parlane MacFarlane,
as his surviving daughter Maggy MacFarlane, _alias_ MacNab,
wha married Duncan MacNab o' Stuckavrallachan, can testify,
stood as near to your gudeman, Robert MacGregor, as in the
fourth degree of kindred, for''------

  The virago lopped the genealogical tree, by demanding
haughtily, ``If a stream of rushing water acknowledged any
relation with the portion withdrawn from it for the mean
domestic uses of those who dwelt on its banks?''

  ``Vera true, kinswoman,'' said the Bailie; ``but for a' that,
the burn wad be glad to hae the milldam back again in simmer,
when the chuckie-stanes are white in the sun. I ken weel
eneugh you Hieland folk haud us Glasgow people light and
cheap for our language and our claes;---but everybody speaks
their native tongue that they learned in infancy; and it would
be a daft-like thing to see me wi' my fat wame in a short
Hieland coat, and my puir short houghs gartered below the
knee, like ane o' your lang-legged gillies. Mair by token, kinswoman,''
he continued, in defiance of various intimations by
which Dougal seemed to recommend silence, as well as of the
marks of impatience which the Amazon evinced at his loquacity,
``I wad hae ye to mind that the king's errand whiles
comes in the cadger's gate, and that, for as high as ye may
think o' the gudeman, as it's right every wife should honour
her husband---there's Scripture warrant for that---yet as high
as ye haud him, as I was saying, I hae been serviceable to Rob
ere now;---forbye a set o' pearlins I sent yourself when ye was
gaun to be married, and when Rob was an honest weel-doing
drover, and nane o' this unlawfu' wark, wi' fighting, and flashes,
and fluff-gibs, disturbing the king's peace and disarming his
soldiers.''

  He had apparently touched on a key which his kinswoman
could not brook. She drew herself up to her full height, and
betrayed the acuteness of her feelings by a laugh of mingled
scorn and bitterness.

  ``Yes,'' she said, ``you, and such as you, might claim a
relation to us, when we stooped to be the paltry wretches fit
to exist under your dominion, as your hewers of wood and
drawers of water---to find cattle for your banquets, and subjects
for your laws to oppress and trample on. But now we are free---
free by the very act which left us neither house nor hearth, food
nor covering---which bereaved me of all---of all---and makes
me groan when I think I must still cumber the earth for other
purposes than those of vengeance. And I will carry on the
work, this day has so well commenced, by a deed that shall
break all bands between MacGregor and the Lowland churls.
Here Allan---Dougal---bind these Sassenachs neck and heel
together, and throw them into the Highland Loch to seek for
their Highland kinsfolk.''

  The Bailie, alarmed at this mandate, was commencing an
expostulation, which probably would have only inflamed the
violent passions of the person whom he addressed, when Dougal
threw himself between them, and in his own language, which
he spoke with a fluency and rapidity strongly contrasted by
the slow, imperfect, and idiot-like manner in which he expressed
himself in English, poured forth what I doubt not was a very
animated pleading in our behalf.

  His mistress replied to him, or rather cut short his harangue,
by exclaiming in English (as if determined to make us taste in
anticipation the full bitterness of death)---``Base dog, and son
of a dog, do you dispute my commands? Should I tell ye to
cut out their tongues and put them into each other's throats,
to try which would there best knap Southron, or to tear out
their hearts and put them into each other's breasts, to see which
would there best plot treason against the MacGregor---and such
things have been done of old in the day of revenge, when our
fathers had wrongs to redress---Should I command you to do
this, would it be your part to dispute my orders?''

  ``To be sure, to be sure,'' Dougal replied, with accents of
profound submission; ``her pleasure suld be done---tat's but
reason; but an it were---tat is, an it could be thought the
same to her to coup the ill-faured loon of ta red-coat Captain,
and hims corporal Cramp, and twa three o' the red-coats, into
the loch, herself wad do't wi' muckle mair great satisfaction
than to hurt ta honest civil shentlemans as were friends to the
Gregarach, and came up on the Chiefs assurance, and not to do
no treason, as herself could testify.''

  The lady was about to reply, when a few wild strains of a
pibroch were heard advancing up the road from Aberfoil, the
same probably which had reached the ears of Captain Thornton's
rear-guard, and determined him to force his way onward
rather than return to the village, on finding the pass occupied.
The skirmish being of very short duration, the armed men who
followed this martial melody, had not, although quickening
their march when they heard the firing, been able to arrive in
time sufficient to take any share in the rencontre. The victory,
therefore, was complete without them, and they now arrived
only to share in the triumph of their countrymen.

  There was a marked difference betwixt the appearance of
these new comers and that of the party by which our escort
had been defeated---and it was greatly in favour of the former.
Among the Highlanders who surrounded the Chieftainess, if I
may presume to call her so without offence to grammar, were
men in the extremity of age, boys scarce able to bear a sword,
and even women---all, in short, whom the last necessity urges
to take up arms; and it added a shade of bitter shame to the
defection which clouded Thornton's manly countenance, when
he found that the numbers and position of a foe, otherwise so
despicable, had enabled them to conquer his brave veterans.
But the thirty or forty Highlanders who now joined the others,
were all men in the prime of youth or manhood, active clean-made
fellows, whose short hose and belted plaids set out their
sinewy limbs to the best advantage. Their arms were as superior
to those of the first party as their dress and appearance. The
followers of the female Chief had axes, scythes, and other
antique weapons, in aid of their guns; and some had only
clubs, daggers, and long knives. But of the second party, most
had pistols at the belt, and almost all had dirks hanging at the
pouches which they wore in front. Each had a good gun in
his hand, and a broadsword by his side, besides a stout round
target, made of light wood, covered with leather, and curiously
studded with brass, and having a steel spike screwed into the
centre. These hung on their left shoulder during a march, or
while they were engaged in exchanging fire with the enemy,
and were worn on their left arm when they charged with sword
in hand.

  But it was easy to see that this chosen band had not arrived
from a victory such as they found their ill-appointed companions
possessed of. The pibroch sent forth occasionally a few wailing
notes expressive of a very different sentiment from triumph;
and when they appeared before the wife of their Chieftain, it
was in silence, and with downcast and melancholy looks. They
paused when they approached her, and the pipes again sent forth
the same wild and melancholy strain.

  Helen rushed towards them with a countenance in which
anger was mingled with apprehension.---``What means this,
Alaster?'' she said to the minstrel---``why a lament in the
moment of victory?---Robert---Hamish---where's the MacGregor?
---where's your father?''

  Her sons, who led the band, advanced with slow and irresolute
steps towards her, and murmured a few words in Gaelic,
at hearing which she set up a shriek that made the rocks ring
again, in which all the women and boys joined, clapping their
hands and yelling as if their lives had been expiring in the
sound. The mountain echoes, silent since the military sounds
of battle had ceased, had now to answer these frantic and discordant
shrieks of sorrow, which drove the very night-birds
from their haunts in the rocks, as if they were startled to hear
orgies more hideous and ill-omened than their own, performed
in the face of open day.

  ``Taken!'' repeated Helen, when the clamour had subsided
---``Taken!---captive!---and you live to say so?---Coward
dogs! did I nurse you for this, that you should spare your
blood on your father's enemies? or see him prisoner, and come
back to tell it?''

  The sons of MacGregor, to whom this expostulation was
addressed, were youths, of whom the eldest had hardly attained
his twentieth year. _Hamish,_ or James, the elder of these
youths, was the tallest by a head, and much handsomer than
his brother; his light-blue eyes, with a profusion of fair hair,
which streamed from under his smart blue bonnet, made his
whole appearance a most favourable specimen of the Highland
youth. The younger was called Robert; but, to distinguish
him from his father, the Highlanders added the epithet _Oig,_ or
the young. Dark hair, and dark features, with a ruddy glow of
health and animation, and a form strong and well-set beyond his
years, completed the sketch of the young mountaineer.

  Both now stood before their mother with countenances
clouded with grief and shame, and listened, with the most
respectful submission, to the reproaches with which she loaded
them. At length when her resentment appeared in some
degree to subside, the eldest, speaking in English, probably that
he might not be understood by their followers, endeavoured
respectfully to vindicate himself and his brother from his
mother's reproaches. I was so near him as to comprehend
much of what he said; and, as it was of great consequence to
me to be possessed of information in this strange crisis, I failed
not to listen as attentively as I could.

  ``The MacGregor,'' his son stated, ``had been called out upon
a trysting with a Lowland hallion, who came with a token
from''---he muttered the name very low, but I thought it sounded
like my own. ``The MacGregor,'' he said, ``accepted of the invitation,
but commanded the Saxon who brought the message
to be detained, as a hostage that good faith should be observed
to him. Accordingly he went to the place of appointment''
(which had some wild Highland name that I cannot remember),
``attended only by Angus Breck and Little Rory, commanding
no one to follow him. Within half an hour Angus Breck came
back with the doleful tidings that the MacGregor had been
surprised and made prisoner by a party of Lennox militia, under
Galbraith of Garschattachin.'' He added, ``that Galbraith, on
being threatened by MacGregor, who upon his capture menaced
him with retaliation on the person of the hostage, had treated
the threat with great contempt, replying, `Let each side hang his
man; we'll hang the thief, and your catherans may hang the
gauger, Rob, and the country will be rid of two damned things
at once, a wild Highlander and a revenue officer.' Angus Breck,
less carefully looked to than his master, contrived to escape from
the hands of the captors, after having been in their custody long
enough to hear this discussion, and to bring off the news.''

  ``And did you learn this, you false-hearted traitor,'' said the
wife of MacGregor, ``and not instantly rush to your father's
rescue, to bring him off, or leave your body on the place?''

  The young MacGregor modestly replied, by representing the
very superior force of the enemy, and stated, that as they made
no preparation for leaving the country, he had fallen back up
the glen with the purpose of collecting a band sufficient to
attempt a rescue with some tolerable chance of success. At
length he said, ``the militiamen would quarter, he understood,
in the neighbouring house of Gartartan, or the old castle in the
port of Monteith, or some other stronghold, which, although
strong and defensible, was nevertheless capable of being surprised,
could they but get enough of men assembled for the
purpose.''

  I understood afterwards that the rest of the freebooter's
followers were divided into two strong bands, one destined to
watch the remaining garrison of Inversnaid, a party of which,
under Captain Thornton, had been defeated; and another to
show front to the Highland clans who had united with the
regular troops and Lowlanders in this hostile and combined
invasion of that mountainous and desolate territory, which
lying between the lakes of Loch Lomond, Loch Katrine, and
Loch Ard, was at this time currently called Rob Roy's, or the
MacGregor country. Messengers were despatched in great
haste, to concentrate, as I supposed, their forces, with a view to
the purposed attack on the Lowlanders; and the dejection and
despair, at first visible on each countenance, gave place to the
hope of rescuing their leader, and to the thirst of vengeance.
It was under the burning influence of the latter passion that
the wife of MacGregor commanded that the hostage exchanged
for his safety should be brought into her presence. I believe
her sons had kept this unfortunate wretch out of her sight, for
fear of the consequences; but if it was so, their humane precaution
only postponed his fate. They dragged forward at her
summons a wretch already half dead with terror, in whose
agonised features I recognised, to my horror and astonishment,
my old acquaintance Morris.

  He fell prostrate before the female Chief with an effort to
clasp her knees, from which she drew back, as if his touch had
been pollution, so that all he could do in token of the extremity
of his humiliation, was to kiss the hem of her plaid. I never
heard entreaties for life poured forth with such agony of spirit.
The ecstasy of fear was such, that instead of paralysing his
tongue, as on ordinary occasions, it even rendered him eloquent;
and, with cheeks pale as ashes, hands compressed in agony,
eyes that seemed to be taking their last look of all mortal
objects, he protested, with the deepest oaths, his total ignorance
of any design on the person of Rob Roy, whom he swore he
loved and honoured as his own soul. In the inconsistency of
his terror, he said he was but the agent of others, and he muttered
the name of Rashleigh. He prayed but for life---for life
he would give all he had in the world: it was but life he asked
---life, if it were to be prolonged under tortures and privations:
he asked only breath, though it should be drawn in the damps
of the lowest caverns of their hills.

  It is impossible to describe the scorn, the loathing, and contempt,
with which the wife of MacGregor regarded this wretched
petitioner for the poor boon of existence.

  ``I could have bid ye live,'' she said, ``had life been to you
the same weary and wasting burden that it is to me---that it is
to every noble and generous mind. But you---wretch! you
could creep through the world unaffected by its various disgraces,
its ineffable miseries, its constantly accumulating masses
of crime and sorrow: you could live and enjoy yourself, while
the noble-minded are betrayed---while nameless and birthless
villains tread on the neck of the brave and the long-descended:
you could enjoy yourself, like a butcher's dog in the shambles,
battening on garbage, while the slaughter of the oldest and best
went on around you! This enjoyment you shall not live to
partake of!---you shall die, base dog! and that before yon cloud
has passed over the sun.''

  She gave a brief command in Gaelic to her attendants, two of
whom seized upon the prostrate suppliant, and hurried him to
the brink of a cliff which overhung the flood. He set up the
most piercing and dreadful cries that fear ever uttered---I may
well term them dreadful, for they haunted my sleep for years
afterwards. As the murderers, or executioners, call them as
you will, dragged him along, he recognised me even in that
moment of horror, and exclaimed, in the last articulate words I
ever heard him utter, ``Oh, Mr. Osbaldistone, save me!---save
me!''

  I was so much moved by this horrid spectacle, that, although
in momentary expectation of sharing his fate, I did attempt to
speak in his behalf, but, as might have been expected, my
interference was sternly disregarded. The victim was held fast
by some, while others, binding a large heavy stone in a plaid,
tied it round his neck, and others again eagerly stripped him of
some part of his dress. Half-naked, and thus manacled, they
hurled him into the lake, there about twelve feet deep, with a
loud halloo of vindictive triumph,---above which, however, his
last death-shriek, the yell of mortal agony, was distinctly heard.
The heavy burden splashed in the dark-blue waters, and the
Highlanders, with their pole-axes and swords, watched an instant
to guard, lest, extricating himself from the load to which he was
attached, the victim might have struggled to regain the shore.
But the knot had been securely bound---the wretched man sunk
without effort; the waters, which his fall had disturbed, settled
calmly over him, and the unit of that life for which he had
pleaded so strongly, was for ever withdrawn from the sum of
human existence.
