





	INTRODUCTION---(1829)



  When the author projected this further encroachment on the patience
of an indulgent public, he was at some loss for a title; a good name
being very nearly of as much consequence in literature as in life.
The title of _Rob Roy_ was suggested by the late Mr. Constable, whose
sagacity and experience foresaw the germ of popularity which it
included.

  No introduction can be more appropriate to the work than some
account of the singular character whose name is given to the title-page,
and who, through good report and bad report, has maintained
a wonderful degree of importance in popular recollection. This
cannot be ascribed to the distinction of his birth, which, though that
of a gentleman, had in it nothing of high destination, and gave him
little right to command in his clan. Neither, though he lived a
busy, restless, and enterprising life, were his feats equal to those of
other freebooters, who have been less distinguished. He owed his
fame in a great measure to his residing on the very verge of the
Highlands, and playing such pranks in the beginning of the 18th
century, as are usually ascribed to Robin Hood in the middle ages,---
and that within forty miles of Glasgow, a great commercial city, the
seat of a learned university. Thus a character like his, blending the
wild virtues, the subtle policy, and unrestrained license of an
American Indian, was flourishing in Scotland during the Augustan
age of Queen Anne and George I. Addison, it is probable, or Pope,
would have been considerably surprised if they had known that there,
existed in the same island with them a personage of Rob Roy's
peculiar habits and profession. It is this strong contrast betwixt
the civilised and cultivated mode of life on the one side of the Highland
line, and the wild and lawless adventures which were habitually
undertaken and achieved by one who dwelt on the opposite side of that
ideal boundary, which creates the interest attached to his name.
Hence it is that even yet,

	Far and near, through vale and hill,
	  Are faces that attest the same,
	And kindle like a fire new stirr'd,
	  At sound of Rob Roy's name.

  There were several advantages which Rob Roy enjoyed for sustaining
to advantage the character which he assumed.

  The most prominent of these was his descent from, and connection
with, the clan MacGregor, so famous for their misfortunes, and the
indomitable spirit with which they maintained themselves as a clan,
linked and banded together in spite of the most severe laws, executed
with unheard-of rigour against those who bore this forbidden surname.
Their history was that of several others of the original Highland
clans, who were suppressed by more powerful neighbours, and either
extirpated, or forced to secure themselves by renouncing their own
family appellation, and assuming that of the conquerors. The
peculiarity in the story of the MacGregors, is their retaining, with
such tenacity, their separate existence and union as a clan under
circumstances of the utmost urgency. The history of the tribe is
briefly as follows------But we must premise that the tale depends in
some degree on tradition; therefore, excepting when written documents
are, quoted, it must be considered as in some degree dubious.

  The sept of MacGregor claimed a descent from Gregor, or
Gregorius, third son, it is said, of Alpin King of Scots, who
flourished about 787. Hence their original patronymic is MacAlpine,
and they are usually termed the Clan Alpine. An individual
tribe of them retains the same name. They are accounted one
of the most ancient clans in the Highlands, and it is certain they
were a people of original Celtic descent, and occupied at one period
very extensive possessions in Perthshire and Argyleshire, which they
imprudently continued to hold by the _coir a glaive,_ that is, the right
of the sword. Their neighbours, the Earls of Argyle and Breadalbane,
in the meanwhile, managed to leave the lands occupied by the
MacGregors engrossed in those charters which they easily obtained
from the Crown; and thus constituted a legal right in their own
favour, without much regard to its justice. As opportunity occurred
of annoying or extirpating their neighbours, they gradually extended
their own domains, by usurping, under the pretext of such royal
grants, those of their more uncivilised neighbours. A Sir Duncan
Campbell of Lochow, known in the Highlands by the name of
_Donacha Dhu nan Churraichd,_ that is, Black Duncan with the
Cowl, it being his pleasure to wear such a head-gear, is said to have
been peculiarly successful in those acts of spoliation upon the clan
MacGregor.

  The devoted sept, ever finding themselves iniquitously driven from
their possessions, defended themselves by force, and occasionally gained
advantages, which they used cruelly enough. This conduct, though
natural, considering the country and time, was studiously represented
at the capital as arising from an untameable and innate ferocity,
which nothing, it was said, could remedy, save cutting off the tribe
of MacGregor root and branch.

  In an act of Privy Council at Stirling, 22d September 1563, in
the reign of Queen Mary, commission is granted to the most powerful
nobles, and chiefs of the clans, to pursue the clan Gregor with fire and
sword. A similar warrant in 1563, not only grants the like powers
to Sir John Campbell of Glenorchy, the descendant of Duncan with
the Cowl, but discharges the lieges to receive or assist any of the clan
Gregor, or afford them, under any colour whatever, meat, drink, or
clothes.

  An atrocity which the clan Gregor committed in 1589, by the
murder of John Drummond of Drummond-ernoch, a forester of the
royal forest of Glenartney, is elsewhere given, with all its horrid circumstances.
The clan swore upon the severed head of the murdered
man, that they would make common cause in avowing the deed.
This led to an act of the Privy Council, directing another crusade
against the ``wicked clan Gregor, so long continuing in blood,
slaughter, theft, and robbery,'' in which letters of fire and sword are
denounced against them for the space of three years. The reader
will find this particular fact illustrated in the Introduction to the
Legend of Montrose in the present edition of these Novels.

  Other occasions frequently occurred, in which the MacGregors
testified contempt for the laws, from which they had often experienced
severity, but never protection. Though they were gradually deprived
of their possessions, and of all ordinary means of procuring subsistence,
they could not, nevertheless, be supposed likely to starve for
famine, while they had the means of taking from strangers what they
considered as rightfully their own. Hence they became versed in
predatory forays, and accustomed to bloodshed. Their passions were
eager, and, with a little management on the part of some of their
most powerful neighbours, they could easily be _hounded out,_ to use
an expressive Scottish phrase, to commit violence, of which the wily
instigators took the advantage, and left the ignorant MacGregors an
undivided portion of blame and punishment. This policy of pushing
on the fierce clans of the Highlands and Borders to break the peace of
the country, is accounted by the historian one of the most dangerous
practices of his own period, in which the MacGregors were considered
as ready agents.

  Notwithstanding these severe denunciations,---which were acted
upon in the same spirit in which they were conceived, some of the
clan still possessed property, and the chief of the name in 1592 is
designed Allaster MacGregor of Glenstrae. He is said to have been
a brave and active man; but, from the tenor of his confession at his
death, appears to have been engaged in many and desperate feuds,
one of which finally proved fatal to himself and many of his followers.
This was the celebrated conflict at Glenfruin, near the southwestern
extremity of Loch Lomond, in the vicinity of which the MacGregors
continued to exercise much authority by the _coir a glaive,_ or right of
the strongest, which we have already mentioned.

  There had been a long and bloody feud betwixt the MacGregors
and the Laird of Luss, head of the family of Colquhoun, a powerful
race on the lower part of Loch Lomond. The MacGregors' tradition
affirms that the quarrel began on a very trifling subject. Two of the
MacGregors being benighted, asked shelter in a house belonging to a
dependant of the Colquhouns, and were refused. They then retreated
to an out-house, took a wedder from the fold, killed it, and supped
off the carcass, for which (it is said) they offered payment to the
proprietor. The Laird of Luss seized on the offenders, and, by the
summary process which feudal barons had at their command, had
them both condemned and executed. The MacGregors verify this
account of the feud by appealing to a proverb current amongst them,
execrating the hour _(Mult dhu an Carbail ghil)_ that the black wedder.
with the white tail was ever lambed. To avenge this quarrel, the
Laird of MacGregor assembled his clan, to the number of three or
four hundred men, and marched towards Luss from the banks of
Loch Long, by a pass called _Raid na Gael,_ or the Highlandman's
Pass.

  Sir Humphrey Colquhoun received early notice of this incursion,
and collected a strong force, more than twice the number of that of
the invaders. He had with him the gentlemen of the name of
Buchanan, with the Grahams, and other gentry of the Lennox, and
a party of the citizens of Dumbarton, under command of Tobias
Smollett, a magistrate, or bailie, of that town, and ancestor of the
celebrated author.

  The parties met in the valley of Glenfruin, which signifies the
Glen of Sorrow---a name that seemed to anticipate the event of the
day, which, fatal to the conquered party, was at least equally so to
the victors, the ``babe unborn'' of Clan Alpine having reason to
repent it. The MacGregors, somewhat discouraged by the appearance
of a force much superior to their own, were cheered on to the attack
by a Seer, or second-sighted person, who professed that he saw the
shrouds of the dead wrapt around their principal opponents. The
clan charged with great fury on the front of the enemy, while John
MacGregor, with a strong party, made an unexpected attack on the
flank. A great part of the Colquhouns' force consisted in cavalry,
which could not act in the boggy ground. They were said to have
disputed the field manfully, but were at length completely routed, and
a merciless slaughter was exercised on the fugitives, of whom betwixt
two and three hundred fell on the field and in the pursuit. If the
MacGregors lost, as is averred, only two men slain in the action, they
had slight provocation for an indiscriminate massacre. It is said
that their fury extended itself to a party of students for clerical orders,
who had imprudently come to see the battle. Some doubt is thrown
on this fact, from the indictment against the chief of the clan Gregor
being silent on the subject, as is the historian Johnston, and a Professor
Ross, who wrote an account of the battle twenty-nine years after
it was fought. It is, however, constantly averred by the tradition of
the country, and a stone where the deed was done is called _Leck-a-Mhinisteir,_
the Minister or Clerk's Flagstone. The MacGregors, by
a tradition which is now found to be inaccurate, impute this cruel
action to the ferocity of a single man of their tribe, renowned for size
and strength, called Dugald, _Ciar Mhor,_ or the great Mouse-coloured
Man. He was MacGregor's foster-brother, and the chief committed
the youths to his charge, with directions to keep them safely till the
affray was over. Whether fearful of their escape, or incensed by
some sarcasms which they threw on his tribe, or whether out of mere
thirst of blood, this savage, while the other MacGregors were engaged
in the pursuit, poniarded his helpless and defenceless prisoners.
When the chieftain, on his return, demanded where the youths were,
the _Ciar_ (pronounced Kiar) _Mhor_ drew out his bloody dirk, saying
in Gaelic, ``Ask that, and God save me!'' The latter words allude.
to the exclamation which his victims used when he was murdering
them. It would seem, therefore, that this horrible part of the story
is founded on fact, though the number of the youths so slain is
probably exaggerated in the Lowland accounts. The common people
say that the blood of the Ciar Mhor's victims can never be washed off
the stone. When MacGregor learnt their fate, he expressed the
utmost horror at the deed, and upbraided his foster-brother with having
done that which would occasion the destruction of him and his clan.
This supposed homicide was the ancestor of Rob Roy, and the tribe
from which he was descended. He lies buried at the church of
Fortingal, where his sepulchre, covered with a large stone,<*> is still

* Note A. The Grey Stone of MacGregor.

shown, and where his great strength and courage are the theme of
many traditions.<*>

* Note B. Dugald Ciar Mhor.


  MacGregor's brother was one of the very few of the tribe who was
slain. He was buried near the field of battle, and the place is
marked by a rude stone, called the Grey Stone of MacGregor.

  Sir Humphrey Colquhoun, being well mounted, escaped for the
time to the castle of Banochar, or Benechra. It proved no sure defence,
however, for he was shortly after murdered in a vault of the
castle,---the family annals say by the MacGregors, though other
accounts charge the deed upon the MacFarlanes.

  This battle of Glenfruin, and the severity which the victors
exercised in the pursuit, was reported to King James VI. in a
manner the most unfavourable to the clan Gregor, whose general
character, being that of lawless though brave men, could not much
avail them in such a case. That James might fully understand the
extent of the slaughter, the widows of the slain, to the number of
eleven score, in deep mourning, riding upon white palfreys, and each
bearing her husband's bloody shirt on a spear, appeared at Stirling,
in presence of a monarch peculiarly accessible to such sights of fear
and sorrow, to demand vengeance for the death of their husbands,
upon those by whom they had been made desolate.

  The remedy resorted to was at least as severe as the cruelties which
it was designed to punish. By an Act of the Privy Council, dated
3d April 1603, the name of MacGregor was expressly abolished, and
those who had hitherto borne it were commanded to change it for other
surnames, the pain of death being denounced against those who should
call themselves Gregor or MacGregor, the names of their fathers.
Under the same penalty, all who had been at the conflict of Glenfruin,
or accessory to other marauding parties charged in the act, were prohibited
from carrying weapons, except a pointless knife to eat their
victuals. By a subsequent act of Council, 24th June 1613, death
was denounced against any persons of the tribe formerly called MacGregor,
who should presume to assemble in greater numbers than four.
Again, by an Act of Parliament, 1617, chap. 26, these laws were
continued, and extended to the rising generation, in respect that great
numbers of the children of those against whom the acts of Privy
Council had been directed, were stated to be then approaching to
maturity, who, if permitted to resume the name of their parents,
would render the clan as strong as it was before.

  The execution of those severe acts was chiefly intrusted in the west
to the Earl of Argyle and the powerful clan of Campbell, and to the
Earl of Athole and his followers in the more eastern Highlands of
Perthshire. The MacGregors failed not to resist with the most determined
courage; and many a valley in the West and North Highlands
retains memory of the severe conflicts, in which the proscribed
clan sometimes obtained transient advantages, and always sold their
lives dearly. At length the pride of Allaster MacGregor, the chief
of the clan, was so much lowered by the sufferings of his people, that
he resolved to surrender himself to the Earl of Argyle, with his
principal followers, on condition that they should be sent out of Scotland.
If the unfortunate chief's own account be true, he had more
reasons than one for expecting some favour from the Earl, who had
in secret advised and encouraged him to many of the desperate actions
for which he was now called to so severe a reckoning. But Argyle,
as old Birrell expresses himself, kept a Highlandman's promise with
them, fulfilling it to the ear, and breaking it to the sense. MacGregor
was sent under a strong guard to the frontier of England,
and being thus, in the literal sense, sent out of Scotland, Argyle was
judged to have kept faith with him, though the same party which
took him there brought him back to Edinburgh in custody.

  MacGregor of Glenstrae was tried before the Court of Justiciary,
20th January 1604, and found guilty. He appears to have been
instantly conveyed from the bar to the gallows; for Birrell, of the
same date, reports that he was hanged at the Cross, and, for distinction
sake, was suspended higher by his own height than two of his
kindred and friends.

  On the 18th of February following, more men of the MacGregors
were executed, after a long imprisonment, and several others in the
beginning of March.

  The Earl of Argyle's service, in conducting to the surrender of the
insolent and wicked race and name of MacGregor, notorious common
malefactors, and in the in-bringing of MacGregor, with a great many
of the leading men of the clan, worthily executed to death for their
offences, is thankfully acknowledged by an Act of Parliament, 1607,
chap. 16, and rewarded with a grant of twenty chalders of victual
out of the lands of Kintire.

  The MacGregors, notwithstanding the letters of fire and sword, and
orders for military execution repeatedly directed against them by the
Scottish legislature, who apparently lost all the calmness of conscious
dignity and security, and could not even name the outlawed clan
without vituperation, showed no inclination to be blotted out of the
roll of clanship. They submitted to the law, indeed, so far as to
take the names of the neighbouring families amongst whom they
happened to live, nominally becoming, as the case might render it
most convenient, Drummonds, Campbells, Grahams, Buchanans,
Stewarts, and the like; but to all intents and purposes of combination
and mutual attachment, they remained the clan Gregor, united
together for right or wrong, and menacing with the general vengeance
of their race, all who committed aggressions against any individual
of their number.

  They continued to take and give offence with as little hesitation as
before the legislative dispersion which had been attempted, as appears
from the preamble to statute 1633, chapter 30, setting forth, that the
clan Gregor, which had been suppressed and reduced to quietness by
the great care of the late King James of eternal memory, had nevertheless
broken out again, in the counties of Perth, Stirling, Clackmannan,
Monteith, Lennox, Angus, and Mearns; for which reason
the statute re-establishes the disabilities attached to the clan, and,
grants a new commission for enforcing the laws against that wicked
and rebellious race.

  Notwithstanding the extreme severities of King James I. and
Charles I. against this unfortunate people, who were rendered furious
by proscription, and then punished for yielding to the passions which
had been wilfully irritated, the MacGregors to a man attached themselves
during the civil war to the cause of the latter monarch. Their
bards have ascribed this to the native respect of the MacGregors for
the crown of Scotland, which their ancestors once wore, and have
appealed to their armorial bearings, which display a pine-tree crossed
saltire wise with a naked sword, the point of which supports a royal
crown. But, without denying that such motives may have had their
weight, we are disposed to think, that a war which opened the low
country to the raids of the clan Gregor would have more charms for
them than any inducement to espouse the cause of the Covenanters,
which would have brought them into contact with Highlanders as
fierce as themselves, and having as little to lose. Patrick MacGregor,
their leader, was the son of a distinguished chief, named Duncan
Abbarach, to whom Montrose wrote letters as to his trusty and
special friend, expressing his reliance on his devoted loyalty, with an
assurance, that when once his Majesty's affairs were placed upon a
permanent footing, the grievances of the clan MacGregor should be
redressed.

  At a subsequent period of these melancholy times, we find the clan
Gregor claiming the immunities of other tribes, when summoned by
the Scottish Parliament to resist the invasion of the Commonwealth's
army, in 1651. On the last day of March in that year, a supplication
to the King and Parliament, from Calum MacCondachie Vich
Euen, and Euen MacCondachie Euen, in their own name, and that
of the whole name of MacGregor, set forth, that while, in obedience to
the orders of Parliament, enjoining all clans to come out in the
present service under their chieftains, for the defence of religion, king,
and kingdoms, the petitioners were drawing their men to guard
the passes at the head of the river Forth, they were interfered with by
the Earl of Athole and the Laird of Buchanan, who had required
the attendance of many of the clan Gregor upon their arrays. This
interference was, doubtless, owing to the change of name, which seems
to have given rise to the claim of the Earl of Athole and the Laird
of Buchanan to muster the MacGregors under their banners, as
Murrays or Buchanans. It does not appear that the petition of the
MacGregors, to be permitted to come out in a body, as other clans,
received any answer. But upon the Restoration, King Charles, in
the first Scottish Parliament of his reign (statute 1661, chap. 195),
annulled the various acts against the clan Gregor, and restored them
to the full use of their family name, and the other privileges of liege
subjects, setting forth, as a reason for this lenity, that those who were
formerly designed MacGregors had, during the late troubles, conducted
themselves with such loyalty and affection to his Majesty, as might
justly wipe off all memory of former miscarriages, and take away all
marks of reproach for the same.

  It is singular enough, that it seems to have aggravated the feelings
of the non-conforming Presbyterians, when the penalties which were
most unjustly imposed upon themselves were relaxed towards the poor
MacGregors;---so little are the best men, any more than the worst,
able to judge with impartiality of the same measures, as applied to
themselves, or to others. Upon the Restoration, an influence inimical
to this unfortunate clan, said to be the same with that which afterwards
dictated the massacre of Glencoe, occasioned the re-enaction of
the penal statutes against the MacGregors. There are no reasons
given why these highly penal acts should have been renewed; nor is
it alleged that the clan had been guilty of late irregularities. Indeed,
there is some reason to think that the clause was formed of set purpose,
in a shape which should elude observation; for, though containing
conclusions fatal to the rights of so many Scottish subjects, it is
neither mentioned in the title nor the rubric of the Act of Parliament
in which it occurs, and is thrown briefly in at the close of the statute
1693, chap. 61, entitled, an Act for the Justiciary in the Highlands.

  It does not, however, appear that after the Revolution the acts
against the clan were severely enforced; and in the latter half of
the eighteenth century, they were not enforced at all. Commissioners
of supply were named in Parliament by the proscribed title of MacGregor,
and decrees of courts of justice were pronounced, and legal
deeds entered into, under the same appellative. The MacGregors,
however, while the laws continued in the statute-book, still suffered
under the deprivation of the name which was their birthright, and
some attempts were made for the purpose of adopting another, MacAlpine
or Grant being proposed as the title of the whole clan in
future. No agreement, however, could be entered into; and the evil
was submitted to as a matter of necessity, until full redress was
obtained from the British Parliament, by an act abolishing for ever
the penal statutes which had been so long imposed upon this ancient
race. This statute, well merited by the services of many a gentleman
of the clan in behalf of their King and country, was passed, and the
clan proceeded to act upon it with the same spirit of ancient times,
which had made them suffer severely under a deprivation that would
have been deemed of little consequence by a great part of their fellow-subjects.

  They entered into a deed recognising John Murray of Lanrick,
Esq. (afterwards Sir John MacGregor, Baronet), representative of
the family of Glencarnock, as lawfully descended from the ancient
stock and blood of the Lairds and Lords of MacGregor, and therefore
acknowledged him as their chief on all lawful occasions and causes
whatsoever. The deed was subscribed by eight hundred and twenty-six
persons of the name of MacGregor, capable of bearing arms. A
great many of the clan during the last war formed themselves into
what was called the Clan Alpine Regiment, raised in 1799, under
the command of their Chief and his brother Colonel MacGregor.

  Having briefly noticed the history of this clan, which presents a
rare and interesting example of the indelible character of the patriarchal
system, the author must now offer some notices of the individual
who gives name to these volumes.

  In giving an account of a Highlander, his pedigree is first to be
considered. That of Rob Roy was deduced from Ciar Mhor, the
great mouse-coloured man, who is accused by tradition of having
slain the young students at the battle of Glenfruin.

  Without puzzling ourselves and our readers with the intricacies
of Highland genealogy, it is enough to say, that after the death of
Allaster MacGregor of Glenstrae, the clan, discouraged by the unremitting
persecution of their enemies, seem not to have had the means
of placing themselves under the command of a single =chief.= According
to their places of residence and immediate descent, the several
families were led and directed by _Chieftains,_ which, in the Highland
acceptation, signifies the head of a particular branch of a tribe, in
opposition to _Chief,_ who is the leader and commander of the whole
name.

  The family and descendants of Dugald Ciar Mhor lived chiefly
in the mountains between Loch Lomond and Loch Katrine, and
occupied a good deal of property there---whether by sufferance, by the
right of the sword, which it was never safe to dispute with them, or
by legal titles of various kinds, it would be useless to inquire and
unnecessary to detail. Enough;---there they certainly were---a
people whom their most powerful neighbours were desirous to conciliate,
their friendship in peace being very necessary to the quiet of the
vicinage, and their assistance in war equally prompt and effectual.

  Rob Roy MacGregor Campbell, which last name he bore in consequence
of the Acts of Parliament abolishing his own, was the younger
son of Donald MacGregor of Glengyle, said to have been a Lieutenant-Colonel
(probably in the service of James II.), by his wife, a
daughter of Campbell of Glenfalloch. Rob's own designation was of
Inversnaid; but he appears to have acquired a right of some kind
or other to the property or possession of Craig Royston, a domain of
rock and forest, lying on the east side of Loch Lomond, where that
beautiful lake stretches into the dusky mountains of Glenfalloch.

  The time of his birth is uncertain. But he is said to have been
active in the scenes of war and plunder which succeeded the Revolution;
and tradition affirms him to have been the leader in a predatory
incursion into the parish of Kippen, in the Lennox, which took
place in the year 1691. It was of almost a bloodless character, only
one person losing his life; but from the extent of the depredation, it
was long distinguished by the name of the Her'-ship, or devastation, of
Kippen.<*> The time of his death is also uncertain, but as he is
said to have survived the year 1733, and died an aged man, it is

* See _Statistcal Account of Scotland,_ 1st edition, vol. xviii. p. 332. Parish of
* Kippen.

probable he may have been twenty-five about the time of the Her'-ship
of Kippen, which would assign his birth to the middle of the 17th
century.

  In the more quiet times which succeeded the Revolution, Rob Roy,
or Red Robert, seems to have exerted his active talents, which were of
no mean order, as a drover, or trader in cattle, to a great extent.
It may well be supposed that in those days no Lowland, much less
English drovers, ventured to enter the Highlands. The cattle, which
were the staple commodity of the mountains, were escorted down to
fairs, on the borders of the Lowlands, by a party of Highlanders,
with their arms rattling around them; and who dealt, however, in
all honour and good faith with their Southern customers. A fray,
indeed, would sometimes arise, when the Lowlandmen, chiefly Borderers,
who had to supply the English market, used to dip their
bonnets in the next brook, and wrapping them round their hands,
oppose their cudgels to the naked broadswords, which had not always
the superiority. I have heard from aged persons who had been
engaged in such affrays, that the Highlanders used remarkably fair
play, never using the point of the sword, far less their pistols or
daggers; so that

	With many a stiff thwack and many a bang,
	Hard crabtree and cold iron rang.

  A slash or two, or a broken head, was easily accommodated, and
as the trade was of benefit to both parties, trifling skirmishes were
not allowed to interrupt its harmony. Indeed it was of vital interest
to the Highlanders, whose income, so far as derived from their estates,
depended entirely on the sale of black cattle; and a sagacious and
experienced dealer benefited not only himself, but his friends and
neighbours, by his speculations. Those of Rob Roy were for several
years so successful as to inspire general confidence, and raise him in
the estimation of the country in which he resided.

  His importance was increased by the death of his father, in consequence
of which he succeeded to the management of his nephew Gregor
MacGregor of Glengyle's property, and, as his tutor, to such influence
with the clan and following as was due to the representative of
Dugald Ciar. Such influence was the more uncontrolled, that this
family of the MacGregors seemed to have refused adherence to MacGregor
of Glencarnock, the ancestor of the present Sir Ewan MacGregor,
and asserted a kind of independence.

  It was at this time that Rob Roy acquired an interest by purchase,
wadset, or otherwise, to the property of Craig Royston already mentioned.
He was in particular favour, during this prosperous period
of his life, with his nearest and most powerful neighbour, James, first
Duke of Montrose, from whom he received many marks of regard.
His Grace consented to give his nephew and himself a right of property
on the estates of Glengyle and Inversnaid, which they had till
then only held as kindly tenants. The Duke also, with a view to
the interest of the country and his own estate, supported our adventurer
by loans of money to a considerable amount, to enable him to
carry on his speculations in the cattle trade.

  Unfortunately that species of commerce was and is liable to sudden
fluctuations; and Rob Roy was, by a sudden depression of markets,
and, as a friendly tradition adds, by the bad faith of a partner
named MacDonald, whom he had imprudently received into his confidence,
and intrusted with a considerable sum of money, rendered
totally insolvent. He absconded, of course---not empty-handed, if it
be true, as stated in an advertisement for his apprehension, that he
had in his possession sums to the amount of <L>1000 sterling, obtained
from several noblemen and gentlemen under pretence of purchasing
cows for them in the Highlands. This advertisement appeared in
June 1712, and was several times repeated. It fixes the period when
Rob Roy exchanged his commercial adventures for speculations of a
very different complexion.<*>

* See Appendix, No. I.


  He appears at this period first to have removed from his ordinary
dwelling at Inversnaid, ten or twelve Scots miles (which is double
the number of English) farther into the Highlands, and commenced
the lawless sort of life which he afterwards followed. The Duke of
Montrose, who conceived himself deceived and cheated by MacGregor's
conduct, employed legal means to recover the money lent to him. Rob
Roy's landed property was attached by the regular form of legal procedure,
and his stock and furniture made the subject of arrest and sale.

  It is said that this diligence of the law, as it is called in Scotland,
which the English more bluntly term distress, was used in this case
with uncommon severity, and that the legal satellites, not usually the
gentlest persons in the world, had insulted MacGregor's wife, in a
manner which would have aroused a milder man than he to thoughts
of unbounded vengeance. She was a woman of fierce and haughty
temper, and is not unlikely to have disturbed the officers in the execution
of their duty, and thus to have incurred ill treatment, though,
for the sake of humanity, it is to be hoped that the story sometimes
told is a popular exaggeration. It is certain that she felt extreme
anguish at being expelled from the banks of Loch Lomond, and gave
vent to her feelings in a fine piece of pipe-music, still well known to
amateurs by the name of ``Rob Roy's Lament.''

  The fugitive is thought to have found his first place of refuge in
Glen Dochart, under the Earl of Breadalbane's protection; for,
though that family had been active agents in the destruction of the
MacGregors in former times, they had of late years sheltered a great
many of the name in their old possessions. The Duke of Argyle
was also one of Rob Roy's protectors, so far as to afford him, according
to the Highland phrase, wood and water---the shelter, namely,
that is afforded by the forests and lakes of an inaccessible country.

  The great men of the Highlands in that time, besides being
anxiously ambitious to keep up what was called their Following,
or military retainers, were also desirous to have at their disposal
men of resolute character, to whom the world and the world's law
were no friends, and who might at times ravage the lands or destroy
the tenants of a feudal enemy, without bringing responsibility on
their patrons. The strife between the names of Campbell and
Graham, during the civil wars of the seventeenth century, had been
stamped with mutual loss and inveterate enmity. The death of the
great Marquis of Montrose on the one side, the defeat at Inverlochy,
and cruel plundering of Lorn, on the other, were reciprocal injuries
not likely to be forgotten. Rob Roy was, therefore, sure of refuge in
the country of the Campbells, both as having assumed their name, as
connected by his mother with the family of Glenfalloch, and as an
enemy to the rival house of Montrose. The extent of Argyle's
possessions, and the power of retreating thither in any emergency,
gave great encouragement to the bold schemes of revenge which he had
adopted.

  This was nothing short of the maintenance of a predatory war
against the Duke of Montrose, whom he considered as the author of
his exclusion from civil society, and of the outlawry to which he had
been sentenced by letters of horning and caption (legal writs so called),
as well as the seizure of his goods, and adjudication of his landed
property. Against his Grace, therefore, his tenants, friends, allies,
and relatives, he disposed himself to employ every means of annoyance
in his power; and though this was a circle sufficiently extensive
for active depredation, Rob, who professed himself a Jacobite, took
the liberty of extending his sphere of operations against all whom he
chose to consider as friendly to the revolutionary government, or to
that most obnoxious of measures---the Union of the Kingdoms.
Under one or other of these pretexts, all his neighbours of the Lowlands
who had anything to lose, or were unwilling to compound for
security by paying him an annual sum for protection or forbearance,
were exposed to his ravages.

  The country in which this private warfare, or system of depredation,
was to be carried on, was, until opened up by roads, in the
highest degree favourable for his purpose. It was broken up into
narrow valleys, the habitable part of which bore no proportion to the
huge wildernesses of forest, rocks, and precipices by which they were
encircled, and which was, moreover, full of inextricable passes,
morasses, and natural strengths, unknown to any but the inhabitants
themselves, where a few men acquainted with the ground were capable,
with ordinary address, of baffling the pursuit of numbers.

  The opinions and habits of the nearest neighbours to the Highland
line were also highly favourable to Rob Roy's purpose. A large proportion
of them were of his own clan of MacGregor, who claimed
the property of Balquhidder, and other Highland districts, as having
been part of the ancient possessions of their tribe; though the harsh
laws, under the severity of which they had suffered so deeply, had
assigned the ownership to other families. The civil wars of the
seventeenth century had accustomed these men to the use of arms, and
they were peculiarly brave and fierce from remembrance of their
sufferings. The vicinity of a comparatively rich Lowland district
gave also great temptations to incursion. Many belonging to other
clans, habituated to contempt of industry, and to the use of arms,
drew towards an unprotected frontier which promised facility of
plunder; and the state of the country, now so peaceable and quiet,
verified at that time the opinion which Dr. Johnson heard with doubt
and suspicion, that the most disorderly and lawless districts of the
Highlands were those which lay nearest to the Lowland line. There
was, therefore, no difficulty in Rob Roy, descended of a tribe which
was widely dispersed in the country we have described, collecting any
number of followers whom he might be able to keep in action, and to
maintain by his proposed operations.

  He himself appears to have been singularly adapted for the profession
which he proposed to exercise. His stature was not of the
tallest, but his person was uncommonly strong and compact. The
greatest peculiarities of his frame were the breadth of his shoulders,
and the great and almost disproportionate length of his arms; so
remarkable, indeed, that it was said he could, without stooping, tie
the garters of his Highland hose, which are placed two inches below
the knee. His countenance was open, manly, stern at periods of
danger, but frank and cheerful in his hours of festivity. His hair
was dark red, thick, and frizzled, and curled short around the face.
His fashion of dress showed, of course, the knees and upper part of
the leg, which was described to me, as resembling that of a Highland
bull, hirsute, with red hair, and evincing muscular strength similar
to that animal. To these personal qualifications must be added a
masterly use of the Highland sword, in which his length of arm gave
him great advantage---and a perfect and intimate knowledge of all
the recesses of the wild country in which he harboured, and the
character of the various individuals, whether friendly or hostile, with
whom he might come in contact.

  His mental qualities seem to have been no less adapted to the circumstances
in which he was placed. Though the descendant of the
blood-thirsty Ciar Mhor, he inherited none of his ancestor's ferocity.
On the contrary, Rob Roy avoided every appearance of cruelty, and
it is not averred that he was ever the means of unnecessary bloodshed,
or the actor in any deed which could lead the way to it. His
schemes of plunder were contrived and executed with equal boldness
and sagacity, and were almost universally successful, from the skill
with which they were laid, and the secrecy and rapidity with which
they were executed. Like Robin Hood of England, he was a kind
and gentle robber,---and, while he took from the rich, was liberal in
relieving the poor. This might in part be policy; but the universal
tradition of the country speaks it to have arisen from a better motive.
All whom I have conversed with, and I have in my youth seen some
who knew Rob Roy personally, give him the character of a benevolent
and humane man ``in his way.''

  His ideas of morality were those of an Arab chief, being such as
naturally arose out of his wild education. Supposing Rob Roy to
have argued on the tendency of the life which he pursued, whether
from choice or from necessity, he would doubtless have assumed to
himself the character of a brave man, who, deprived of his natural
rights by the partiality of laws, endeavoured to assert them by the
strong hand of natural power; and he is most felicitously described
as reasoning thus, in the high-toned poetry of my gifted friend
Wordsworth:

	Say, then, that he was wise as brave,
	  As wise in thought as bold in deed;
	For in the principles of things
	  _He_ sought his moral creed.

	Said generous Rob, ``What need of Books?
	  Burn all the statutes and their shelves!
	They stir us up against our kind,
	  And worse, against ourselves.

	``We have a passion, make a law,
	  Too false to guide us or control;
	And for the law itself we fight
	  In bitterness of soul.

	``And puzzled, blinded, then we lose
	  Distinctions that are plain and few;
	These find I graven on my heart,
	  That tells me what to do.

	``The creatures see of flood and field,
	  And those that travel on the wind
	With them no strife can last; they live
	  In peace, and peace of mind.

	``For why? Because the good old rule
	  Sufficeth them; the simple plan,
	That they should take who have the power,
	  And they should keep who can.

	``A lesson which is quickly learn'd,
	  A signal through which all can see;
	Thus, nothing here provokes the strong
	  To wanton cruelty.

	``And freakishness of mind is check'd,
	  He tamed who foolishly aspires,
	While to the measure of his might
	  Each fashions his desires.

	``All kinds and creatures stand and fall
	  By strength of prowess or of wit;
	'Tis God's appointment who must sway,
	  And who is to submit.

	``Since then,'' said Robin, ``right is plain,
	  And longest life is but a day,
	To have my ends, maintain my rights,
	  I'll take the shortest way.''

	And thus among these rocks he lived,
	  Through summer's heat and winter's snow
	The eagle, he was lord above,
	  And Rob was lord below.

We are not, however, to suppose the character of this distinguished
outlaw to be that of an actual hero, acting uniformly and consistently
on such moral principles as the illustrious bard who, standing by his
grave, has vindicated his fame. On the contrary, as is common with
barbarous chiefs, Rob Roy appears to have mixed his professions of
principle with a large alloy of craft and dissimulation, of which his
conduct during the civil war is sufficient proof. It is also said, and
truly, that although his courtesy was one of his strongest characteristics,
yet sometimes he assumed an arrogance of manner which was
not easily endured by the high-spirited men to whom it was addressed,
and drew the daring outlaw into frequent disputes, from which he
did not always come off with credit. From this it has been inferred,
that Rob Roy w as more of a bully than a hero, or at least that he
had, according to the common phrase, his fighting days. Some aged
men who knew him well, have described him also as better at a _taich-tulzie,_
or scuffle within doors, than in mortal combat. The tenor of
his life may be quoted to repel this charge; while, at the same time,
it must be allowed, that the situation in which he was placed
rendered him prudently averse to maintaining quarrels, where nothing
was to be had save blows, and where success would have raised up
against him new and powerful enemies, in a country where revenge
was still considered as a duty rather than a crime. The power of
commanding his passions on such occasions, far from being inconsistent
with the part which MacGregor had to perform, was essentially
necessary, at the period when he lived, to prevent his career from
being cut short.

  I may here mention one or two occasions on which Rob Roy
appears to have given way in the manner alluded to. My late
venerable friend, John Ramsay of Ochtertyre, alike eminent as a
classical scholar and as an authentic register of the ancient history
and manners of Scotland, informed me, that on occasion of a public
meeting at a bonfire in the town of Doune, Rob Roy gave some offence
to James Edmondstone of Newton, the same gentleman who was unfortunately
concerned in the slaughter of Lord Rollo (see Maclaurin's
Criminal Trials, No. IX.), when Edmondstone compelled MacGregor
to quit the town on pain of being thrown by him into the bonfire.
``I broke one off your ribs on a former occasion,'' said he, ``and now,
Rob, if you provoke me farther, I will break your neck.'' But it
must be remembered that Edmondstone was a man of consequence in
the Jacobite party, as he carried the royal standard of James VII.
at the battle of Sheriffmuir, and also, that he was near the door of
his own mansion-house, and probably surrounded by his friends and
adherents. Rob Roy, however, suffered in reputation for retiring
under such a threat.

  Another well-vouched case is that of Cunningham of Boquhan.

  Henry Cunningham, Esq. of Boquhan, was a gentleman of
Stirlingshire, who, like many _exquisites_ of our own time, united
a natural high spirit and daring character with an affectation of
delicacy of address and manners amounting to foppery.<*> He

* His courage and affectation of foppery were united, which is less frequently the
* case, with a spirit of innate modesty. He is thus described in Lord Binning's
* satirical verses, entitled ``Argyle's Levee:''---
* 
*	``Six times had Harry bowed unseen,
*	    Before he dared advance;
*	The Duke then, turning round well pleased,
*	    Said, `Sure you've been in France!
*	A more polite and jaunty man
*	    I never saw before:'
*	Then Harry bowed, and blushed, and bowed,
*	    And strutted to the door.''
*
* See a Collection of original Poems, by Scotch Gentlemen, vol. ii. p. 125.

chanced to be in company with Rob Roy, who, either in contempt of
Boquhan's supposed effeminacy, or because he thought him a safe
person to fix a quarrel on (a point which Rob's enemies alleged he
was wont to consider), insulted him so grossly that a challenge passed
between them. The goodwife of the clachan had hidden Cunningham's
sword, and while he rummaged the house in quest of his own
or some other, Rob Roy went to the Shieling Hill, the appointed place
of combat, and paraded there with great majesty, waiting for his antagonist.
In the meantime, Cunningham had rummaged out an old
sword, and, entering the ground of contest in all haste, rushed on the
outlaw with such unexpected fury that he fairly drove him off the field,
nor did he show himself in the village again for some time. Mr.
MacGregor Stirling has a softened account of this anecdote in his
new edition of Nimmo's Stirlingshire; still he records Rob Roy's discomfiture.

  Occasionally Rob Roy suffered disasters, and incurred great personal
danger. On one remarkable occasion he was saved by the coolness
of his lieutenant, Macanaleister or Fletcher, the _Little John_ of
his band---a fine active fellow, of course, and celebrated as a marksman.
It happened that MacGregor and his party had been surprised
and dispersed by a superior force of horse and foot, and the word
was given to ``split and squander.'' Each shifted for himself, but
a bold dragoon attached himself to pursuit of Rob, and overtaking
him, struck at him with his broadsword. A plate of iron in his
bonnet saved the MacGregor from being cut down to the teeth; but
the blow was heavy enough to bear him to the ground, crying as he
fell, ``Oh, Macanaleister, is there naething in her?'' (_i.e._ in the
gun). The trooper, at the same time, exclaiming, ``D---n ye, your
mother never wrought your night-cap!'' had his arm raised for a
second blow, when Macanaleister fired, and the ball pierced the
dragoon's heart.

  Such as he was, Rob Roy's progress in his occupation is thus
described by a gentleman of sense and talent, who resided within the
circle of his predatory wars, had probably felt their effects, and speaks
of them, as might be expected, with little of the forbearance with
which, from their peculiar and romantic character, they are now
regarded.

  ``This man (Rob Roy MacGregor) was a person of sagacity, and
neither wanted stratagem nor address; and having abandoned himself
to all licentiousness, set himself at the head of all the loose,
vagrant, and desperate people of that clan, in the west end of Perth
and Stirling shires, and infested those whole countries with thefts,
robberies, and depredations. Very few who lived within his reach
(that is, within the distance of a nocturnal expedition) could promise
to themselves security, either for their persons or effects, without
subjecting themselves to pay him a heavy and shameful tax of _black-mail._
He at last proceeded to such a degree of audaciousness that
he committed robberies, raised contributions, and resented quarrels,
at the head of a very considerable body of armed men, in open day,
and in the face of the government.''<*>

* Mr. Grahame of Gartmore's Causes of the Disturbances in the Highlands. See
* Jamieson's edition of Burt's Letters from the North of Scotland, Appendix, vol.
* ii. p. 348.


  The extent and success of these depredations cannot be surprising,
when we consider that the scene of them was laid in a country where
the general law was neither enforced nor respected.

  Having recorded that the general habit of cattle-stealing had
blinded even those of the better classes to the infamy of the practice,
and that as men's property consisted entirely in herds, it was rendered
in the highest degree precarious, Mr. Grahame adds---

  ``On these accounts there is no culture of ground, no improvement
of pastures, and from the same reasons, no manufactures, no trade;
in short, no industry. The people are extremely prolific, and therefore
so numerous, that there is not business in that country, according
to its present order and economy, for the one-half of them.
Every place is full of idle people, accustomed to arms, and lazy in
everything but rapines and depredations. As _buddel_ or _aquavit<ae>_
houses are to be found everywhere through the country, so in these
they saunter away their time, and frequently consume there the returns
of their illegal purchases. Here the laws have never been executed,
nor the authority of the magistrate ever established. Here the
officer of the law neither dare nor can execute his duty, and several
places are about thirty miles from lawful persons. In short, here is
no order, no authority, no government.''

  The period of the rebellion, 1715, approached soon after Rob Roy
had attained celebrity. His Jacobite partialities were now placed
in opposition to his sense of the obligations which he owed to the indirect
protection of the Duke of Argyle. But the desire of ``drowning
his sounding steps amid the din of general war'' induced him to
join the forces of the Earl of Mar, although his patron the Duke of
Argyle was at the head of the army opposed to the Highland insurgents.

  The MacGregors, a large sept of them at least, that of Ciar Mhor,
on this occasion were not commanded by Rob Roy, but by his nephew
already mentioned, Gregor MacGregor, otherwise called James
Grahame of Glengyle, and still better remembered by the Gaelic epithet
of _Ghlune Dhu, i.e._ Black Knee, from a black spot on one of his
knees, which his Highland garb rendered visible. There can be no
question, however, that being then very young, Glengyle must have
acted on most occasions by the advice and direction of so experienced
a leader as his uncle.

  The MacGregors assembled in numbers at that period, and began
even to threaten the Lowlands towards the lower extremity of Loch
Lomond. They suddenly seized all the boats which were upon the
lake, and, probably with a view to some enterprise of their own, drew
them overland to Inversnaid, in order to intercept the progress of a
large body of west-country whigs who were in arms for the government,
and moving in that direction.

  The whigs made an excursion for the recovery of the boats. Their
forces consisted of volunteers from Paisley, Kilpatrick, and elsewhere,
who, with the assistance of a body of seamen, were towed up the
river Leven in long-boats belonging to the ships of war then lying in
the Clyde. At Luss they were joined by the forces of Sir Humphrey
Colquhoun, and James Grant, his son-in-law, with their followers,
attired in the Highland dress of the period, which is picturesquely
described.<*> The whole party crossed to Craig-Royston, but the MacGregors

* ``At night they arrived at Luss, where they were joined by Sir Humphrey
* Colquhoun of Luss, and James Grant of Plascander, his son-in-law, followed by
* forty or fifty stately fellows in their short hose and belted plaids, armed each of
* them with a well-fixed gun on his shoulder, a strong handsome target, with a
* sharp-pointed steel of above half an ell in length screwed into the navel of it, on
* his left arm, a sturdy claymore by his side, and a pistol or two, with a dirk and
* knife, in his belt.''---_Rae's History of the Rebellion,_ 4to, p. 287.

did not offer combat. If we are to believe the account of the
expedition given by the historian Rae, they leapt on shore at Craig-Royston
with the utmost intrepidity, no enemy appearing to oppose
them, and by the noise of their drums, which they beat incessantly,
and the discharge of their artillery and small arms, terrified the
MacGregors, whom they appear never to have seen, out of their fastnesses,
and caused them to fly in a panic to the general camp of the
Highlanders at Strath-Fillan.<*> The low-country men succeeded in

* Note C. The Loch Lomond Expedition.

getting possession of the boats at a great expenditure of noise and
courage, and little risk of danger.

  After this temporary removal from his old haunts, Rob Roy was
sent by the Earl of Mar to Aberdeen, to raise, it is believed, a part
of the clan Gregor, which is settled in that country. These men
were of his own family (the race of the Ciar Mhor). They were the
descendants of about three hundred MacGregors whom the Earl of
Murray, about the year 1624, transported from his estates in Menteith
to oppose against his enemies the MacIntoshes, a race as hardy
and restless as they were themselves.

  But while in the city of Aberdeen, Rob Roy met a relation of a
very different class and character from those whom he was sent to
summon to arms. This was Dr. James Gregory (by descent a MacGregor),
the patriarch of a dynasty of professors distinguished for
literary and scientific talent, and the grandfather of the late eminent
physician and accomplished scholar, Professor Gregory of Edinburgh.
This gentleman was at the time Professor of Medicine in King's
College, Aberdeen, and son of Dr. James Gregory, distinguished in
science as the inventor of the reflecting telescope. With such a family
it may seem our friend Rob could have had little communion. But
civil war is a species of misery which introduces men to strange bed-fellows.
Dr. Gregory thought it a point of prudence to claim kindred,
at so critical a period, with a man so formidable and influential.
He invited Rob Roy to his house, and treated him with so much
kindness, that he produced in his generous bosom a degree of gratitude
which seemed likely to occasion very inconvenient effects.

  The Professor had a son about eight or nine years old,---a lively,
stout boy of his age,---with whose appearance our Highland Robin
Hood was much taken. On the day before his departure from the
house of his learned relative, Rob Roy, who had pondered deeply how
he might requite his cousin's kindness, took Dr. Gregory aside, and
addressed him to this purport:---``My dear kinsman, I have been
thinking what I could do to show my sense of your hospitality.
Now, here you have a fine spirited boy of a son, whom you are ruining
by cramming him with your useless book-learning, and I am
determined, by way of manifesting my great good-will to you and
yours, to take him with me and make a man of him.'' The learned
Professor was utterly overwhelmed when his warlike kinsman
announced his kind purpose in language which implied no doubt of
its being a proposal which, would be, and ought to be, accepted with
the utmost gratitude. The task of apology or explanation was of a
most delicate description; and there might have been considerable
danger in suffering Rob Roy to perceive that the promotion with which
he threatened the son was, in the father's eyes, the ready road to the
gallows. Indeed, every excuse which he could at first think of---
such as regret for putting his friend to trouble with a youth who had
been educated in the Lowlands, and so on---only strengthened the
chieftain's inclination to patronise his young kinsman, as he supposed
they arose entirely from the modesty of the father. He would for a
long time take no apology, and even spoke of carrying off the youth
by a certain degree of kindly violence, whether his father consented, or
not. At length the perplexed Professor pleaded that his son was very
young, and in an infirm state of health, and not yet able to endure
the hardships of a mountain life; but that in another year or two
he hoped his health would be firmly established, and he would be in
a fitting condition to attend on his brave kinsman, and follow out
the splendid destinies to which he opened the way. This agreement
being made, the cousins parted,---Rob Roy pledging his honour to
carry his young relation to the hills with him on his next return to
Aberdeenshire, and Dr. Gregory, doubtless, praying in his secret soul
that he might never see Rob's Highland face again.

  James Gregory, who thus escaped being his kinsman's recruit, and
in all probability his henchman, was afterwards Professor of Medicine
in the College, and, like most of his family, distinguished by his
scientific acquirements. He was rather of an irritable and pertinacious
disposition; and his friends were wont to remark, when he
showed any symptom of these foibles, ``Ah! this comes of not having
been educated by Rob Roy.''

  The connection between Rob Roy and his classical kinsman did not
end with the period of Rob's transient power. At a period considerably
subsequent to the year 1715, he was walking in the Castle Street
of Aberdeen, arm in arm with his host, Dr. James Gregory, when the
drums in the barracks suddenly beat to arms, and soldiers were seen
issuing from the barracks. ``If these lads are turning out,'' said
Rob, taking leave of his cousin with great composure, ``it is time for
me to look after my safety.'' So saying, he dived down a close, and,
as John Bunyan says, ``went upon his way and was seen no more.''<*>

* The first of these anecdotes, which brings the highest pitch of civilisation so
* closely in contact with the half-savage state of society, I have heard told by the
* late distinguished Dr. Gregory; and the members of his family have had the kindness
* to collate the story with their recollections and family documents, and furnish
* the authentic particulars. The second rests on the recollection of an old man, who
* was present when Rob took French leave of his literary cousin on hearing the
* drums beat, and communicated the circumstance to Mr. Alexander Forbes, a connection
* of Dr. Gregory by marriage, who is still alive.


  We have already stated that Rob Roy's conduct during the insurrection
of 1715 was very equivocal. His person and followers were
in the Highland army, but his heart seems to have been with the
Duke of Argyle's. Yet the insurgents were constrained to trust to
him as their only guide, when they marched from Perth towards
Dunblane, with the view of crossing the Forth at what are called the
Fords of Frew, and when they themselves said he could not be relied
upon.

  This movement to the westward, on the part of the insurgents,
brought on the battle of Sheriffmuir---indecisive, indeed, in its immediate
results, but of which the Duke of Argyle reaped the whole
advantage. In this action, it will be recollected that the right wing
of the Highlanders broke and cut to pieces Argyle's left wing, while
the clans on the left of Mar's army, though consisting of Stewarts,
Mackenzies, and Camerons, were completely routed. During this
medley of flight and pursuit, Rob Roy retained his station on a hill
in the centre of the Highland position; and though it is said his
attack might have decided the day, he could not be prevailed upon to
charge. This was the more unfortunate for the insurgents, as the
leading of a party of the Macphersons had been committed to MacGregor.
This, it is said, was owing to the age and infirmity of the
chief of that name, who, unable to lead his clan in person, objected
to his heir-apparent, Macpherson of Nord, discharging his duty on
that occasion; so that the tribe, or a part of them, were brigaded
with their allies the MacGregors. While the favourable moment for
action was gliding away unemployed, Mar's positive orders reached
Rob Roy that he should presently attack. To which he coolly replied,
``No, no! if they cannot do it without me, they cannot do it with
me.'' One of the Macphersons, named Alexander, one of Rob's
original profession, _videlicet,_ a drover, but a man of great strength
and spirit, was so incensed at the inactivity of this temporary leader,
that he threw off his plaid, drew his sword, and called out to his
clansmen, ``Let us endure this no longer! if he will not lead you I
will.'' Rob Roy replied, with great coolness, ``Were the question
about driving Highland stots or kyloes, Sandie, I would yield to
your superior skill; but as it respects the leading of men, I must be
allowed to be the better judge.''---``Did the matter respect driving
Glen-Eigas stots,'' answered the Macpherson, ``the question with Rob
would not be, which was to be last, but which was to be foremost.''
Incensed at this sarcasm, MacGregor drew his sword, and they would
have fought upon the spot if their friends on both sides had not interfered.
But the moment of attack was completely lost. Rob did
not, however, neglect his own private interest on the occasion. In
the confusion of an undecided field of battle, he enriched his followers
by plundering the baggage and the dead on both sides.

  The fine old satirical ballad on the battle of Sheriffmuir does not
forget to stigmatise our hero's conduct on this memorable occasion---

	Rob Roy he stood watch
	On a hill for to catch
	  The booty for aught that I saw, man;
	For he ne'er advanced
	From the place where he stanced,
	  Till nae mair was to do there at a', man.

  Notwithstanding the sort of neutrality which Rob Roy had continued
to observe during the progress of the Rebellion, he did not escape some
of its penalties. He was included in the act of attainder, and the
house in Breadalbane, which was his place of retreat, was burned by
General Lord Cadogan, when, after the conclusion of the insurrection,
he marched through the Highlands to disarm and punish the offending
clans. But upon going to Inverary with about forty or fifty of
his followers, Rob obtained favour, by an apparent surrender of their
arms to Colonel Patrick Campbell of Finnah, who furnished them
and their leader with protections under his hand. Being thus in a
great measure secured from the resentment of government, Rob Roy
established his residence at Craig-Royston, near Loch Lomond, in the
midst of his own kinsmen, and lost no time in resuming his private
quarrel with the Duke of Montrose. For this purpose he soon got on
foot as many men, and well armed too, as he had yet commanded.
He never stirred without a body-guard of ten or twelve picked followers,
and without much effort could increase them to fifty or sixty.

  The Duke was not wanting in efforts to destroy this troublesome
adversary. His Grace applied to General Carpenter, commanding
the forces in Scotland, and by his orders three parties of soldiers were
directed from the three different points of Glasgow, Stirling, and
Finlarig near Killin. Mr. Graham of Killearn, the Duke of Montrose's
relation and factor, Sheriff-depute also of Dumbartonshire, accompanied
the troops, that they might act under the civil authority,
and have the assistance of a trusty guide well acquainted with the
hills. It was the object of these several columns to arrive about the
same time in the neighbourhood of Rob Roy's residence, and surprise
him and his followers. But heavy rains, the difficulties of the
country, and the good intelligence which the Outlaw was always
supplied with, disappointed their well-concerted combination. The
troops, finding the birds were flown, avenged themselves by destroying
the nest. They burned Rob Roy's house,---though not with impunity;
for the MacGregors, concealed among the thickets and cliffs, fired on
them, and killed a grenadier.

  Rob Roy avenged himself for the loss which he sustained on this
occasion by an act of singular audacity. About the middle of
November 1716, John Graham of Killearn, already mentioned as
factor of the Montrose family, went to a place called Chapel Errock,
where the tenants of the Duke were summoned to appear with their
termly rents. They appeared accordingly, and the factor had received
ready money to the amount of about <L>300, when Rob Roy entered
the room at the head of an armed party. The Steward endeavoured
to protect the Duke's property by throwing the books of accounts and
money into a garret, trusting they might escape notice. But the experienced
freebooter was not to be baffled where such a prize was at
stake. He recovered the books and cash, placed himself calmly in
the receipt of custom, examined the accounts, pocketed the money,
and gave receipts on the Duke's part, saying he would hold reckoning
with the Duke of Montrose out of the damages which he had
sustained by his Grace's means, in which he included the losses he
had suffered, as well by the burning of his house by General Cadogan,
as by the later expedition against Craig-Royston. He then requested
Mr. Graham to attend him; nor does it appear that he treated him
with any personal violence, or even rudeness, although he informed
him he regarded him as a hostage, and menaced rough usage in case
he should be pursued, or in danger of being overtaken. Few more
audacious feats have been performed. After some rapid changes of
place (the fatigue attending which was the only annoyance that Mr.
Graham seems to have complained of), he carried his prisoner to an
island on Loch Katrine, and caused him to write to the Duke, to
state that his ransom was fixed at <L>3400 merks, being the balance
which MacGregor pretended remained due to him, after deducting all
that he owed to the Duke of Montrose.

  However, after detaining Mr. Graham five or six days in custody
on the island, which is still called Rob Roy's Prison, and could be
no comfortable dwelling for November nights, the Outlaw seems to
have despaired of attaining further advantage from his bold attempt,
and suffered his prisoner to depart uninjured, with the account-books,
and bills granted by the tenants, taking especial care to retain the
cash.<*>

* The reader will find two original letters of the Duke of Montrose, with that
* which Mr. Graham of Killearn despatched from his prison-house by the Outlaw's
* command, in the Appendix, No. II.


  About 1717, our Chieftain had the dangerous adventure of falling
into the hands of the Duke of Athole, almost as much his enemy as
the Duke of Montrose himself; but his cunning and dexterity again
freed him from certain death. See a contemporary account of this
curious affair in the Appendix, No. V.

  Other pranks are told of Rob, which argue the same boldness and
sagacity as the seizure of Killearn. The Duke of Montrose, weary
of his insolence, procured a quantity of arms, and distributed them
among his tenantry, in order that they might defend themselves
against future violences. But they fell into different hands from those
they were intended for. The MacGregors made separate attacks on
the houses of the tenants, and disarmed them all one after another,
not, as was supposed, without the consent of many of the persons so
disarmed.

  As a great part of the Duke's rents were payable in kind, there
were girnels (granaries) established for storing up the corn at Moulin,
and elsewhere on the Buchanan estate. To these storehouses Rob Roy
used to repair with a sufficient force, and of course when he was
least expected, and insist upon the delivery of quantities of grain---
sometimes for his own use, and sometimes for the assistance of the
country people; always giving regular receipts in his own name, and
pretending to reckon with the Duke for what sums he received.

  In the meanwhile a garrison was established by Government, the
ruins of which may be still seen about half-way betwixt Loch Lomond
and Loch Katrine, upon Rob Roy's original property of Inversnaid.
Even this military establishment could not bridle the restless MacGregor.
He contrived to surprise the little fort, disarm the soldiers,
and destroy the fortification. It was afterwards re-established, and
again taken by the MacGregors under Rob Roy's nephew Ghlune
Dhu, previous to the insurrection of 1745-6. Finally, the fort of
Inversnaid was a third time repaired after the extinction of civil
discord; and when we find the celebrated General Wolfe commanding
in it, the imagination is strongly affected by the variety of time and
events which the circumstance brings simultaneously to recollection.
It is now totally dismantled.<*>

* About 1792, when the author chanced to pass that way while on a tour through
* the Highlands, a garrison, consisting of a single veteran, was still maintained at
* Inversnaid. The venerable warder was reaping his barley croft in all peace and
* tranquillity and when we asked admittance to repose ourselves, he told us we
* would find the key of the Fort under the door.


  It was not, strictly speaking, as a professed depredator that Rob
Roy now conducted his operations, but as a sort of contractor for the
police; in Scottish phrase, a lifter of black-mail. The nature of
this contract has been described in the Novel of Waverley, and in the
notes on that work. Mr. Grahame of Gartmore's description of the
character may be here transcribed:---

``The confusion and disorders of the country were so great, and the
Government go absolutely neglected it, that the sober people were obliged to
purchase some security to their effects by shameful and ignominious contracts
of _black-mail._ A person who had the greatest correspondence with the
thieves was agreed with to preserve the lands contracted for from thefts,
for certain sums to be paid yearly. Upon this fund he employed one half
of the thieves to recover stolen cattle, and the other half of them to steal, in
order to make this agreement and black-mail contract necessary. The
estates of those gentlemen who refused to contract, or give countenance to
that pernicious practice, are plundered by the thieving part of the watch,
in order to force them to purchase their protection. Their leader calls
himself the _Captain_ of the _Watch,_ and his banditti go by that name. And
as this gives them a kind of authority to traverse the country, so it makes
them capable of doing any mischief. These corps through the Highlands
make altogether a very considerable body of men, inured from their infancy
to the greatest fatigues, and very capable, to act in a military way when
occasion offers.

  ``People who are ignorant and enthusiastic, who are in absolute dependence
upon their chief or landlord, who are directed in their consciences by
Roman Catholic priests, or nonjuring clergymen, and who are not masters
of any property, may easily be formed into any mould. They fear no
dangers, as they have nothing to lose, and so can with ease be induced to
attempt anything. Nothing can make their condition worse: confusions
and troubles do commonly indulge them in such licentiousness, that by these
they better it.''<*>

* Letters from the North of Scotland, vol. ii. pp. 344, 345.


  As the practice of contracting for black-mail was an obvious
encouragement to rapine, and a great obstacle to the course of justice,
it was, by the statute 1567, chap. 21, declared a capital crime both
on the part of him who levied and him who paid this sort of tax.
But the necessity of the case prevented the execution of this severe
law, I believe, in any one instance; and men went on submitting to
a certain unlawful imposition rather than run the risk of utter ruin
---just as it is now found difficult or impossible to prevent those who
have lost a very large sum of money by robbery, from compounding
with the felons for restoration of a part of their booty.

  At what rate Rob Roy levied black-mail I never heard stated;
but there is a formal contract by which his nephew, in 1741, agreed
with various landholders of estates in the counties of Perth, Stirling,
and Dumbarton, to recover cattle stolen from them, or to pay the
value within six months of the loss being intimated, if such intimation
were made to him with sufficient despatch, in consideration of a
payment of <L>5 on each <L>100 of valued rent, which was not a very
heavy insurance. Petty thefts were not included in the contract;
but the theft of one horse, or one head of black cattle, or of sheep
exceeding the number of six, fell under the agreement.

  Rob Roy's profits upon such contracts brought him in a considerable
revenue in money or cattle, of which he made a popular use;
for he was publicly liberal as well as privately beneficent. The
minister of the parish of Balquhidder, whose name was Robertson,
was at one time threatening to pursue the parish for an augmentation
of his stipend. Rob Roy took an opportunity to assure him
that he would do well to abstain from this new exaction---a hint
which the minister did not fail to understand. But to make him
some indemnification, MacGregor presented him every year with a
cow and a fat sheep; and no scruples as to the mode in which the
donor came by them are said to have affected the reverend gentleman's
conscience.

  The following amount of the proceedings of Rob Roy, on an application
to him from one of his contractors, had in it something very
interesting to me, as told by an old countryman in the Lennox who
was present on the expedition. But as there is no point or marked
incident in the story, and as it must necessarily be without the half-frightened,
half-bewildered look with which the narrator accompanied
his recollections, it may possibly lose, its effect when transferred to
paper.

  My informant stated himself to have been a lad of fifteen, living
with his father on the estate of a gentleman in the Lennox, whose
name I have forgotten, in the capacity of herd. On a fine morning
in the end of October, the period when such calamities were almost
always to be apprehended, they found the Highland thieves had been
down upon them, and swept away ten or twelve head of cattle. Rob
Roy was sent for, and came with a party of seven or eight armed
men. He heard with great gravity all that could be told him of the
circumstances of the _creagh,_ and expressed his confidence that the
_herd-widdiefows_<*> could not have carried their booty far, and that

* Mad herdsmen---a name given to cattle-stealers [properly one who deserves
* to fill a _widdie,_ or halter].

he should be able to recover them. He desired that two Lowlanders
should be sent on the party, as it was not to be expected that any of
his gentlemen would take the trouble of driving the cattle when he
should recover possession of them. My informant and his father
were despatched on the expedition. They had no good will to the
journey; nevertheless, provided with a little food, and with a dog to
help them to manage the cattle, they set off with MacGregor. They
travelled a long day's journey in the direction of the mountain Benvoirlich,
and slept for the night in a ruinous hut or bothy. The
next morning they resumed their journey among the hills, Rob Roy
directing their course by signs and marks on the heath which my informant
did not understand.

  About noon Rob commanded the armed party to halt, and to lie
couched in the heather where it was thickest. ``Do you and your
son,'' he said to the oldest Lowlander, ``go boldly over the hill;---
you will see beneath you, in a glen on the other side, your master's
cattle, feeding, it may be, with others; gather your own together, taking
care to disturb no one else, and drive them to this place. If any one
speak to or threaten you, tell them that I am here, at the head of
twenty men.''---``But what if they abuse us, or kill us?'' said the
Lowland, peasant, by no means delighted at finding the embassy imposed
on him and his son. ``If they do you any wrong,'' said Rob,
``I will never forgive them as long as I live.'' The Lowlander was
by no means content with this security, but did not think it safe to
dispute Rob's injunctions.

  He and his son climbed the hill therefore, found a deep valley,
where there grazed, as Rob had predicted, a large herd of cattle.
They cautiously selected those which their master had lost, and took
measures to drive them over the hill. As soon as they began to remove
them, they were surprised by hearing cries and screams; and
looking around in fear and trembling they saw a woman seeming to
have started out of the earth, who _flyted_ at them, that is, scolded
them, in Gaelic. When they contrived, however, in the best Gaelic
they could muster, to deliver the message Rob Roy told them, she
became silent, and disappeared without offering them any further
annoyance. The chief heard their story on their return, and spoke
with great complacency of the art which he possessed of putting such
things to rights without any unpleasant bustle. The party were now
on their road home, and the danger, though not the fatigue, of the
expedition was at an end.

  They drove on the cattle with little repose until it was nearly dark,
when Rob proposed to halt for the night upon a wide moor, across
which a cold north-east wind, with frost on its wing, was whistling
to the tune of the Pipers of Strath-Dearn.<*> The Highlanders,

* The winds which sweep a wild glen in Badenoch are so called.

sheltered by their plaids, lay down on the heath comfortably enough,
but the Lowlanders had no protection whatever. Rob Roy observing
this, directed one of his followers to afford the old man a portion of
his plaid; ``for the callant (boy), he may,'' said the freebooter,
``keep himself warm by walking about and watching the cattle.''
My informant heard this sentence with no small distress; and as
the frost wind grew more and more cutting, it seemed to freeze the
very blood in his young veins. He had been exposed to weather all
his life, he said, but never could forget the cold of that night; insomuch
that, in the bitterness of his heart, he cursed the bright moon
for giving no heat with so much light. At length the sense of cold
and weariness became so intolerable that he resolved to desert his
watch to seek some repose and shelter. With that purpose he couched
himself down behind one of the most bulky of the Highlanders, who
acted as lieutenant to the party. Not satisfied with having secured
the shelter of the man's large person, he coveted a share of his plaid,
and by imperceptible degrees drew a corner of it round him. He
was now comparatively in paradise, and slept sound till daybreak,
when he awoke, and was terribly afraid on observing that his nocturnal
operations had altogether uncovered the dhuiniewassell's neck and
shoulders, which, lacking the plaid which should have protected them,
were covered with _cranreuch_ (_i.e._ hoar frost). The lad rose in great
dread of a beating, at least, when it should be found how luxuriously
he had been accommodated at the expense of a principal person of the
party. Good Mr. Lieutenant, however, got up and shook himself,
rubbing off the hoar frost with his plaid, and muttering something
of a _cauld neight._ They then drove on the cattle, which were restored
to their owner without farther adventure---The above can hardly be
termed a tale, but yet it contains materials both for the poet and
artist.

  It was perhaps about the same time that, by a rapid march into
the Balquhidder hills at the head of a body of his own tenantry, the
Duke of Montrose actually surprised Rob Roy, and made him
prisoner. He was mounted behind one of the Duke's followers, named
James Stewart, and made fast to him by a horse-girth. The person
who had him thus in charge was grandfather of the intelligent man
of the same name, now deceased, who lately kept the inn in the
vicinity of Loch Katrine, and acted as a guide to visitors through
that beautiful scenery. From him I learned the story many years
before he was either a publican, or a guide, except to moorfowl shooters.
---It was evening (to resume the story), and the Duke was pressing
on to lodge his prisoner, so long sought after in vain, in some place
of security, when, in crossing the Teith or Forth, I forget which,
MacGregor took an opportunity to conjure Stewart, by all the ties of
old acquaintance and good neighbourhood, to give him some chance of
an escape from an assured doom. Stewart was moved with compassion,
perhaps with fear. He slipt the girth-buckle, and Rob, dropping
down from behind the horse's croupe, dived, swam, and escaped,
pretty much as described in the Novel. When James Stewart came
on shore, the Duke hastily demanded where his prisoner was; and
as no distinct answer was returned, instantly suspected Stewart's
connivance at the escape of the Outlaw; and, drawing a steel pistol
from his belt, struck him down with a blow on the head, from the
effects of which, his descendant said, he never completely recovered.

  In the success of his repeated escapes from the pursuit of his
powerful enemy, Rob Roy at length became wanton and facetious.
He wrote a mock challenge to the Duke, which he circulated among
his friends to amuse them over a bottle. The reader will find this
document in the Appendix.<*> It is written in a good hand, and not

* Appendix, No. III.

particularly deficient in grammar or spelling. Our Southern readers
must be given to understand that it was a piece of humour,---a _quiz,_
in short,---on the part of the Outlaw, who was too sagacious to propose
such a rencontre in reality. This letter was written in the year 1719.

  In the following year Rob Roy composed another epistle, very little
to his own reputation, as he therein confesses having played booty
during the civil war of 1715. It is addressed to General Wade, at
that time engaged in disarming the Highland clans, and making
military roads through the country. The letter is a singular composition.
It sets out the writer's real and unfeigned desire to have
offered his service to King George, but for his liability to be thrown
into jail for a civil debt, at the instance of the Duke of Montrose.
Being thus debarred from taking the right side, he acknowledged he
embraced the wrong one, upon Falstaff's principle, that since the King
wanted men and the rebels soldiers, it were worse shame to be idle in
such a stirring world, than to embrace the worst side, were it as black
as rebellion could make it. The impossibility of his being neutral in
such a debate, Rob seems to lay down as an undeniable proposition.
At the same time, while he acknowledges having been forced into an
unnatural rebellion against King George, he pleads that he not only
avoided acting offensively against his Majesty's forces on all occasions,
but, on the contrary, sent to them what intelligence he could collect
from time to time; for the truth of which he refers to his Grace the
Duke of Argyle. What influence this plea had on General Wade,
we have no means of knowing.

  Rob Roy appears to have continued to live very much as usual.
His fame, in the meanwhile, passed beyond the narrow limits of the
country in which he resided. A pretended history of him appeared
in London during his lifetime, under the title of the Highland Rogue.
It is a catch-penny publication, bearing in front the effigy of a species
of ogre, with a beard of a foot in length; and his actions are as much
exaggerated as his personal appearance. Some few of the best known
adventures of the hero are told, though with little accuracy; but the
greater part of the pamphlet is entirely fictitious. It is great pity so
excellent a theme for a narrative of the kind had not fallen into the
hands of De Foe, who was engaged at the time on subjects somewhat
similar, though inferior in dignity and interest.

  As Rob Roy advanced in years, he became more peaceable in his
habits, and his nephew Ghlune Dhu, with most of his tribe, renounced
those peculiar quarrels with the Duke of Montrose, by which
his uncle had been distinguished. The policy of that great family
had latterly been rather to attach this wild tribe by kindness than to
follow the mode of violence which had been hitherto ineffectually resorted
to. Leases at a low rent were granted to many of the MacGregors,
who had heretofore held possessions in the Duke's Highland
property merely by occupancy; and Glengyle (or Black-knee), who
continued to act as collector of black-mail, managed his police, as a
commander of the Highland watch arrayed at the charge of Government.
He is said to have strictly abstained from the open and lawless
depredations which his kinsman had practised,

  It was probably after this state of temporary quiet had been obtained,
that Rob Roy began to think of the concerns of his future
state. He had been bred, and long professed himself, a Protestant;
but in his later years he embraced the Roman Catholic faith,---
perhaps on Mrs. Cole's principle, that it was a comfortable religion
for one of his calling. He is said to have alleged as the cause of his
conversion, a desire to gratify the noble family of Perth, who were
then strict Catholics. Having, as he observed, assumed the name of
the Duke of Argyle, his first protector, he could pay no compliment
worth the Earl of Perth's acceptance save complying with his mode
of religion. Rob did not pretend, when pressed closely on the subject,
to justify all the tenets of Catholicism, and acknowledged that extreme
unction always appeared to him a great waste of _ulzie,_ or oil.<*>

* Such an admission is ascribed to the robber Donald Bean Lean in Waverley,
* chap. lxii,


In the last years of Rob Roy's life, his clan was involved in a
dispute with one more powerful than themselves. Stewart of Appin,
a chief of the tribe so named, was proprietor of a hill-farm in the
Braes of Balquhidder, called Invernenty. The MacGregors of Rob
Roy's tribe claimed a right to it by ancient occupancy, and declared
they would oppose to the uttermost the settlement of any person upon
the farm not being of their own name. The Stewarts came down
with two hundred men, well armed, to do themselves justice by main
force. The MacGregors took the field, but were unable to muster an
equal strength. Rob Roy, fending himself the weaker party, asked a
parley, in which he represented that both clans were friends to the
_King,_ and, that he was unwilling they should be weakened by mutual
conflict, and thus made a merit of surrendering to Appin the disputed
territory of Invernenty. Appin, accordingly, settled as tenants
there, at an easy quit-rent, the MacLarens, a family dependent on
the Stewarts, and from whose character for strength and bravery, it
was expected that they would make their right good if annoyed by the
MacGregors. When all this had been amicably adjusted, in presence
of the two clans drawn up in arms near the Kirk of Balquhidder,
Rob Roy, apparently fearing his tribe might be thought to have conceded
too much upon the occasion, stepped forward and said, that
where so many gallant men were met in arms, it would be shameful
to part without it trial of skill, and therefore he took the freedom to
invite any gentleman of the Stewarts present to exchange a few blows
with him for the honour of their respective clans. The brother-in-law
of Appin, and second chieftain of the clan, Alaster Stewart of
Invernahyle, accepted the challenge, and they encountered with broadsword
and target before their respective kinsmen.<*> The combat

* Some accounts state that Appin himself was Rob Roy's antagonist on this
* occasion. My recollection, from the account of Invernahyle himself, was as stated
* in the text. But the period when I received the information is now so distant,
* that it is possible I may be mistaken. Invernahyle was rather of low stature, but
* very well made, athletic, and an excellent swordsman.

lasted till Rob received a slight wound in the arm, which was the
usual termination of such a combat when fought for honour only,
and not with a mortal purpose. Rob Roy dropped his point, and
congratulated his adversary on having been the first man who ever
drew blood from him. The victor generously acknowledged, that
without the advantage of youth, and the agility accompanying it, he
probably could not have come off with advantage.

  This was probably one of Rob Roy's last exploits in arms. The
time of his death is not known with certainty, but he is generally
said to have survived 1738, and to have died an aged man. When
he found himself approaching his final change, he expressed some
contrition for particular parts of his life. His wife laughed at these
scruples of conscience, and exhorted him to die like a man, as he had
lived. In reply, he rebuked her for her violent passions, and the
counsels she had given him. ``You have put strife,'' he said,
``betwixt me and the best men of the country, and now you would
place enmity between me and my God.''

  There is a tradition, no way inconsistent with the former, if
the character of Rob Roy be justly considered, that while on his
deathbed, he learned that a person with whom he was at enmity
proposed to visit him. ``Raise me from my bed,'' said the invalid;
``throw my plaid around me, and bring me my claymore, dirk, and
pistols---it shall never be said that a foeman saw Rob Roy MacGregor
defenceless and unarmed.'' His foeman, conjectured to be one
of the MacLarens before and after mentioned, entered and paid his
compliments, inquiring after the health of his formidable neighbour.
Rob Roy maintained a cold haughty civility during their short conference,
and so soon as he had left the house. ``Now,'' he said, ``all
is over---let the piper play, _Ha til mi tulidh_'' (we return no more);
and he is said to have expired before the dirge was finished.

  This singular man died in bed in his own house, in the parish of
Balquhidder. He was buried in the churchyard of the same parish,
where his tombstone is only distinguished by a rude attempt at the
figure of a broadsword.

  The character of Rob Roy is, of course, a mixed one. His
sagacity, boldness, and prudence, qualities so highly necessary to
success in war, became in some degree vices, from the manner in
which they were employed. The circumstances of his education, however,
must be admitted as some extenuation of his habitual transgressions
against the law; and for his political tergiversations, he
might in that distracted period plead the example of men far more
powerful, and less excusable in becoming the sport of circumstances,
than the poor and desperate outlaw. On the other hand, he was in
the constant exercise of virtues, the more meritorious as they seem
inconsistent with his general character. Pursuing the occupation of
a predatory chieftain,---in modern phrase a captain of banditti,---
Rob Roy was moderate in his revenge, and humane in his successes.
No charge of cruelty or bloodshed, unless in battle, is brought against
his memory. In like manner, the formidable outlaw was the friend
of the poor, and, to the utmost of his ability, the support of the
widow and the orphan---kept his word when pledged---and died
lamented in his own wild country, where there were hearts grateful
for his beneficence, though their minds were not sufficiently instructed
to appreciate his errors.

  The author perhaps ought to stop here; but the fate of a part of
Rob Roy's family was so extraordinary, as to call for a continuation
of this somewhat prolix account, as affording an interesting chapter,
not on Highland manners alone, but on every stage of society in
which the people of a primitive and half-civilised tribe are brought
into close contact with a nation, in which civilisation and polity
have attained a complete superiority.

  Rob had five sons,---Coll, Ronald, James, Duncan, and Robert.
Nothing occurs worth notice concerning three of them; but James,
who was a very handsome man, seems to have had a good deal of his
father's spirit, and the mantle of Dougal Ciar Mhor had apparently
descended on the shoulders of Robin Oig, that is, young Robin.
Shortly after Rob Roy's death, the ill-will which the MacGregors
entertained against the MacLarens again broke out, at the instigation,
it was said, of Rob's widow, who seems thus far to have deserved the
character given to her by her husband, as an At<e'> stirring up to blood
and strife. Robin Oig, under her instigation, swore that as soon as
he could get back a certain gun which had belonged to his father, and
had been lately at Doune to be repaired, he would shoot MacLaren,
for having presumed to settle on his mother's land.<*> He was as

* This fatal piece was taken from Robin Oig, when he was seized many years
* afterwards. It remained in possession of the magistrates before whom he was
* brought for examination, and now makes part of a small collection of arms belonging
* to the Author. It is a Spanish-barrelled gun, marked with the letters R. M. C., for
* Robert MacGregor Campbell.

good as his word, and shot MacLaren when between the stilts of his
plough, wounding him mortally.

  The aid of a Highland leech was procured, who probed the wound
with a probe made out of a castock; _i.e._, the stalk of a colewort or
cabbage. This learned gentleman declared he would not venture to
prescribe, not knowing with what shot the patient had been wounded.
MacLaren died, and about the same time his cattle were houghed,
and his live stock destroyed in a barbarous manner.

  Robin Oig, after this feat---which one of his biographers represents
as the unhappy discharge of a gun---retired to his mother's house,
to boast that he had drawn the first blood in the quarrel aforesaid.
On the approach of troops, and a body of the Stewarts, who were
bound to take up the cause of their tenant, Robin Oig absconded, and
escaped all search.

  The doctor already mentioned, by name Callam MacInleister,
with James and Ronald, brothers to the actual perpetrator of the
murder, were brought to trial. But as they contrived to represent the
action as a rash deed committed by ``the daft callant Rob,'' to which
they were not accessory, the jury found their accession to the crime
was Not Proven. The alleged acts of spoil and violence on the MacLarens'
cattle, were also found to be unsupported by evidence. As it
was proved, however, that the two brothers, Ronald and James, were
held and reputed thieves, they were appointed to find caution to the
extent of <L>200, for their good behaviour for seven years.<*>

* Note D. Author's expedition against the MacLarens.


  The spirit of clanship was at that time, so strong---to which must
be added the wish to secure the adherence of stout, able-bodied, and,
as the Scotch phrase then went, _pretty_ men---that the representative
of the noble family of Perth condescended to act openly as patron of
the MacGregors, and appeared as such upon their trial. So at least
the author was informed by the late Robert MacIntosh, Esq., advocate.
The circumstance may, however, have occurred later than 1736---the
year in which this first trial took place.

  Robin Oig served for a time in the 42d regiment, and was present
at the battle of Fontenoy, where he was made prisoner and wounded.
He was exchanged, returned to Scotland, and obtained his discharge.
He afterwards appeared openly in the MacGregor's country; and,
notwithstanding his outlawry, married a daughter of Graham of
Drunkie, a gentleman of some property. His wife died a few years
afterwards.

  The insurrection of 1745 soon afterwards called the MacGregors
to arms. Robert MacGregor of Glencarnoch, generally regarded as
the chief of the whole name, and grandfather of Sir John, whom the
clan received in that character, raised a MacGregor regiment, with
which he joined the standard of the Chevalier. The race of Ciar
Mhor, however, affecting independence, and commanded by Glengyle
and his cousin James Roy MacGregor, did not join this kindred
corps, but united themselves to the levies of the titular Duke of Perth,
until William MacGregor Drummond of Bolhaldie, whom they
regarded as head of their branch, of Clan Alpine, should come over
from France. To cement the union after the Highland fashion,
James laid down the name of Campbell, and assumed that of Drummond,
in compliment to Lord Perth. He was also called James
Roy, after his father, and James Mhor, or Big James, from his
height. His corps, the relics of his father Rob's band, behaved with
great activity; with only twelve men he succeeded in surprising and
burning, for the second time, the fort at Inversnaid, constructed for
the express purpose of bridling the country of the MacGregors.

  What rank or command James MacGregor had, is uncertain.
He calls himself Major; and Chevalier Johnstone calls him Captain.
He must have held rank under Ghlune Dhu, his kinsman, but his
active and audacious character placed him above the rest of his
brethren. Many of his followers were unarmed; he supplied the.
want of guns and swords with scythe-blades set straight upon their
handles.

  At the battle of Prestonpans, James Roy distinguished himself.
``His company,'' says Chevalier Johnstone, ``did great execution with
their scythes.'' They cut the legs of the horses in two---the riders
through the middle of their bodies. MacGregor was brave and intrepid,
but at the same time, somewhat whimsical and singular.
When advancing to the charge with his company, he received five
wounds, two of them from balls that pierced his body through and
through. Stretched on the ground, with his head resting on his
hand, he called out loudly to the Highlanders of his company, ``My
lads, I am not dead. By G---, I shall see if any of you does not
do his duty.'' The victory, as is well known, was instantly obtained.

  In some curious letters of James Roy,<*> it appears that his thigh-bone

* Published in Blackwood's Magazine, vol. ii. p. 228.

was broken on this occasion, and that he, nevertheless, rejoined
the army with six companies, and was present at the battle of
Culloden. After that defeat, the clan MacGregor kept together in a
body, and did not disperse till they had returned into their own
country. They brought James Roy with them in a litter; and,
without being particularly molested, he was permitted to reside in the
MacGregor's country along with his brothers.

  James MacGregor Drummond was attainted for high treason with
persons of more importance. But it appears he had entered into
some communication with Government, as, in the letters quoted, he
mentions having obtained a pass from the Lord Justice-Clerk in
1747, which was a sufficient protection to him from the military.
The circumstance is obscurely stated in one of the letters already
quoted, but may perhaps, joined to subsequent incidents, authorise the
suspicion that James, like his father, could look at both sides of the
cards. As the confusion of the country subsided, the MacGregors,
like foxes which had baffled the hounds, drew back to their old haunts,
and lived unmolested. But an atrocious outrage, in which the sons
of Rob Roy were concerned, brought at length on the family the full
vengeance of the law.

  James Roy was a married man, and had fourteen children. But
his brother, Robin Oig, was now a widower; and it was resolved,
if possible, that he should make his fortune by carrying off and
marrying, by force if necessary, some woman of fortune from the
Lowlands.

  The imagination of the half-civilised Highlanders was less shocked
at the idea of this particular species of violence, than might be expected
from their general kindness to the weaker sex when they make
part of their own families. But all their views were tinged with
the idea that they lived in a state of war; and in such a state, from
the time of the siege of Troy to ``the moment when Previsa fell,''<*>

* Childe Harold's Pilgrimage, Canto II.

the female captives are, to uncivilised victors, the most valuable part
of the booty---

	``The wealthy are slaughtered, the lovely are spared.''

  We need not refer to the rape of the Sabines, or to a similar
instance in the Book of Judges, for evidence that such deeds of
violence have been committed upon a large scale. Indeed, this sort
of enterprise was so common along the Highland line as to give rise
to a variety of songs and ballads.<*> The annals of Ireland, as well

* See Appendix, No. VI.

as those of Scotland, prove the crime to have been common in the more
lawless parts of both countries; and any woman who happened to
please a man of spirit who came of a good house, and possessed a
few chosen friends, and a retreat in the mountains, was not permitted
the alternative of saying him nay. What is more, it would seem
that the women themselves, most interested in the immunities of their
sex, were, among the lower classes, accustomed to regard such
marriages as that which is presently to be detailed as ``pretty
Fanny's way,'' or rather, the way of Donald with pretty Fanny.
It is not a great many years since a respectable woman, above the
lower rank of life, expressed herself very warmly to the author on his
taking the freedom to censure the behaviour of the MacGregors on the
occasion in question. She said ``that there was no use in giving a
bride too much choice upon such occasions; that the marriages were
the happiest long syne which had been done offhand.'' Finally, she
averred that her ``own mother had never seen her father till the night
he brought her up from the Lennox, with ten head of black cattle,
and there had not been a happier couple in the country.''

  James Drummond and his brethren having similar opinions with
the author's old acquaintance, and debating how they might raise the
fallen fortunes of their clan, formed a resolution to settle their
brother's fortune by striking up an advantageous marriage betwixt
Robin Oig and one Jean Key, or Wright, a young woman scarce
twenty years old, and who had been left about two months a widow
by the death of her husband. Her property was estimated at only
from 16,000 to 18,000 merks, but it seems to have been sufficient
temptation to these men to join in the commission of a great crime.

  This poor young victim lived with her mother in her own house at
Edinbilly, in the parish of Balfron and shire of Stirling. At this
place, in the night of 3d December 1750, the sons of Rob Roy, and
particularly James Mhor and Robin Oig, rushed into the house where
the object of their attack was resident, presented guns, swords, and
pistols to the males of the family, and terrified the women by threatening
to break open the doors if Jean Key was not surrendered, as,
said James Roy, ``his brother was a young fellow determined to make
his fortune.'' Having, at length, dragged the object of their lawless
purpose from her place of concealment, they tore her from her mother's
arms, mounted her on a horse before one of the gang, and carried
her off in spite, of her screams and cries, which were long heard after
the terrified spectators of the outrage could no longer see the party
retreat through the darkness. In her attempts to escape, the poor
young woman threw herself from the horse on which they had placed
her, and in so doing wrenched her side. They then laid her double
over the pummel of the saddle, and transported her through the
mosses and moors till the pain of the injury she had suffered in her
side, augmented by the uneasiness of her posture, made her consent to
sit upright. In the execution of this crime they stopped at more
houses than one, but none of the inhabitants dared interrupt their
proceedings. Amongst others who saw them was that classical and
accomplished scholar the late Professor William Richardson of
Glasgow, who used to describe as a terrible dream their violent and
noisy entrance into the house where he was then residing. The
Highlanders filled the little kitchen, brandishing their arms, demanding
what they pleased, and receiving whatever they demanded.
James Mhor, he said, was a tall, stern, and soldier-like man.
Robin Oig looked more gentle; dark, but yet ruddy in complexion---
a good-looking young savage. Their victim was so dishevelled in her
dress, and forlorn in her appearance and demeanour, that he could
hardly tell whether she was alive or dead.

  The gang carried the unfortunate woman to Rowardennan, where
they had a priest unscrupulous enough to read the marriage service,
while James Mhor forcibly held the bride up before him; and the
priest declared the couple man and wife, even while she protested
against the infamy of his conduct. Under the same threats of
violence, which had been all along used to enforce their scheme, the
poor victim was compelled to reside with the pretended husband who
was thus forced upon her. They even dared to carry her to the public
church of Balquhidder, where the officiating clergyman (the same who
had been Rob Roy's pensioner) only asked them if they were married
persons. Robert MacGregor answered in the affirmative; the terrified
female was silent.

  The country was now too effectually subjected to the law for this
vile outrage to be followed by the advantages proposed by the actors,
Military parties were sent out in every direction to seize the MacGregors,
who were for two or three weeks compelled to shift from one
place to another in the mountains, bearing the unfortunate Jean Key
along with them. In the meanwhile, the Supreme Civil Court issued
a warrant, sequestrating the property of Jean Key, or Wright, which
removed out of the reach of the actors in the violence the prize which
they expected. They had, however, adopted a belief of the poor
woman's spirit being so far broken that she would prefer submitting
to her condition, and adhering to Robin Oig as her husband, rather
than incur the disgrace, of appearing in such a cause in an open
court. It was, indeed, a delicate experiment; but their kinsman
Glengyle, chief of their immediate family, was of a temper averse to
lawless proceedings;<*> and the captive's friends having had recourse

* Such, at least, was his general character; for when James Mhor, while perpetrating
* the violence at Edinbilly, called out, in order to overawe opposition, that
* Glengyle was lying in the moor with a hundred men to patronise his enterprise,
* Jean Key told him he lied, since she was confident Glengyle would never countenance
* so scoundrelly a business.

to his advice, they feared that he would withdraw his protection if
they refused to place the prisoner at liberty.

  The brethren resolved, therefore, to liberate the unhappy woman, but
previously had recourse to every measure which should oblige her,
either from fear or otherwise, to own her marriage with Robin Oig.
The cailliachs (old Highland hags) administered drugs, which were
designed to have the effect of philtres, but were probably deleterious.
James Mhor at one time threatened, that if she did not acquiesce in
the match she would find that there were enough of men in the Highlands
to bring the heads of two of her uncles who were pursuing the
civil lawsuit. At another time he fell down on his knees, and confessed
he had been accessory to wronging her, but begged she would
not ruin his innocent wife and large family. She was made to
swear she would not prosecute the brethren for the offence they had
committed; and she was obliged by threats to subscribe papers which
were tendered to her, intimating that she was carried off in consequence
of her own previous request.

  James Mhor Drummond accordingly brought his pretended sister-in-law
to Edinburgh, where, for some little time, she was carried
about from one house to another, watched by those with whom she
was lodged, and never permitted to go out alone, or even to approach
the window. The Court of Session, considering the peculiarity of
the case, and regarding Jean Key as being still under some forcible
restraint, took her person under their own special charge, and appointed
her to reside in the family of Mr. Wightman of Mauldsley, a gentleman
of respectability, who was married to one of her near relatives.
Two sentinels kept guard on the house day and night---a precaution
not deemed superfluous when the MacGregors were in question. She
was allowed to go out whenever she chose, and to see whomsoever she
had a mind, as well as the men of law employed in the civil suit on
either side. When she first came to Mr. Wightman's house she
seemed broken down with affright and suffering, so changed in features
that her mother hardly knew her, and so shaken in mind that she
scarce could recognise her parent. It was long before she could be
assured that she was in perfect safely. But when she at length received
confidence in her situation, she made a judicial declaration,
or affidavit, telling the full history of her wrongs, imputing to fear
her former silence on the subject, and expressing her resolution not to
prosecute those who had injured her, in respect of the oath she had
been compelled to take. From the possible breach of such an oath,
though a compulsory one, she was relieved by the forms of Scottish
jurisprudence, in that respect more equitable than those of England,
prosecutions for crimes being always conducted at the expense and
charge of the King, without inconvenience or cost to the private party
who has sustained the wrong. But the unhappy sufferer did not
live to be either accuser or witness against those who had so deeply
injured her.

  James Mhor Drummond had left Edinburgh so soon as his half-dead
prey had been taken from his clutches. Mrs. Key, or Wright,
was released from her species of confinement there, and removed to
Glasgow, under the escort of Mr. Wightman. As they passed the
Hill of Shotts, her escort chanced to say, ``this is a very wild spot;
what if the MacGregors should come upon us?''---``God forbid!''
was her immediate answer, ``the very sight of them would kill me.''
She continued to reside at Glasgow, without venturing to return to
her own house at Edinbilly. Her pretended husband made some
attempts to obtain an interview with her, which she steadily rejected.
She died on the 4th October 1751. The information for the Crown
hints that her decease might be the consequence of the usage she received.
But there is a general report that she died of the small-pox.
In the meantime, James Mhor, or Drummond, fell into the hands
of justice. He was considered as the instigator of the whole affair.
Nay, the deceased had informed her friends that on the night of her
being carried off, Robin Oig, moved by her cries and tears, had partly
consented to let her return, when James came up with a pistol in his
hand, and, asking whether he was such a coward as to relinquish an
enterprise in which he had risked everything to procure him a fortune,
in a manner compelled his brother to persevere. James's trial took
place on 13th July 1752, and was conducted with the utmost fairness
and impartiality. Several witnesses, all of the MacGregor family,
swore that the marriage was performed with every appearance of
acquiescence on the woman's part; and three or four witnesses, one
of them sheriff-substitute of the county, swore she might have made
her escape if she wished, and the magistrate stated that he offered her
assistance if she felt desirous to do so. But when asked why he, in
his official capacity, did not arrest the MacGregors, he could only
answer, that he had not force sufficient to make the attempt.

  The judicial declarations of Jean Key, or Wright, stated the
violent manner in which she had been carried off, and they were confirmed
by many of her friends, from her private communications
with them, which the event of her death rendered good evidence.
Indeed, the fact of her abduction (to use a Scottish law term) was
completely proved by impartial witnesses. The unhappy woman
admitted that she had pretended acquiescence in her fate on several
occasions, because she dared not trust such as offered to assist her to
escape, not even the sheriff-substitute.

  The jury brought in a special verdict, finding that Jean Key, or
Wright, had been forcibly carried off from her house, as charged in
the indictment, and that the accused had failed to show that she was
herself privy and consenting to this act of outrage. But they found the
forcible marriage, and subsequent violence, was not proved; and also
found, in alleviation of the panel's guilt in the premises, that Jean
Key did afterwards acquiesce in her condition. Eleven of the jury,
using the names of other four who were absent, subscribed a letter to
the Court, stating it was their purpose and desire, by such special
verdict, to take the panel's case out of the class of capital crimes.

  Learned informations (written arguments) on the import of the
verdict, which must be allowed a very mild one in the circumstances,
were laid before the High Court of Justiciary. This point is very
learnedly debated in these pleadings by Mr. Grant, Solicitor for the
Crown, and the celebrated Mr. Lockhart, on the part of the prisoner;
but James Mhor did not wait the event of the Court's decision.

  He had been committed to the Castle of Edinburgh on some reports
that an escape would be attempted. Yet he contrived to achieve his
liberty even from that fortress. His daughter had the address to
enter the prison, disguised as a cobbler, bringing home work, as she
pretended. In this cobbler's dress her father quickly arrayed himself.
The wife and daughter of the prisoner were heard by the sentinels
scolding the supposed cobbler for having done his work ill, and the
man came out with his hat slouched over his eyes, and grumbling, as
if at the manner in which they had treated him. In this way the
prisoner passed all the guards without suspicion, and made his escape
to France. He was afterwards outlawed by the Court of Justiciary,
which proceeded to the trial of Duncan MacGregor, or Drummond,
his brother, 15th January 1753. The accused had unquestionably
been with the party which carried off Jean Key; but no evidence
being brought which applied to him individually and directly, the
jury found him not guilty---and nothing more is known of his fate.

  That of James MacGregor, who, from talent and activity, if not
by seniority, may be considered as head of the family, has been long
misrepresented; as it has been generally averred in Law Reports, as
well as elsewhere, that his outlawry was reversed, and that he returned
and died in Scotland. But the curious letters published in Blackwood's
Magazine for December 1817, show this to be an error. The
first of these documents is a petition to Charles Edward. It is dated
20th September 1753, and pleads his service to the cause of the Stuarts,
ascribing his exile to the persecution of the Hanoverian Government,
without any allusion to the affair of Jean Key, or the Court of
Justiciary. It is stated to be forwarded by MacGregor Drummond
of Bohaldie, whom, as before mentioned, James Mhor acknowledged
as his chief.

  The effect which this petition produced does not appear. Some
temporary relief was perhaps obtained. But, soon after, this daring
adventurer was engaged in a very dark intrigue against an exile of
his own country, and placed pretty nearly in his own circumstances.
A remarkable Highland story must be here briefly alluded to. Mr.
Campbell of Glenure, who had been named factor for Government on
the forfeited estates of Stewart of Ardshiel, was shot dead by an
assassin as he passed through the wood of Lettermore, after crossing
the ferry of Ballachulish. A gentleman, named James Stewart, a
natural brother of Ardshiel, the forfeited person, was tried as being
accessory to the murder, and condemned and executed upon very
doubtful evidence; the heaviest part of which only amounted to the
accused person having assisted a nephew of his own, called Allan
Breck Stewart, with money to escape after the deed was done. Not
satisfied with this vengeance, which was obtained in a manner little
to the honour of the dispensation of justice at the time, the friends of
the deceased Glenure were equally desirous to obtain possession of the
person of Allan Breck Stewart, supposed to be the actual homicide.
James Mhor Drummond was secretly applied to to trepan Stewart
to the sea-coast, and bring him over to Britain, to almost certain
death. Drummond MacGregor had kindred connections with the
slain Glenure; and, besides, the MacGregors and Campbells had been
friends of late, while the former clan and the Stewarts had, as we
have seen, been recently at feud; lastly, Robert Oig was now in
custody at Edinburgh, and James was desirous to do some service by
which his brother might be saved. The joint force of these motives
may, in James's estimation of right and wrong, have been some
vindication for engaging in such an enterprise, although, as must be
necessarily supposed, it could only be executed by treachery of a gross
description. MacGregor stipulated for a license to return to England,
promising to bring Allan Breck thither along with him. But the
intended victim was put upon his guard by two countrymen, who
suspected James's intentions towards him. He escaped from his
kidnapper, after, as MacGregor alleged, robbing his portmanteau of
some clothes and four snuff-boxes. Such a charge, it may be observed,
could scarce have been made unless the parties had been living on a
footing of intimacy, and had access to each other's baggage.

  Although James Drummond had thus missed his blow in the
matter of Allan Breck Stewart, he used his license to make a journey
to London, and had an interview, as he avers, with Lord Holdernesse.
His Lordship, and the Under-Secretary, put many puzzling questions
to him; and, as he says, offered him a situation, which would bring
him bread, in the Government's service. This office was advantageous
as to emolument; but in the opinion of James Drummond, his acceptance
of it would have been a disgrace to his birth, and have rendered
him a scourge to his country. If such a tempting offer and sturdy
rejection had any foundation in fact, it probably relates to some plan
of espionage on the Jacobites, which the Government might hope to
carry on by means of a man who, in the matter of Allan Breck
Stewart, had shown no great nicety of feeling. Drummond MacGregor
was so far accommodating as to intimate his willingness to act
in any station in which other gentlemen of honour served, but not
otherwise;---an answer which, compared with some passages of his
past life, may remind the reader of Ancient Pistol standing upon
his reputation.

  Having thus proved intractable, as he tells the story, to the proposals
of Lord Holdernesse, James Drummond was ordered instantly
to quit England.

  On his return to France, his condition seems to have been utterly
disastrous. He was seized with fever and gravel---ill, consequently,
in body, and weakened and dispirited in mind. Allan Breck Stewart
threatened to put him to death in revenge of the designs he had
harboured against him.<*> The Stewart clan were in the highest degree

* Note E. Allan Breck Stewart.

unfriendly to him: and his late expedition to London had been
attended with many suspicious circumstances, amongst which it was
not the slightest that he had kept his purpose secret from his chief
Bohaldie. His intercourse with Lord Holdernesse was suspicious.
The Jacobites were probably, like Don Bernard de Castel Blaze, in
Gil Blas, little disposed to like those who kept company with Alguazils.
Mac-Donnell of Lochgarry, a man of unquestioned honour, lodged
an information against James Drummond before the High Bailie of
Dunkirk, accusing him of being a spy, so that he found himself
obliged to leave that town and come to Paris, with only the sum of
thirteen livres for his immediate subsistence, and with absolute
beggary staring him in the face.

  We do not offer the convicted common thief, the accomplice in
MacLaren's assassination, or the manager of the outrage against Jean
Key, as an object of sympathy; but it is melancholy to look on the
dying struggles even of a wolf or a tiger, creatures of a species directly
hostile to our own; and, in like manner, the utter distress of this
man, whose faults may have sprung from a wild system of education,
working on a haughty temper, will not be perused without some pity.
In his last letter to Bohaldie, dated Paris, 25th September 1754, he
describes his state of destitution as absolute, and expresses himself
willing to exercise his talents in breaking or breeding horses, or as a
hunter or fowler, if he could only procure employment in such an
inferior capacity till something better should occur. An Englishman
may smile, but a Scotchman will sigh at the postscript, in which the
poor starving exile asks the loan of his patron's bagpipes that he
might play over some of the melancholy tunes of his own land. But
the effect of music arises, in a great degree, from association; and
sounds which might jar the nerves of a Londoner or Parisian, bring
back to the Highlander his lofty mountain, wild lake, and the deeds
of his fathers of the glen. To prove MacGregor's claim to our reader's
compassion, we here insert the last part of the letter alluded to.

  ``By all appearance I am born to suffer crosses, and it seems they're not
at an end; for such is my wretched case at present, that I do not know
earthly where to go or what to do, as I have no subsistence to keep body and
soul together. All that I have carried here is about 13 livres, and have
taken a room at my old quarters in Hotel St. Pierre, Rue de Cordier. I
send you the bearer, begging of you to let me know if you are to be in town
soon, that I may have the pleasure of seeing you, for I have none to make
application to but you alone; and all I want is, if it was possible you could
contrive where I could be employed without going to entire beggary. This
probably is a difficult point, yet unless it's attended with some difficulty,
you might think nothing of it, as your long head can bring about matters of
much more difficulty and consequence than this. If you'd disclose this
matter to your friend Mr. Butler, it's possible he might have some employ
wherein I could be of use, as I pretend to know as much of breiding and
riding of horse as any in France, besides that I am a good hunter either
on horseback or by footing. You may judge my reduction, as I propose
the meanest things to lend a turn till better cast up. I am sorry that I
am obliged to give you so much trouble, but I hope you are very well assured
that I am grateful for what you have done for me, and I leave you to judge
of my present wretched case. I am, and shall for ever continue, dear
Chief, your own to command,                               Jas. MacGregor.

``P. S.---If you'd send your pipes by the bearer, and all the other little
trinkims belonging to it, I would put them in order, and play some
melancholy tunes, which I may now with safety, and in real truth. Forgive
my not going directly to you, for if I could have borne the seeing of
yourself, I could not choose to be seen by my friends in my wretchedness,
nor by any of my acquaintance.''

  While MacGregor wrote in this disconsolate manner, Death, the
sad but sure remedy for mortal evils, and decider of all doubts and
uncertainties, was hovering near him. A memorandum on the back
of the letter says the writer died about a week after, in October 1754.

  It now remains to mention the fate of Robin Oig---for the other
sons of Rob Roy seem to have been no way distinguished. Robin was
apprehended by a party of military from the fort of Inversnaid, at
the foot of Gartmore, and was conveyed to Edinburgh 26th May
1753. After a delay, which may have been protracted by the negotiations
of James for delivering up Allan Breck Stewart upon promise
of his brother's life, Robin Oig, on the 24th of December 1753,
was brought to the bar of the High Court of Justiciary, and indicted
by the name of Robert MacGregor, alias Campbell, alias Drummond,
alias Robert Oig; and the evidence led against him resembled exactly
that which was brought by the Crown on the former trial. Robert's
case was in some degree more favourable than his brother's;---for,
though the principal in the forcible marriage, he had yet to plead
that he had shown symptoms of relenting while they were carrying
Jean Key off, which were silenced by the remonstrances and threats of
his harder natured brother James. A considerable space of time had
also elapsed since the poor woman died, which is always a strong circumstance
in favour of the accused; for there is a sort of perspective
in guilt, and crimes of an old date seem less odious than those of recent
occurrence. But notwithstanding these considerations, the jury,
in Robert's case, did not express any solicitude to save his life as they
had done that of James. They found him guilty of being art and
part in the forcible abduction of Jean Key from her own dwelling.<*>

* The Trials of the Sons of Rob Roy, with anecdotes of Himself and his Family,
* were published at Edinburgh, 1818, in 12mo.


  Robin Oig was condemned to death, and executed on the 14th
February 1754. At the place of execution he behaved with great
decency; and professing himself a Catholic, imputed all his misfortunes
to his swerving from the true church two or three years before.
He confessed the violent methods he had used to gain Mrs. Key, or
Wright, and hoped his fate would stop further proceedings against
his brother James.<*>

* James died near three months before, but his family might easily remain a
* long time without the news of that event.

  The newspapers observed that his body, after hanging the usual
time, was delivered to his friends to be carried to the Highlands.
To this the recollection of a venerable friend, recently taken from us
in the fulness of years, then a schoolboy at Linlithgow, enables the
author to add, that a much larger body of MacGregors than had
cared to advance to Edinburgh received the corpse at that place with
the coronach and other wild emblems of Highland mourning, and so
escorted it to Balquhidder. Thus we may conclude this long account
of Rob Roy and his family with the classic phrase,

		Ite. Conclamatum est.

  I have only to add, that I have selected the above from many
anecdotes of Rob Roy which were, and may still be, current among
the mountains where he flourished; but I am far from warranting
their exact authenticity. Clannish partialities were very apt to guide
the tongue and pen, as well as the pistol and claymore, and the
features of an anecdote are wonderfully softened or exaggerated as the
story is told by a MacGregor or a Campbell.
