



		POSTSCRIPT.



  The second article of the Appendix to the Introduction to
Rob Roy contains two curious letters respecting the
arrest of Mr. Grahame of Killearn by that daring freebooter,
while levying the Duke of Montrose's rents. These were taken
from scroll copies in the possession of his Grace the present
Duke, who kindly permitted the use of them in the present
publication.---The Novel had but just passed through the press,
when the Right Honourable Mr. Peel---whose important state
avocations do not avert his attention from the interests of
literature---transmitted to the author copies of the original
letters and enclosure, of which he possessed only the rough
draught. The originals were discovered in the State Paper
Office, by the indefatigable researches of Mr. Lemon, who is
daily throwing more light on that valuable collection of records.
From the documents with which the Author has been thus
kindly favoured, he is enabled to fill up the addresses which were
wanting in the scrolls. That of the 21st Nov. 1716 is addressed
to Lord Viscount Townshend, and is accompanied by one of
the same date to Robert Pringle, Esquire, Under-Secretary of
State, which is here inserted as relative to so curious an
incident:---

  _Letter from the Duke of Montrose, to Robert Pringle, Esq.,
Under-Secretary to Lord Viscount Townshend._

  ``S<r>,                              _Glasgow,_ 21 _Nov._ 1716.

  ``Haveing had so many dispatches to make this night, I hope
ye'l excuse me that I make use of another hand to give yow a
short account of the occasion of this express, by which I have
written to my Ld. Duke of Roxburgh, and my Lord Townshend,
which I hope ye'l gett carefully deleivered.

  ``Mr. Graham, younger of Killearn, being on Munday last in
Menteith att a country house, collecting my rents, was about
nine o'clock that same night surprised by Rob Roy with a party
of his men in arms, who haveing surrounded the house and
secured the avenues, presented their guns in at the windows,
while he himself entered the room with some others with cokt
pistolls, and seased Killearn with all his money, books, papers,
and bonds, and carryed all away with him to the hills, at the
same time ordering Killearn to write a letter to me (of which
ye have the copy inclosed), proposeing a very honourable treaty
to me. I must say this story was as surprising to me as it was
insolent; and it must bring a very great concern upon me, that
this gentleman, my near relation, should be brought to suffer
all the barbaritys and crueltys, which revenge and mallice may
suggest to these miscreants, for his haveing acted a faithfull
part in the service of the Government, and his affection to me
in my concerns.

  ``I need not be more particular to you, since I know that
my Letter to my Lord Townshend will come into your hands,
so shall only now give you the assurances of my being, with
great sincerity,

  		``S<r>, y<r> most humble servant,

			(Signed)	``Montrose.

  ``I long exceedingly for a return of my former dispatches to
the Secretary's about Methven and Col<ll> Urquhart, and my
wife's cousins, Balnamoon and Phinaven.

  ``I must beg yow'll give my humble service to Mr. Secretary
Methven, and tell him that I must referr him to what I have
written to My Lord Townshend in this affair of Rob Roy,
believing it was needless to trouble both with letters.''

	Examined,		Robt. Lemon,

			_Deputy Keeper of State Papers._

	STATE PAPER OFFICE,
	_Nov._ 4, 1829

  Note.---The enclosure referred to in the preceding letter is
another copy of the letter which Mr. Grahame of Killearn was
compelled by Rob Roy to write to the Duke of Montrose, and
is exactly the same as the one enclosed in his Grace's letter to
Lord Townshend, dated November 21st, 1716.

				R. L.

  The last letter in the Appendix No. II. (28th November),
acquainting the Government with Killearn's being set at
liberty, is also addressed to the Under-Secretary of State, Mr.
Pringle.

  The Author may also here remark, that immediately previous
to the insurrection of 1715, he perceives, from some notes of
information given to Government, that Rob Roy appears to
have been much employed and trusted by the Jacobite party,
even in the very delicate task of transporting specie to the Earl
of Breadalbane, though it might have somewhat resembled
trusting Don Raphael and Ambrose de Lamela with the church
treasure.
