




XXXIII





Owen Leath did not go back with his step-mother to Givre.

In reply to her suggestion he announced his intention of

staying on a day or two longer in Paris.



Anna left alone by the first train the next morning. Darrow

was to follow in the afternoon.  When Owen had left them the

evening before, Darrow waited a moment for her to speak;

then, as she said nothing, he asked her if she really wished

him to return to Givre. She made a mute sign of assent, and

he added: "For you know that, much as I'm ready to do for

Owen, I can't do that for him--I can't go back to be sent

away again."



"No--no!"



He came nearer, and looked at her, and she went to him. All

her fears seemed to fall from her as he held her. It was a

different feeling from any she had known before: confused

and turbid, as if secret shames and rancours stirred in it,

yet richer, deeper, more enslaving.  She leaned her head

back and shut her eyes beneath his kisses.  She knew now

that she could never give him up.



Nevertheless she asked him, the next morning, to let her go

back alone to Givre.  She wanted time to think. She was

convinced that what had happened was inevitable, that she

and Darrow belonged to each other, and that he was right in

saying no past folly could ever put them asunder.  If there

was a shade of difference in her feeling for him it was that

of an added intensity.  She felt restless, insecure out of

his sight: she had a sense of incompleteness, of passionate

dependence, that was somehow at variance with her own

conception of her character.



It was partly the consciousness of this change in herself

that made her want to be alone.  The solitude of her inner

life had given her the habit of these hours of self-

examination, and she needed them as she needed her morning

plunge into cold water.



During the journey she tried to review what had happened in

the light of her new decision and of her sudden relief from

pain.  She seemed to herself to have passed through some

fiery initiation from which she had emerged seared and

quivering, but clutching to her breast a magic talisman.

Sophy Viner had cried out to her: "Some day you'll know!"

and Darrow had used the same words.  They meant, she

supposed, that when she had explored the intricacies and

darknesses of her own heart her judgment of others would be

less absolute. Well, she knew now--knew weaknesses and

strengths she had not dreamed of, and the deep discord and

still deeper complicities between what thought in her and

what blindly wanted...



Her mind turned anxiously to Owen.  At least the blow that

was to fall on him would not seem to have been inflicted by

her hand.  He would be left with the impression that his

breach with Sophy Viner was due to one of the ordinary

causes of such disruptions: though he must lose her, his

memory of her would not be poisoned.  Anna never for a

moment permitted herself the delusion that she had renewed

her promise to Darrow in order to spare her step-son this

last refinement of misery.  She knew she had been prompted

by the irresistible impulse to hold fast to what was most

precious to her, and that Owen's arrival on the scene had

been the pretext for her decision, and not its cause; yet

she felt herself fortified by the thought of what she had

spared him.  It was as though a star she had been used to

follow had shed its familiar ray on ways unknown to her.



All through these meditations ran the undercurrent of an

absolute trust in Sophy Viner.  She thought of the girl with

a mingling of antipathy and confidence.  It was humiliating

to her pride to recognize kindred impulses in a character

which she would have liked to feel completely alien to her.

But what indeed was the girl really like?  She seemed to have

no scruples and a thousand delicacies.  She had given

herself to Darrow, and concealed the episode from Owen

Leath, with no more apparent sense of debasement than the

vulgarest of adventuresses; yet she had instantly obeyed the

voice of her heart when it bade her part from the one and

serve the other.



Anna tried to picture what the girl's life must have been:

what experiences, what initiations, had formed her.  But her

own training had been too different: there were veils she

could not lift.  She looked back at her married life, and

its colourless uniformity took on an air of high restraint

and order.  Was it because she had been so incurious that it

had worn that look to her?  It struck her with amazement that

she had never given a thought to her husband's past, or

wondered what he did and where he went when he was away from

her.  If she had been asked what she supposed he thought

about when they were apart, she would instantly have

answered: his snuff-boxes.  It had never occurred to her

that he might have passions, interests, preoccupations of

which she was absolutely ignorant. Yet he went up to Paris

rather regularly: ostensibly to attend sales and

exhibitions, or to confer with dealers and collectors.  She

tried to picture him, straight, trim, beautifully brushed

and varnished, walking furtively down a quiet street, and

looking about him before he slipped into a doorway.  She

understood now that she had been cold to him: what more

likely than that he had sought compensations?  All men were

like that, she supposed--no doubt her simplicity had amused

him.



In the act of transposing Fraser Leath into a Don Juan she

was pulled up by the ironic perception that she was simply

trying to justify Darrow.  She wanted to think that all men

were "like that" because Darrow was "like that": she wanted

to justify her acceptance of the fact by persuading herself

that only through such concessions could women like herself

hope to keep what they could not give up.  And suddenly she

was filled with anger at her blindness, and then at her

disastrous attempt to see.  Why had she forced the truth out

of Darrow?  If only she had held her tongue nothing need ever

have been known.  Sophy Viner would have broken her

engagement, Owen would have been sent around the world, and

her own dream would have been unshattered. But she had

probed, insisted, cross-examined, not rested till she had

dragged the secret to the light. She was one of the luckless

women who always have the wrong audacities, and who always

know it...



Was it she, Anna Leath, who was picturing herself to herself

in that way?  She recoiled from her thoughts as if with a

sense of demoniac possession, and there flashed through her

the longing to return to her old state of fearless

ignorance.  If at that moment she could have kept Darrow

from following her to Givre she would have done so...



But he came; and with the sight of him the turmoil fell and

she felt herself reassured, rehabilitated.  He arrived

toward dusk, and she motored to Francheuil to meet him.  She

wanted to see him as soon as possible, for she had divined,

through the new insight that was in her, that only his

presence could restore her to a normal view of things.  In

the motor, as they left the town and turned into the high-

road, he lifted her hand and kissed it, and she leaned

against him, and felt the currents flow between them.  She

was grateful to him for not saying anything, and for not

expecting her to speak.  She said to herself: "He never

makes a mistake--he always knows what to do"; and then she

thought with a start that it was doubtless because he had so

often been in such situations.  The idea that his tact was a

kind of professional expertness filled her with repugnance,

and insensibly she drew away from him.  He made no motion to

bring her nearer, and she instantly thought that that was

calculated too.  She sat beside him in frozen misery,

wondering whether, henceforth, she would measure in this way

his every look and gesture.  Neither of them spoke again

till the motor turned under the dark arch of the avenue, and

they saw the lights of Givre twinkling at its end.  Then

Darrow laid his hand on hers and said: "I know, dear--" and

the hardness in her melted.  "He's suffering as I am," she

thought; and for a moment the baleful fact between them

seemed to draw them closer instead of walling them up in

their separate wretchedness.



It was wonderful to be once more re-entering the doors of

Givre with him, and as the old house received them into its

mellow silence she had again the sense of passing out of a

dreadful dream into the reassurance of kindly and familiar

things.  It did not seem possible that these quiet rooms, so

full of the slowly-distilled accumulations of a fastidious

taste, should have been the scene of tragic dissensions.

The memory of them seemed to be shut out into the night with

the closing and barring of its doors.



At the tea-table in the oak-room they found Madame de

Chantelle and Effie.  The little girl, catching sight of

Darrow, raced down the drawing-rooms to meet him, and

returned in triumph on his shoulder.  Anna looked at them

with a smile.  Effie, for all her graces, was chary of such

favours, and her mother knew that in according them to

Darrow she had admitted him to the circle where Owen had

hitherto ruled.



Over the tea-table Darrow gave Madame de Chantelle the

explanation of his sudden return from England.  On reaching

London, he told her, he had found that the secretary he was

to have replaced was detained there by the illness of his

wife.  The Ambassador, knowing Darrow's urgent reasons for

wishing to be in France, had immediately proposed his going

back, and awaiting at Givre the summons to relieve his

colleague; and he had jumped into the first train, without

even waiting to telegraph the news of his release.  He spoke

naturally, easily, in his usual quiet voice, taking his tea

from Effie, helping himself to the toast she handed, and

stooping now and then to stroke the dozing terrier.  And

suddenly, as Anna listened to his explanation, she asked

herself if it were true.



The question, of course, was absurd.  There was no possible

reason why he should invent a false account of his return,

and every probability that the version he gave was the real

one.  But he had looked and spoken in the same way when he

had answered her probing questions about Sophy Viner, and

she reflected with a chill of fear that she would never

again know if he were speaking the truth or not.  She was

sure he loved her, and she did not fear his insincerity as

much as her own distrust of him.  For a moment it seemed to

her that this must corrupt the very source of love; then she

said to herself: "By and bye, when I am altogether his, we

shall be so near each other that there will be no room for

any doubts between us."  But the doubts were there now, one

moment lulled to quiescence, the next more torturingly

alert.  When the nurse appeared to summon Effie, the little

girl, after kissing her grandmother, entrenched herself on

Darrow's knee with the imperious demand to be carried up to

bed; and Anna, while she laughingly protested, said to

herself with a pang: "Can I give her a father about whom I

think such things?"



The thought of Effie, and of what she owed to Effie, had

been the fundamental reason for her delays and hesitations

when she and Darrow had come together again in England.  Her

own feeling was so clear that but for that scruple she would

have put her hand in his at once.  But till she had seen him

again she had never considered the possibility of re-

marriage, and when it suddenly confronted her it seemed, for

the moment, to disorganize the life she had planned for

herself and her child.  She had not spoken of this to Darrow

because it appeared to her a subject to be debated within

her own conscience.  The question, then, was not as to his

fitness to become the guide and guardian of her child; nor

did she fear that her love for him would deprive Effie of

the least fraction of her tenderness, since she did not

think of love as something measured and exhaustible but as a

treasure perpetually renewed.  What she questioned was her

right to introduce into her life any interests and duties

which might rob Effie of a part of her time, or lessen the

closeness of their daily intercourse.



She had decided this question as it was inevitable that she

should; but now another was before her.  Assuredly, at her

age, there was no possible reason why she should cloister

herself to bring up her daughter; but there was every reason

for not marrying a man in whom her own faith was not

complete...



