




XXXVI





Darrow continued to stand by the door after it had closed.

Anna felt that he was looking at her, and sat still,

disdaining to seek refuge in any evasive word or movement.

For the last time she wanted to let him take from her the

fulness of what the sight of her could give.



He crossed over and sat down on the sofa.  For a moment

neither of them spoke; then he said: "To-night, dearest, I

must have my answer."



She straightened herself under the shock of his seeming to

take the very words from her lips.



"To-night?" was all that she could falter.



"I must be off by the early train.  There won't be more than

a moment in the morning."



He had taken her hand, and she said to herself that she must

free it before she could go on with what she had to say.

Then she rejected this concession to a weakness she was

resolved to defy.  To the end she would leave her hand in

his hand, her eyes in his eyes: she would not, in their

final hour together, be afraid of any part of her love for

him.



"You'll tell me to-night, dear," he insisted gently; and his

insistence gave her the strength to speak.



"There's something I must ask you," she broke out,

perceiving, as she heard her words, that they were not in

the least what she had meant to say.



He sat still, waiting, and she pressed on: "Do such things

happen to men often?"



The quiet room seemed to resound with the long

reverberations of her question.  She looked away from him,

and he released her and stood up.



"I don't know what happens to other men.  Such a thing never

happened to me..."



She turned her eyes back to his face.  She felt like a

traveller on a giddy path between a cliff and a precipice:

there was nothing for it now but to go on.



"Had it...had it begun...before you met her in Paris?"



"No; a thousand times no!  I've told you the facts as they

were."



"All the facts?"



He turned abruptly.  "What do you mean?"



Her throat was dry and the loud pulses drummed in her

temples.



"I mean--about her...Perhaps you knew...knew things about

her...beforehand."



She stopped.  The room had grown profoundly still.  A log

dropped to the hearth and broke there in a hissing shower.



Darrow spoke in a clear voice.  "I knew nothing, absolutely

nothing," he said.



She had the answer to her inmost doubt--to her last shameful

unavowed hope.  She sat powerless under her woe.



He walked to the fireplace and pushed back the broken log

with his foot.  A flame shot out of it, and in the upward

glare she saw his pale face, stern with misery.



"Is that all?" he asked.



She made a slight sign with her head and he came slowly back

to her.  "Then is this to be good-bye?"



Again she signed a faint assent, and he made no effort to

touch her or draw nearer.  "You understand that I sha'n't

come back?"



He was looking at her, and she tried to return his look, but

her eyes were blind with tears, and in dread of his seeing

them she got up and walked away.  He did not follow her, and

she stood with her back to him, staring at a bowl of

carnations on a little table strewn with books.  Her tears

magnified everything she looked at, and the streaked petals

of the carnations, their fringed edges and frail curled

stamens, pressed upon her, huge and vivid.  She noticed

among the books a volume of verse he had sent her from

England, and tried to remember whether it was before or

after...



She felt that he was waiting for her to speak, and at last

she turned to him.  "I shall see you to-morrow before you

go..."



He made no answer.



She moved toward the door and he held it open for her. She

saw his hand on the door, and his seal ring in its setting

of twisted silver; and the sense of the end of all things

came to her.



They walked down the drawing-rooms, between the shadowy

reflections of screens and cabinets, and mounted the stairs

side by side.  At the end of the gallery, a lamp brought out

turbid gleams in the smoky battle-piece above it.



On the landing Darrow stopped; his room was the nearest to

the stairs.  "Good night," he said, holding out his hand.



As Anna gave him hers the springs of grief broke loose in

her.  She struggled with her sobs, and subdued them; but her

breath came unevenly, and to hide her agitation she leaned

on him and pressed her face against his arm.



"Don't--don't," he whispered, soothing her.



Her troubled breathing sounded loudly in the silence of the

sleeping house.  She pressed her lips tight, but could not

stop the nervous pulsations in her throat, and he put an arm

about her and, opening his door, drew her across the

threshold of his room.  The door shut behind her and she sat

down on the lounge at the foot of the bed.  The pulsations

in her throat had ceased, but she knew they would begin

again if she tried to speak.



Darrow walked away and leaned against the mantelpiece. The

red-veiled lamp shone on his books and papers, on the arm-

chair by the fire, and the scattered objects on his

dressing-table.  A log glimmered on the hearth, and the room

was warm and faintly smoke-scented.  It was the first time

she had ever been in a room he lived in, among his personal

possessions and the traces of his daily usage.  Every object

about her seemed to contain a particle of himself: the whole

air breathed of him, steeping her in the sense of his

intimate presence.



Suddenly she thought: "This is what Sophy Viner knew"...and

with a torturing precision she pictured them alone in such a

scene...Had he taken the girl to an hotel...where did people

go in such cases?  Wherever they were, the silence of night

had been around them, and the things he used had been strewn

about the room...Anna, ashamed of dwelling on the detested

vision, stood up with a confused impulse of flight; then a

wave of contrary feeling arrested her and she paused with

lowered head.



Darrow had come forward as she rose, and she perceived that

he was waiting for her to bid him good night.  It was clear

that no other possibility had even brushed his mind; and the

fact, for some dim reason, humiliated her.  "Why not...why

not?" something whispered in her, as though his forbearance,

his tacit recognition of her pride, were a slight on other

qualities she wanted him to feel in her.



"In the morning, then?" she heard him say.



"Yes, in the morning," she repeated.



She continued to stand in the same place, looking vaguely

about the room.  For once before they parted--since part

they must--she longed to be to him all that Sophy Viner had

been; but she remained rooted to the floor, unable to find a

word or imagine a gesture that should express her meaning.

Exasperated by her helplessness, she thought: "Don't I feel

things as other women do?"



Her eye fell on a note-case she had given him.  It was worn

at the corners with the friction of his pocket and distended

with thickly packed papers.  She wondered if he carried her

letters in it, and she put her hand out and touched it.



All that he and she had ever felt or seen, their close

encounters of word and look, and the closer contact of their

silences, trembled through her at the touch.  She remembered

things he had said that had been like new skies above her

head: ways he had that seemed a part of the air she

breathed.  The faint warmth of her girlish love came back to

her, gathering heat as it passed through her thoughts; and

her heart rocked like a boat on the surge of its long long

memories.  "It's because I love him in too many ways," she

thought; and slowly she turned to the door.



She was aware that Darrow was still silently watching her,

but he neither stirred nor spoke till she had reached the

threshold.  Then he met her there and caught her in his

arms.



"Not to-night--don't tell me to-night!" he whispered; and

she leaned away from him, closing her eyes for an instant,

and then slowly opening them to the flood of light in his.
