




XXXI





The sound of Miss Painter's latch-key made her start. She

was still a bundle of quivering fears to whom each coming

moment seemed a menace.



There was a slight interval, and a sound of voices in the

hall; then Miss Painter's vigorous hand was on the door.



Anna stood up as she came in.  "You've found him?"



"I've found Sophy."



"And Owen?--has she seen him?  Is he here?"



"SHE'S here: in the hall.  She wants to speak to you."



"Here--NOW?" Anna found no voice for more.



"She drove back with me," Miss Painter continued in the tone

of impartial narrative.  "The cabman was impertinent.  I've

got his number."  She fumbled in a stout black reticule.



"Oh, I can't--" broke from Anna; but she collected herself,

remembering that to betray her unwillingness to see the girl

was to risk revealing much more.



"She thought you might be too tired to see her: she wouldn't

come in till I'd found out."



Anna drew a quick breath.  An instant's thought had told her

that Sophy Viner would hardly have taken such a step unless

something more important had happened. "Ask her to come,

please," she said.



Miss Painter, from the threshold, turned back to announce

her intention of going immediately to the police station to

report the cabman's delinquency; then she passed out, and

Sophy Viner entered.



The look in the girl's face showed that she had indeed come

unwillingly; yet she seemed animated by an eager

resoluteness that made Anna ashamed of her tremors. For a

moment they looked at each other in silence, as if the

thoughts between them were packed too thick for speech; then

Anna said, in a voice from which she strove to take the edge

of hardness: "You know where Owen is, Miss Painter tells

me."



"Yes; that was my reason for asking you to see me."  Sophy

spoke simply, without constraint or hesitation.



"I thought he'd promised you--" Anna interposed.



"He did; but he broke his promise.  That's what I thought I

ought to tell you."



"Thank you."  Anna went on tentatively: "He left Givre this

morning without a word.  I followed him because I was

afraid..."



She broke off again and the girl took up her phrase.  "You

were afraid he'd guessed?  He HAS..."



"What do you mean--guessed what?"



"That you know something he doesn't...something that made

you glad to have me go."



"Oh--" Anna moaned.  If she had wanted more pain she had it

now.  "He's told you this?" she faltered.



"He hasn't told me, because I haven't seen him.  I kept him

off--I made Mrs. Farlow get rid of him.  But he's written me

what he came to say; and that was it."



"Oh, poor Owen!" broke from Anna.  Through all the

intricacies of her suffering she felt the separate pang of

his.



"And I want to ask you," the girl continued, "to let me see

him; for of course," she added in the same strange voice of

energy, "I wouldn't unless you consented."



"To see him?" Anna tried to gather together her startled

thoughts.  "What use would it be?  What could you tell him?"



"I want to tell him the truth," said Sophy Viner.



The two women looked at each other, and a burning blush rose

to Anna's forehead.  "I don't understand," she faltered.



Sophy waited a moment; then she lowered her voice to say: "I

don't want him to think worse of me than he need..."



"Worse?"



"Yes--to think such things as you're thinking now...I want

him to know exactly what happened...then I want to bid him

good-bye."



Anna tried to clear a way through her own wonder and

confusion.  She felt herself obscurely moved.



"Wouldn't it be worse for him?"



"To hear the truth?  It would be better, at any rate, for you

and Mr. Darrow."



At the sound of the name Anna lifted her head quickly. "I've

only my step-son to consider!"



The girl threw a startled look at her.  "You don't mean--

you're not going to give him up?"



Anna felt her lips harden.  "I don't think it's of any use

to talk of that."



"Oh, I know!  It's my fault for not knowing how to say what I

want you to hear.  Your words are different; you know how to

choose them.  Mine offend you...and the dread of it makes me

blunder.  That's why, the other day, I couldn't say

anything...couldn't make things clear to you.  But now

MUST, even if you hate it!" She drew a step nearer, her

slender figure swayed forward in a passion of entreaty.  "Do

listen to me!  What you've said is dreadful.  How can you

speak of him in that voice?  Don't you see that I went away

so that he shouldn't have to lose you?"



Anna looked at her coldly.  "Are you speaking of Mr. Darrow?

I don't know why you think your going or staying can in any

way affect our relations."



"You mean that you HAVE given him up--because of me?  Oh,

how could you?  You can't really love him!--And yet," the

girl suddenly added, "you must, or you'd be more sorry for

me!"



"I'm very sorry for you," Anna said, feeling as if the iron

band about her heart pressed on it a little less inexorably.



"Then why won't you hear me?  Why won't you try to

understand?  It's all so different from what you imagine!"



"I've never judged you."



"I'm not thinking of myself.  He loves you!"



"I thought you'd come to speak of Owen."



Sophy Viner seemed not to hear her.  "He's never loved any

one else.  Even those few days...I knew it all the

while...he never cared for me."



"Please don't say any more!" Anna said.



"I know it must seem strange to you that I should say so

much.  I shock you, I offend you: you think me a creature

without shame.  So I am--but not in the sense you think!  I'm

not ashamed of having loved him; no; and I'm not ashamed of

telling you so.  It's that that justifies me--and him

too...Oh, let me tell you how it happened!  He was sorry for

me: he saw I cared. I KNEW that was all he ever felt.  I

could see he was thinking of some one else.  I knew it was

only for a week...He never said a word to mislead me...I

wanted to be happy just once--and I didn't dream of the harm

I might be doing him!"



Anna could not speak.  She hardly knew, as yet, what the

girl's words conveyed to her, save the sense of their tragic

fervour; but she was conscious of being in the presence of

an intenser passion than she had ever felt.



"I am sorry for you."  She paused.  "But why do you say this

to me?" After another interval she exclaimed: "You'd no

right to let Owen love you."



"No; that was wrong.  At least what's happened since has

made it so.  If things had been different I think I could

have made Owen happy.  You were all so good to me--I wanted

so to stay with you!  I suppose you'll say that makes it

worse: my daring to dream I had the right...But all that

doesn't matter now.  I won't see Owen unless you're willing.

I should have liked to tell him what I've tried to tell you;

but you must know better; you feel things in a finer way.

Only you'll have to help him if I can't.  He cares a great

deal...it's going to hurt him..."



Anna trembled.  "Oh, I know!  What can I do?"



"You can go straight back to Givre--now, at once!  So that

Owen shall never know you've followed him."  Sophy's clasped

hands reached out urgently.  "And you can send for Mr.

Darrow--bring him back.  Owen must be convinced that he's

mistaken, and nothing else will convince him.  Afterward

I'll find a pretext--oh, I promise you!  But first he must

see for himself that nothing's changed for you."



Anna stood motionless, subdued and dominated.  The girl's

ardour swept her like a wind.



"Oh, can't I move you?  Some day you'll know!" Sophy pleaded,

her eyes full of tears.



Anna saw them, and felt a fullness in her throat. Again the

band about her heart seemed loosened.  She wanted to find a

word, but could not: all within her was too dark and

violent.  She gave the girl a speechless look.



"I do believe you," she said suddenly; then she turned and

walked out of the room.

