




XXXV





The next morning the dread was still there, and she

understood that she must snatch herself out of the torpor of

the will into which she had been gradually sinking, and tell

Darrow that she could not be his wife.



The knowledge came to her in the watches of a sleepless

night, when, through the tears of disenchanted passion, she

stared back upon her past.  There it lay before her, her

sole romance, in all its paltry poverty, the cheapest of

cheap adventures, the most pitiful of sentimental blunders.

She looked about her room, the room where, for so many

years, if her heart had been quiescent her thoughts had been

alive, and pictured herself henceforth cowering before a

throng of mean suspicions, of unavowed compromises and

concessions.  In that moment of self-searching she saw that

Sophy Viner had chosen the better part, and that certain

renunciations might enrich where possession would have left

a desert.



Passionate reactions of instinct fought against these

efforts of her will.  Why should past or future coerce her,

when the present was so securely hers?  Why insanely

surrender what the other would after all never have?  Her

sense of irony whispered that if she sent away Darrow it

would not be to Sophy Viner, but to the first woman who

crossed his path--as, in a similar hour, Sophy Viner herself

had crossed it...But the mere fact that she could think such

things of him sent her shuddering back to the opposite pole.

She pictured herself gradually subdued to such a conception

of life and love, she pictured Effie growing up under the

influence of the woman she saw herself becoming--and she hid

her eyes from the humiliation of the picture...







They were at luncheon when the summons that Darrow expected

was brought to him.  He handed the telegram to Anna, and she

learned that his Ambassador, on the way to a German cure,

was to be in Paris the next evening and wished to confer

with him there before he went back to London.  The idea that

the decisive moment was at hand was so agitating to her that

when luncheon was over she slipped away to the terrace and

thence went down alone to the garden.  The day was grey but

mild, with the heaviness of decay in the air.  She rambled

on aimlessly, following under the denuded boughs the path

she and Darrow had taken on their first walk to the river.

She was sure he would not try to overtake her: sure he would

guess why she wished to be alone.  There were moments when

it seemed to double her loneliness to be so certain of his

reading her heart while she was so desperately ignorant of

his...



She wandered on for more than an hour, and when she returned

to the house she saw, as she entered the hall, that Darrow

was seated at the desk in Owen's study.  He heard her step,

and looking up turned in his chair without rising.  Their

eyes met, and she saw that his were clear and smiling.  He

had a heap of papers at his elbow and was evidently engaged

in some official correspondence.  She wondered that he could

address himself so composedly to his task, and then

ironically reflected that such detachment was a sign of his

superiority.  She crossed the threshold and went toward him;

but as she advanced she had a sudden vision of Owen,

standing outside in the cold autumn dusk and watching Darrow

and Sophy Viner as they faced each other across the lamplit

desk...The evocation was so vivid that it caught her breath

like a blow, and she sank down helplessly on the divan among

the piled-up books.  Distinctly, at the moment, she

understood that the end had come.  "When he speaks to me I

will tell him!" she thought...



Darrow, laying aside his pen, looked at her for a moment in

silence; then he stood up and shut the door.



"I must go to-morrow early," he said, sitting down beside

her.  His voice was grave, with a slight tinge of sadness.

She said to herself: "He knows what I am feeling..."  and now

the thought made her feel less alone.  The expression of his

face was stern and yet tender: for the first time she

understood what he had suffered.



She had no doubt as to the necessity of giving him up, but

it was impossible to tell him so then.  She stood up and

said: "I'll leave you to your letters."  He made no protest,

but merely answered: "You'll come down presently for a

walk?" and it occurred to her at once that she would walk

down to the river with him, and give herself for the last

time the tragic luxury of sitting at his side in the little

pavilion.  "Perhaps," she thought, "it will be easier to

tell him there."



It did not, on the way home from their walk, become any

easier to tell him; but her secret decision to do so before

he left gave her a kind of factitious calm and laid a

melancholy ecstasy upon the hour.  Still skirting the

subject that fanned their very faces with its flame, they

clung persistently to other topics, and it seemed to Anna

that their minds had never been nearer together than in this

hour when their hearts were so separate. In the glow of

interchanged love she had grown less conscious of that other

glow of interchanged thought which had once illumined her

mind.  She had forgotten how Darrow had widened her world

and lengthened out all her perspectives, and with a pang of

double destitution she saw herself alone among her shrunken

thoughts.



For the first time, then, she had a clear vision of what her

life would be without him.  She imagined herself trying to

take up the daily round, and all that had lightened and

animated it seemed equally lifeless and vain.  She tried to

think of herself as wholly absorbed in her daughter's

development, like other mothers she had seen; but she

supposed those mothers must have had stored memories of

happiness to nourish them.  She had had nothing, and all her

starved youth still claimed its due.



When she went up to dress for dinner she said to herself:

"I'll have my last evening with him, and then, before we say

good night, I'll tell him."



This postponement did not seem unjustified.  Darrow had

shown her how he dreaded vain words, how resolved he was to

avoid all fruitless discussion.  He must have been intensely

aware of what had been going on in her mind since his

return, yet when she had attempted to reveal it to him he

had turned from the revelation. She was therefore merely

following the line he had traced in behaving, till the final

moment came, as though there were nothing more to say...



That moment seemed at last to be at hand when, at her usual

hour after dinner, Madame de Chantelle rose to go upstairs.

She lingered a little to bid good-bye to Darrow, whom she

was not likely to see in the morning; and her affable

allusions to his prompt return sounded in Anna's ear like

the note of destiny.



A cold rain had fallen all day, and for greater warmth and

intimacy they had gone after dinner to the oak-room,

shutting out the chilly vista of the farther drawing-rooms.

The autumn wind, coming up from the river, cried about the

house with a voice of loss and separation; and Anna and

Darrow sat silent, as if they feared to break the hush that

shut them in.  The solitude, the fire-light, the harmony of

soft hangings and old dim pictures, wove about them a spell

of security through which Anna felt, far down in her heart,

the muffled beat of an inextinguishable bliss. How could she

have thought that this last moment would be the moment to

speak to him, when it seemed to have gathered up into its

flight all the scattered splendours of her dream?

