




XXXVII





Anna and Darrow, the next day, sat alone in a compartment of

the Paris train.



Anna, when they entered it, had put herself in the farthest

corner and placed her bag on the adjoining seat.  She had

decided suddenly to accompany Darrow to Paris, had even

persuaded him to wait for a later train in order that they

might travel together.  She had an intense longing to be

with him, an almost morbid terror of losing sight of him for

a moment: when he jumped out of the train and ran back along

the platform to buy a newspaper for her she felt as though

she should never see him again, and shivered with the cold

misery of her last journey to Paris, when she had thought

herself parted from him forever.  Yet she wanted to keep him

at a distance, on the other side of the compartment, and as

the train moved out of the station she drew from her bag the

letters she had thrust in it as she left the house, and

began to glance over them so that her lowered lids should

hide her eyes from him.



She was his now, his for life: there could never again be

any question of sacrificing herself to Effie's welfare, or

to any other abstract conception of duty. Effie of course

would not suffer; Anna would pay for her bliss as a wife by

redoubled devotion as a mother. Her scruples were not

overcome; but for the time their voices were drowned in the

tumultuous rumour of her happiness.



As she opened her letters she was conscious that Darrow's

gaze was fixed on her, and gradually it drew her eyes

upward, and she drank deep of the passionate tenderness in

his.  Then the blood rose to her face and she felt again the

desire to shield herself.  She turned back to her letters

and her glance lit on an envelope inscribed in Owen's hand.



Her heart began to beat oppressively: she was in a mood when

the simplest things seemed ominous.  What could Owen have to

say to her?  Only the first page was covered, and it

contained simply the announcement that, in the company of a

young compatriot who was studying at the Beaux Arts, he had

planned to leave for Spain the following evening.



"He hasn't seen her, then!" was Anna's instant thought; and

her feeling was a strange compound of humiliation and

relief.  The girl had kept her word, lived up to the line of

conduct she had set herself; and Anna had failed in the same

attempt.  She did not reproach herself with her failure; but

she would have been happier if there had been less

discrepancy between her words to Sophy Viner and the act

which had followed them.  It irritated her obscurely that

the girl should have been so much surer of her power to

carry out her purpose...



Anna looked up and saw that Darrow's eyes were on the

newspaper.  He seemed calm and secure, almost indifferent to

her presence.  "Will it become a matter of course to him so

soon?" she wondered with a twinge of jealousy.  She sat

motionless, her eyes fixed on him, trying to make him feel

the attraction of her gaze as she felt his.  It surprised

and shamed her to detect a new element in her love for him:

a sort of suspicious tyrannical tenderness that seemed to

deprive it of all serenity.  Finally he looked up, his smile

enveloped her, and she felt herself his in every fibre, his

so completely and inseparably that she saw the vanity of

imagining any other fate for herself.



To give herself a countenance she held out Owen's letter.

He took it and glanced down the page, his face grown grave.

She waited nervously till he looked up.



"That's a good plan; the best thing that could happen," he

said, a just perceptible shade of constraint in his tone.



"Oh, yes," she hastily assented.  She was aware of a faint

current of relief silently circulating between them.  They

were both glad that Owen was going, that for a while he

would be out of their way; and it seemed to her horrible

that so much of the stuff of their happiness should be made

of such unavowed feelings...



"I shall see him this evening," she said, wishing Darrow to

feel that she was not afraid of meeting her step-son.



"Yes, of course; perhaps he might dine with you."



The words struck her as strangely obtuse.  Darrow was to

meet his Ambassador at the station on the latter's arrival,

and would in all probability have to spend the evening with

him, and Anna knew he had been concerned at the thought of

having to leave her alone.  But how could he speak in that

careless tone of her dining with Owen?  She lowered her voice

to say: "I'm afraid he's desperately unhappy."



He answered, with a tinge of impatience: "It's much the best

thing that he should travel."



"Yes--but don't you feel..."  She broke off.  She knew how

he disliked these idle returns on the irrevocable, and her

fear of doing or saying what he disliked was tinged by a new

instinct of subserviency against which her pride revolted.

She thought to herself: "He will see the change, and grow

indifferent to me as he did to HER..."  and for a moment

it seemed to her that she was reliving the experience of

Sophy Viner.



Darrow made no attempt to learn the end of her unfinished

sentence.  He handed back Owen's letter and returned to his

newspaper; and when he looked up from it a few minutes later

it was with a clear brow and a smile that irresistibly drew

her back to happier thoughts.



The train was just entering a station, and a moment later

their compartment was invaded by a commonplace couple

preoccupied with the bestowal of bulging packages.  Anna, at

their approach, felt the possessive pride of the woman in

love when strangers are between herself and the man she

loves.  She asked Darrow to open the window, to place her

bag in the net, to roll her rug into a cushion for her feet;

and while he was thus busied with her she was conscious of a

new devotion in his tone, in his way of bending over her and

meeting her eyes.  He went back to his seat, and they looked

at each other like lovers smiling at a happy secret.



Anna, before going back to Givre, had suggested Owen's

moving into her apartment, but he had preferred to remain at

the hotel to which he had sent his luggage, and on arriving

in Paris she decided to drive there at once.  She was

impatient to have the meeting over, and glad that Darrow was

obliged to leave her at the station in order to look up a

colleague at the Embassy. She dreaded his seeing Owen again,

and yet dared not tell him so, and to ensure his remaining

away she mentioned an urgent engagement with her dress-maker

and a long list of commissions to be executed for Madame de

Chantelle.



"I shall see you to-morrow morning," she said; but he

replied with a smile that he would certainly find time to

come to her for a moment on his way back from meeting the

Ambassador; and when he had put her in a cab he leaned

through the window to press his lips to hers.



She blushed like a girl, thinking, half vexed, half happy:

"Yesterday he would not have done it..."  and a dozen

scarcely definable differences in his look and manner seemed

all at once to be summed up in the boyish act.  "After all,

I'm engaged to him," she reflected, and then smiled at the

absurdity of the word.  The next instant, with a pang of

self-reproach, she remembered Sophy Viner's cry: "I knew all

the while he didn't care..."  "Poor thing, oh poor thing!"

Anna murmured...





At Owen's hotel she waited in a tremor while the porter went

in search of him.  Word was presently brought back that he

was in his room and begged her to come up, and as she

crossed the hall she caught sight of his portmanteaux lying

on the floor, already labelled for departure.



Owen sat at a table writing, his back to the door; and when

he stood up the window was behind him, so that, in the rainy

afternoon light, his features were barely discernible.



"Dearest--so you're really off?" she said, hesitating a

moment on the threshold.



He pushed a chair forward, and they sat down, each waiting

for the other to speak.  Finally she put some random

question about his travelling-companion, a slow shy

meditative youth whom he had once or twice brought down to

Givre.  She reflected that it was natural he should have

given this uncommunicative comrade the preference over his

livelier acquaintances, and aloud she said: "I'm so glad

Fred Rempson can go with you."



Owen answered in the same tone, and for a few minutes their

talk dragged itself on over a dry waste of common-places.

Anna noticed that, though ready enough to impart his own

plans, Owen studiously abstained from putting any questions

about hers.  It was evident from his allusions that he meant

to be away for some time, and he presently asked her if she

would give instructions about packing and sending after him

some winter clothes he had left at Givre.  This gave her the

opportunity to say that she expected to go back within a day

or two and would attend to the matter as soon as she

returned.  She added: "I came up this morning with George,

who is going on to London to-morrow," intending, by the use

of Darrow's Christian name, to give Owen the chance to speak

of her marriage.  But he made no comment, and she continued

to hear the name sounding on unfamiliarly between them.



The room was almost dark, and she finally stood up and

glanced about for the light-switch, saying: "I can't see

you, dear."



"Oh, don't--I hate the light!" Owen exclaimed, catching her

by the wrist and pushing her back into her seat.  He gave a

nervous laugh and added: "I'm half-blind with neuralgia.  I

suppose it's this beastly rain."



"Yes; it will do you good to get down to Spain."



She asked if he had the remedies the doctor had given him

for a previous attack, and on his replying that he didn't

know what he'd done with the stuff, she sprang up, offering

to go to the chemist's.  It was a relief to have something

to do for him, and she knew from his "Oh, thanks--would

you?" that it was a relief to him to have a pretext for not

detaining her.  His natural impulse would have been to

declare that he didn't want any drugs, and would be all

right in no time; and his acquiescence showed her how

profoundly he felt the uselessness of their trying to

prolong their talk.  His face was now no more than a white

blur in the dusk, but she felt its indistinctness as a veil

drawn over aching intensities of expression.  "He knows...he

knows..."  she said to herself, and wondered whether the

truth had been revealed to him by some corroborative fact or

by the sheer force of divination.



He had risen also, and was clearly waiting for her to go,

and she turned to the door, saying: "I'll be back in a

moment."



"Oh, don't come up again, please!" He paused, embarrassed.

"I mean--I may not be here.  I've got to go and pick up

Rempson, and see about some final things with him."

She stopped on the threshold with a sinking heart.  He meant

this to be their leave-taking, then--and he had not even

asked her when she was to be married, or spoken of seeing

her again before she set out for the other side of the

world.



"Owen!" she cried, and turned back.



He stood mutely before her in the dimness.



"You haven't told me how long you're to be gone."



"How long?  Oh, you see...that's rather vague...I hate

definite dates, you know..."



He paused and she saw he did not mean to help her out. She

tried to say: "You'll be here for my wedding?" but could not

bring the words to her lips.  Instead she murmured: "In six

weeks I shall be going too..."  and he rejoined, as if he had

expected the announcement and prepared his answer: "Oh, by

that time, very likely..."



"At any rate, I won't say good-bye," she stammered, feeling

the tears beneath her veil.



"No, no; rather not!" he declared; but he made no movement,

and she went up and threw her arms about him. "You'll write

me, won't you?"



"Of course, of course----"



Her hands slipped down into his, and for a minute they held

each other dumbly in the darkness; then he gave a vague

laugh and said: "It's really time to light up."  He pressed

the electric button with one hand while with the other he

opened the door; and she passed out without daring to turn

back, lest the light on his face should show her what she

feared to see.
