





XXXIX





Anna, the next day, woke to a humiliated memory of the

previous evening.



Darrow had been right in saying that their sacrifice would

benefit no one; yet she seemed dimly to discern that there

were obligations not to be tested by that standard.  She

owed it, at any rate, as much to his pride as to hers to

abstain from the repetition of such scenes; and she had

learned that it was beyond her power to do so while they

were together.  Yet when he had given her the chance to free

herself, everything had vanished from her mind but the blind

fear of losing him; and she saw that he and she were as

profoundly and inextricably bound together as two trees with

interwoven roots.

For a long time she brooded on her plight, vaguely conscious

that the only escape from it must come from some external

chance.  And slowly the occasion shaped itself in her mind.

It was Sophy Viner only who could save her--Sophy Viner only

who could give her back her lost serenity.  She would seek

the girl out and tell her that she had given Darrow up; and

that step once taken there would be no retracing it, and she

would perforce have to go forward alone.



Any pretext for action was a kind of anodyne, and she

despatched her maid to the Farlows' with a note asking if

Miss Viner would receive her.  There was a long delay before

the maid returned, and when at last she appeared it was with

a slip of paper on which an address was written, and a

verbal message to the effect that Miss Viner had left some

days previously, and was staying with her sister in a hotel

near the Place de l'Etoile.  The maid added that Mrs.

Farlow, on the plea that Miss Viner's plans were uncertain,

had at first made some difficulty about giving this

information; and Anna guessed that the girl had left her

friends' roof, and instructed them to withhold her address,

with the object of avoiding Owen.  "She's kept faith with

herself and I haven't," Anna mused; and the thought was a

fresh incentive to action.



Darrow had announced his intention of coming soon after

luncheon, and the morning was already so far advanced that

Anna, still mistrustful of her strength, decided to drive

immediately to the address Mrs. Farlow had given.  On the

way there she tried to recall what she had heard of Sophy

Viner's sister, but beyond the girl's enthusiastic report of

the absent Laura's loveliness she could remember only

certain vague allusions of Mrs. Farlow's to her artistic

endowments and matrimonial vicissitudes.  Darrow had

mentioned her but once, and in the briefest terms, as having

apparently very little concern for Sophy's welfare, and

being, at any rate, too geographically remote to give her

any practical support; and Anna wondered what chance had

brought her to her sister's side at this conjunction.  Mrs.

Farlow had spoken of her as a celebrity (in what line Anna

failed to recall); but Mrs. Farlow's celebrities were

legion, and the name on the slip of paper--Mrs. McTarvie-

Birch--did not seem to have any definite association with

fame.



While Anna waited in the dingy vestibule of the Hotel

Chicago she had so distinct a vision of what she meant to

say to Sophy Viner that the girl seemed already to be before

her; and her heart dropped from all the height of its

courage when the porter, after a long delay, returned with

the announcement that Miss Viner was no longer in the hotel.

Anna, doubtful if she understood, asked if he merely meant

that the young lady was out at the moment; but he replied

that she had gone away the day before.  Beyond this he had

no information to impart, and after a moment's hesitation

Anna sent him back to enquire if Mrs. McTarvie-Birch would

receive her.  She reflected that Sophy had probably pledged

her sister to the same secrecy as Mrs. Farlow, and that a

personal appeal to Mrs. Birch might lead to less negative

results.



There was another long interval of suspense before the

porter reappeared with an affirmative answer; and a third

while an exiguous and hesitating lift bore her up past a

succession of shabby landings.



When the last was reached, and her guide had directed her

down a winding passage that smelt of sea-going luggage, she

found herself before a door through which a strong odour of

tobacco reached her simultaneously with the sounds of a

suppressed altercation.  Her knock was followed by a

silence, and after a minute or two the door was opened by a

handsome young man whose ruffled hair and general air of

creased disorder led her to conclude that he had just risen

from a long-limbed sprawl on a sofa strewn with tumbled

cushions.  This sofa, and a grand piano bearing a basket of

faded roses, a biscuit-tin and a devastated breakfast tray,

almost filled the narrow sitting-room, in the remaining

corner of which another man, short, swarthy and humble, sat

examining the lining of his hat.



Anna paused in doubt; but on her naming Mrs. Birch the young

man politely invited her to enter, at the same time casting

an impatient glance at the mute spectator in the background.



The latter, raising his eyes, which were round and bulging,

fixed them, not on the young man but on Anna, whom, for a

moment, he scrutinized as searchingly as the interior of his

hat.  Under his gaze she had the sense of being minutely

catalogued and valued; and the impression, when he finally

rose and moved toward the door, of having been accepted as a

better guarantee than he had had any reason to hope for.  On

the threshold his glance crossed that of the young man in an

exchange of intelligence as full as it was rapid; and this

brief scene left Anna so oddly enlightened that she felt no

surprise when her companion, pushing an arm-chair forward,

sociably asked her if she wouldn't have a cigarette. Her

polite refusal provoked the remark that he would, if she'd

no objection; and while he groped for matches in his loose

pockets, and behind the photographs and letters crowding the

narrow mantel-shelf, she ventured another enquiry for Mrs.

Birch.



"Just a minute," he smiled; "I think the masseur's with

her."  He spoke in a smooth denationalized English, which,

like the look in his long-lashed eyes and the promptness of

his charming smile, suggested a long training in all the

arts of expediency.  Having finally discovered a match-box

on the floor beside the sofa, he lit his cigarette and

dropped back among the cushions; and on Anna's remarking

that she was sorry to disturb Mrs. Birch he replied that

that was all right, and that she always kept everybody

waiting.



After this, through the haze of his perpetually renewed

cigarettes, they continued to chat for some time of

indifferent topics; but when at last Anna again suggested

the possibility of her seeing Mrs. Birch he rose from his

corner with a slight shrug, and murmuring: "She's perfectly

hopeless," lounged off through an inner door.



Anna was still wondering when and in what conjunction of

circumstances the much-married Laura had acquired a partner

so conspicuous for his personal charms, when the young man

returned to announce: "She says it's all right, if you don't

mind seeing her in bed."



He drew aside to let Anna pass, and she found herself in a

dim untidy scented room, with a pink curtain pinned across

its single window, and a lady with a great deal of fair hair

and uncovered neck smiling at her from a pink bed on which

an immense powder-puff trailed.



"You don't mind, do you?  He costs such a frightful lot that

I can't afford to send him off," Mrs. Birch explained,

extending a thickly-ringed hand to Anna, and leaving her in

doubt as to whether the person alluded to were her

masseur or her husband.  Before a reply was possible there

was a convulsive stir beneath the pink expanse, and

something that resembled another powder-puff hurled itself

at Anna with a volley of sounds like the popping of

Lilliputian champagne corks.  Mrs. Birch, flinging herself

forward, gasped out: "If you'd just give him a

caramel...there, in that box on the dressing-table...it's

the only earthly thing to stop him..."  and when Anna had

proffered this sop to her assailant, and he had withdrawn

with it beneath the bedspread, his mistress sank back with a

laugh.



"Isn't he a beauty?  The Prince gave him to me down at Nice

the other day--but he's perfectly awful," she confessed,

beaming intimately on her visitor.  In the roseate penumbra

of the bed-curtains she presented to Anna's startled gaze an

odd chromo-like resemblance to Sophy Viner, or a suggestion,

rather, of what Sophy Viner might, with the years and in

spite of the powder-puff, become.  Larger, blonder, heavier-

featured, she yet had glances and movements that

disturbingly suggested what was freshest and most engaging

in the girl; and as she stretched her bare plump arm across

the bed she seemed to be pulling back the veil from dingy

distances of family history.



"Do sit down, if there's a place to sit on," she cordially

advised; adding, as Anna took the edge of a chair hung with

miscellaneous raiment: "My singing takes so much time that I

don't get a chance to walk the fat off--that's the worst of

being an artist."



Anna murmured an assent.  "I hope it hasn't inconvenienced

you to see me; I told Mr. Birch--"



"Mr. WHO?" the recumbent beauty asked; and then: "Oh,

JIMMY!" she faintly laughed, as if more for her own

enlightenment than Anna's.



The latter continued eagerly: "I understand from Mrs. Farlow

that your sister was with you, and I ventured to come up

because I wanted to ask you when I should have a chance of

finding her."



Mrs. McTarvie-Birch threw back her head with a long stare.

"Do you mean to say the idiot at the door didn't tell you?

Sophy went away last night."



"Last night?" Anna echoed.  A sudden terror had possessed

her.  Could it be that the girl had tricked them all and

gone with Owen?  The idea was incredible, yet it took such

hold of her that she could hardly steady her lips to say:

"The porter did tell me, but I thought perhaps he was

mistaken.  Mrs. Farlow seemed to think that I should find

her here."



"It was all so sudden that I don't suppose she had time to

let the Farlows know.  She didn't get Mrs. Murrett's wire

till yesterday, and she just pitched her things into a trunk

and rushed----"



"Mrs. Murrett?"



"Why, yes.  Sophy's gone to India with Mrs. Murrett; they're

to meet at Brindisi," Sophy's sister said with a calm smile.



Anna sat motionless, gazing at the disordered room, the pink

bed, the trivial face among the pillows.



Mrs. McTarvie-Birch pursued: "They had a fearful kick-up

last spring--I daresay you knew about it--but I told Sophy

she'd better lump it, as long as the old woman was willing

to...As an artist, of course, it's perfectly impossible for

me to have her with me..."



"Of course," Anna mechanically assented.



Through the confused pain of her thoughts she was hardly

aware that Mrs. Birch's explanations were still continuing.

"Naturally I didn't altogether approve of her going back to

that beast of a woman.  I said all I could...I told her she

was a fool to chuck up such a place as yours.  But Sophy's

restless--always was--and she's taken it into her head she'd

rather travel..."



Anna rose from her seat, groping for some formula of leave-

taking.  The pushing back of her chair roused the white

dog's smouldering animosity, and he drowned his mistress's

further confidences in another outburst of hysterics.

Through the tumult Anna signed an inaudible farewell, and

Mrs. Birch, having momentarily succeeded in suppressing her

pet under a pillow, called out: "Do come again!  I'd love to

sing to you."



Anna murmured a word of thanks and turned to the door. As

she opened it she heard her hostess crying after her:

"Jimmy!  Do you hear me?  Jimmy BRANCE!" and then, there

being no response from the person summoned: "DO tell him

he must go and call the lift for you!"





End
