





BOOK V



XXX





Anna Leath, three days later, sat in Miss Painter's drawing-

room in the rue de Matignon.



Coming up precipitately that morning from the country, she

had reached Paris at one o'clock and Miss Painter's landing

some ten minutes later.  Miss Painter's mouldy little man-

servant, dissembling a napkin under his arm, had mildly

attempted to oppose her entrance; but Anna, insisting, had

gone straight to the dining-room and surprised her friend--

who ate as furtively as certain animals--over a strange meal

of cold mutton and lemonade.  Ignoring the embarrassment she

caused, she had set forth the object of her journey, and

Miss Painter, always hatted and booted for action, had

immediately hastened out, leaving her to the solitude of the

bare fireless drawing-room with its eternal slip-covers and

"bowed" shutters.



In this inhospitable obscurity Anna had sat alone for close

upon two hours.  Both obscurity and solitude were acceptable

to her, and impatient as she was to hear the result of the

errand on which she had despatched her hostess, she desired

still more to be alone.  During her long meditation in a

white-swathed chair before the muffled hearth she had been

able for the first time to clear a way through the darkness

and confusion of her thoughts.  The way did not go far, and

her attempt to trace it was as weak and spasmodic as a

convalescent's first efforts to pick up the thread of

living.  She seemed to herself like some one struggling to

rise from a long sickness of which it would have been so

much easier to die.  At Givre she had fallen into a kind of

torpor, a deadness of soul traversed by wild flashes of

pain; but whether she suffered or whether she was numb, she

seemed equally remote from her real living and doing self.



It was only the discovery--that very morning--of Owen's

unannounced departure for Paris that had caught her out of

her dream and forced her back to action.  The dread of what

this flight might imply, and of the consequences that might

result from it, had roused her to the sense of her

responsibility, and from the moment when she had resolved to

follow her step-son, and had made her rapid preparations for

pursuit, her mind had begun to work again, feverishly,

fitfully, but still with something of its normal order.  In

the train she had been too agitated, too preoccupied with

what might next await her, to give her thoughts to anything

but the turning over of dread alternatives; but Miss

Painter's imperviousness had steadied her, and while she

waited for the sound of the latch-key she resolutely

returned upon herself.



With respect to her outward course she could at least tell

herself that she had held to her purpose.  She had, as

people said, "kept up" during the twenty-four hours

preceding George Darrow's departure; had gone with a calm

face about her usual business, and even contrived not too

obviously to avoid him.  Then, the next day before dawn,

from behind the closed shutters where she had kept for half

the night her dry-eyed vigil, she had heard him drive off to

the train which brought its passengers to Paris in time for

the Calais express.



The fact of his taking that train, of his travelling so

straight and far away from her, gave to what had happened

the implacable outline of reality.  He was gone; he would

not come back; and her life had ended just as she had

dreamed it was beginning.  She had no doubt, at first, as to

the absolute inevitability of this conclusion.  The man who

had driven away from her house in the autumn dawn was not

the man she had loved; he was a stranger with whom she had

not a single thought in common.  It was terrible, indeed,

that he wore the face and spoke in the voice of her friend,

and that, as long as he was under one roof with her, the

mere way in which he moved and looked could bridge at a

stroke the gulf between them.  That, no doubt, was the fault

of her exaggerated sensibility to outward things: she was

frightened to see how it enslaved her.  A day or two before

she had supposed the sense of honour was her deepest

sentiment: if she had smiled at the conventions of others it

was because they were too trivial, not because they were too

grave.  There were certain dishonours with which she had

never dreamed that any pact could be made: she had had an

incorruptible passion for good faith and fairness.



She had supposed that, once Darrow was gone, once she was

safe from the danger of seeing and hearing him, this high

devotion would sustain her.  She had believed it would be

possible to separate the image of the man she had thought

him from that of the man he was.  She had even foreseen the

hour when she might raise a mournful shrine to the memory of

the Darrow she had loved, without fear that his double's

shadow would desecrate it.  But now she had begun to

understand that the two men were really one.  The Darrow she

worshipped was inseparable from the Darrow she abhorred; and

the inevitable conclusion was that both must go, and she be

left in the desert of a sorrow without memories...



But if the future was thus void, the present was all too

full.  Never had blow more complex repercussions; and to

remember Owen was to cease to think of herself. What

impulse, what apprehension, had sent him suddenly to Paris?

And why had he thought it needful to conceal his going from

her?  When Sophy Viner had left, it had been with the

understanding that he was to await her summons; and it

seemed improbable that he would break his pledge, and seek

her without leave, unless his lover's intuition had warned

him of some fresh danger. Anna recalled how quickly he had

read the alarm in her face when he had rushed back to her

sitting-room with the news that Miss Viner had promised to

see him again in Paris.  To be so promptly roused, his

suspicions must have been but half-asleep; and since then,

no doubt, if she and Darrow had dissembled, so had he.  To

her proud directness it was degrading to think that they had

been living together like enemies who spy upon each other's

movements: she felt a desperate longing for the days which

had seemed so dull and narrow, but in which she had walked

with her head high and her eyes unguarded.



She had come up to Paris hardly knowing what peril she

feared, and still less how she could avert it.  If Owen

meant to see Miss Viner--and what other object could he

have?--they must already be together, and it was too late to

interfere.  It had indeed occurred to Anna that Paris might

not be his objective point: that his real purpose in leaving

Givre without her knowledge had been to follow Darrow to

London and exact the truth of him.  But even to her alarmed

imagination this seemed improbable.  She and Darrow, to the

last, had kept up so complete a feint of harmony that,

whatever Owen had surmised, he could scarcely have risked

acting on his suspicions.  If he still felt the need of an

explanation, it was almost certainly of Sophy Viner that he

would ask it; and it was in quest of Sophy Viner that Anna

had despatched Miss Painter.



She had found a blessed refuge from her perplexities in the

stolid Adelaide's unawareness.  One could so absolutely

count on Miss Painter's guessing no more than one chose, and

yet acting astutely on such hints as one vouchsafed her!  She

was like a well-trained retriever whose interest in his prey

ceases when he lays it at his master's feet.  Anna, on

arriving, had explained that Owen's unannounced flight had

made her fear some fresh misunderstanding between himself

and Miss Viner. In the interests of peace she had thought it

best to follow him; but she hastily added that she did not

wish to see Sophy, but only, if possible, to learn from her

where Owen was.  With these brief instructions Miss Painter

had started out; but she was a woman of many occupations,

and had given her visitor to understand that before

returning she should have to call on a friend who had just

arrived from Boston, and afterward despatch to another

exiled compatriot a supply of cranberries and brandied

peaches from the American grocery in the Champs Elysees.



Gradually, as the moments passed, Anna began to feel the

reaction which, in moments of extreme nervous tension,

follows on any effort of the will.  She seemed to have gone

as far as her courage would carry her, and she shrank more

and more from the thought of Miss Painter's return, since

whatever information the latter brought would necessitate

some fresh decision.  What should she say to Owen if she

found him?  What could she say that should not betray the one

thing she would give her life to hide from him?  "Give her

life"--how the phrase derided her!  It was a gift she would

not have bestowed on her worst enemy.  She would not have

had Sophy Viner live the hours she was living now...

She tried again to look steadily and calmly at the picture

that the image of the girl evoked.  She had an idea that she

ought to accustom herself to its contemplation.  If life was

like that, why the sooner one got used to it the

better...But no!  Life was not like that.  Her adventure was

a hideous accident. She dreaded above all the temptation to

generalise from her own case, to doubt the high things she

had lived by and seek a cheap solace in belittling what fate

had refused her.  There was such love as she had dreamed,

and she meant to go on believing in it, and cherishing the

thought that she was worthy of it.  What had happened to her

was grotesque and mean and miserable; but she herself was

none of these things, and never, never would she make of

herself the mock that fate had made of her...



She could not, as yet, bear to think deliberately of Darrow;

but she kept on repeating to herself "By and bye that will

come too."  Even now she was determined not to let his image

be distorted by her suffering.  As soon as she could, she

would try to single out for remembrance the individual

things she had liked in him before she had loved him

altogether.  No "spiritual exercise" devised by the

discipline of piety could have been more torturing; but its

very cruelty attracted her.  She wanted to wear herself out

with new pains...

