




                   Palace of the Alhambra.



  TO THE traveller imbued with a feeling for the historical and

poetical, so inseparably intertwined in the annals of romantic

Spain, the Alhambra is as much an object of devotion as is the Caaba

to all true Moslems. How many legends and traditions, true and

fabulous; how many songs and ballads, Arabian and Spanish, of love and

war and chivalry, are associated with this oriental pile! It was the

royal abode of the Moorish kings, where, surrounded with the splendors

and refinements of Asiatic luxury, they held dominion over what they

vaunted as a terrestrial paradise, and made their last stand for

empire in Spain. The royal palace forms but a part of a fortress,

the walls of which, studded with towers, stretch irregularly round the

whole crest of a hill, a spur of the Sierra Nevada or Snowy Mountains,

and overlook the city; externally it is a rude congregation of

towers and battlements, with no regularity of plan nor grace of

architecture, and giving little promise of the grace and beauty

which prevail within.

  In the time of the Moors the fortress was capable of containing

within its outward precincts an army of forty thousand men, and served

occasionally as a strong-hold of the sovereigns against their

rebellious subjects. After the kingdom had passed into the hands of

the Christians, the Alhambra continued to be a royal demesne, and

was occasionally inhabited by the Castilian monarchs. The emperor

Charles V commenced a sumptuous palace within its walls, but was

deterred from completing it by repeated shocks of earthquakes. The

last royal residents were Philip V and his beautiful queen, Elizabetta

of Parma, early in the eighteenth century. Great preparations were

made for their reception. The palace and gardens were placed in a

state of repair, and a new suite of apartments erected, and

decorated by artists brought from Italy. The sojourn of the sovereigns

was transient, and after their departure the palace once more became

desolate. Still the place was maintained with some military state. The

governor held it immediately from the crown, its jurisdiction extended

down into the suburbs of the city, and was independent of the

captain-general of Granada. A considerable garrison was kept up, the

governor had his apartments in the front of the old Moorish palace,

and never descended into Granada without some military parade. The

fortress, in fact, was a little town of itself, having several streets

of houses within its walls, together with a Franciscan convent and a

parochial church.

  The desertion of the court, however, was a fatal blow to the

Alhambra. Its beautiful halls became desolate, and some of them fell

to ruin; the gardens were destroyed, and the fountains ceased to play.

By degrees the dwellings became filled with a loose and lawless

population; contrabandistas, who availed themselves of its independent

jurisdiction to carry on a wide and daring course of smuggling, and

thieves and rogues of all sorts, who made this their place of refuge

whence they might depredate upon Granada and its vicinity. The

strong arm of government at length interfered; the whole community was

thoroughly sifted; none were suffered to remain but such as were of

honest character, and had legitimate right to a residence; the greater

part of the houses were demolished and a mere hamlet left, with the

parochial church and the Franciscan convent. During the recent

troubles in Spain, when Granada was in the hands of the French, the

Alhambra was garrisoned by their troops, and the palace was

occasionally inhabited by the French commander. With that

enlightened taste which has ever distinguished the French nation in

their conquests, this monument of Moorish elegance and grandeur was

rescued from the absolute ruin and desolation that were overwhelming

it. The roofs were repaired, the saloons and galleries protected

from the weather, the gardens cultivated, the watercourses restored,

the fountains once more made to throw up their sparkling showers;

and Spain may thank her invaders for having preserved to her the

most beautiful and interesting of her historical monuments.

  On the departure of the French they blew up several towers of the

outer wall, and left the fortifications scarcely tenable. Since that

time the military importance of the post is at an end. The garrison is

a handful of invalid soldiers, whose principal duty is to guard some

of the outer towers, which serve occasionally as a prison of state;

and the governor, abandoning the lofty hill of the Alhambra, resides

in the centre of Granada, for the more convenient dispatch of his

official duties. I cannot conclude this brief notice of the state of

the fortress without bearing testimony to the honorable exertions of

its present commander, Don Francisco de Serna, who is tasking all

the limited resources at his command to put the palace in a state of

repair, and by his judicious precautions, has for some time arrested

its too certain decay. Had his predecessors discharged the duties of

their station with equal fidelity, the Alhambra might yet have

remained in almost its pristine beauty: were government to second

him with means equal to his zeal, this relic of it might still be

preserved for many generations to adorn the land, and attract the

curious and enlightened of every clime.

  Our first object of course, on the morning after our arrival, was

a visit to this time-honored edifice; it has been so often, however,

and so minutely described by travellers, that I shall not undertake to

give a comprehensive and elaborate account of it, but merely

occasional sketches of parts with the incidents and associations

connected with them.

  Leaving our posada, and traversing the renowned square of the

Vivarrambla, once the scene of Moorish jousts and tournaments, now a

crowded market-place, we proceeded along the Zacatin, the main

street of what, in the time of the Moors, was the Great Bazaar, and

where small shops and narrow alleys still retain the oriental

character. Crossing an open place in front of the palace of the

captain-general, we ascended a confined and winding street, the name

of which reminded us of the chivalric days of Granada. It is called

the Calle or street of the Gomeres, from a Moorish family famous in

chronicle and song. This street led up to the Puerta de las

Granadas, a massive gateway of Grecian architecture, built by

Charles V, forming the entrance to the domains of the Alhambra.

  At the gate were two or three ragged superannuated soldiers,

dozing on a stone bench, the successors of the Zegris and the

Abencerrages; while a tall, meagre varlet, whose rusty-brown cloak was

evidently intended to conceal the ragged state of his nether garments,

was lounging in the sunshine and gossiping with an ancient sentinel on

duty. He joined us as we entered the gate, and offered his services to

show us the fortress.

  I have a traveller's dislike to officious ciceroni, and did not

altogether like the garb of the applicant.

  "You are well acquainted with the place, I presume?"

  "Ninguno mas; pues senor, soy hijo de la Alhambra."- ("Nobody

better; in fact, sir, I am a son of the Alhambra!")

  The common Spaniards have certainly a most poetical way of

expressing themselves. "A son of the Alhambra!"- the appellation

caught me at once; the very tattered garb of my new acquaintance

assumed a dignity in my eyes. It was emblematic of the fortunes of the

place, and befitted the progeny of a ruin.

  I put some farther questions to him, and found that his title was

legitimate. His family had lived in the fortress from generation to

generation ever since the time of the conquest. His name was Mateo

Ximenes. "Then, perhaps," said I, "you may be a descendant from the

great Cardinal Ximenes?"- "Dios sabe! God knows, senor! It may be

so. We are the oldest family in the Alhambra- Cristianos viejos, old

Christians, without any taint of Moor or Jew. I know we belong to some

great family or other, but I forget whom. My father knows all about

it: he has the coat-of-arms hanging up in his cottage, up in the

fortress."- There is not any Spaniard, however poor, but has some

claim to high pedigree. The first title of this ragged worthy,

however, had completely captivated me, so I gladly accepted the

services of the "son of the Alhambra."

  We now found ourselves in a deep narrow ravine, filled with

beautiful groves, with a steep avenue, and various footpaths winding

through it, bordered with stone seats, and ornamented with

fountains. To our left, we beheld the towers of the Alhambra

beetling above us; to our right, on the opposite side of the ravine,

we were equally dominated by rival towers on a rocky eminence.

These, we were told, were the Torres Vermejos, or vermilion towers, so

called from their ruddy hue. No one knows their origin. They are of

a date much anterior to the Alhambra: some suppose them to have been

built by the Romans; others, by some wandering colony of

Phoenicians. Ascending the steep and shady avenue, we arrived at the

foot of a huge square Moorish tower, forming a kind of barbican,

through which passed the main entrance to the fortress. Within the

barbican was another group of veteran invalids, one mounting guard

at the portal, while the rest, wrapped in their tattered cloaks, slept

on the stone benches. This portal is called the Gate of Justice,

from the tribunal held within its porch during the Moslem

domination, for the immediate trial of petty causes: a custom common

to the oriental nations, and occasionally alluded to in the Sacred

Scriptures. "Judge and officers shalt thou make thee in all thy gates,

and they shall judge the people with just judgment."

  The great vestibule, or porch of the gate, is formed by an immense

Arabian arch, of the horseshoe form, which springs to half the

height of the tower. On the keystone of this arch is engraven a

gigantic hand. Within the vestibule, on the keystone of the portal, is

sculptured, in like manner, a gigantic key. Those who pretend to

some knowledge of Mohammedan symbols, affirm that the hand is the

emblem of doctrine; the five fingers designating the five principal

commandments of the creed of Islam, fasting, pilgrimage,

alms-giving, ablution, and war against infidels. The key, say they, is

the emblem of the faith or of power; the key of Daoud or David,

transmitted to the prophet. "And the key of the house of David will

I lay upon his shoulder; so he shall open and none shall shut, and

he shall shut and none shall open." (Isaiah xxii. 22.) The key we

are told was emblazoned on the standard of the Moslems in opposition

to the Christian emblem of the cross, when they subdued Spain or

Andalusia. It betokened the conquering power invested in the

prophet. "He that hath the key of David, he that openeth and no man

shutteth; and shutteth and no man openeth." (Rev. iii. 7.)

  A different explanation of these emblems, however, was given by

the legitimate son of the Alhambra, and one more in unison with the

notions of the common people, who attach something of mystery and

magic to every thing Moorish, and have all kind of superstitions

connected with this old Moslem fortress. According to Mateo, it was

a tradition handed down from the oldest inhabitants, and which he

had from his father and grandfather, that the hand and key were

magical devices on which the fate of the Alhambra depended. The

Moorish king who built it was a great magician, or, as some

believed, had sold himself to the devil, and had laid the whole

fortress under a magic spell. By this means it had remained standing

for several hundred years, in defiance of storms and earthquakes,

while almost all other buildings of the Moors had fallen to ruin,

and disappeared. This spell, the tradition went on to say, would

last until the hand on the outer arch should reach down and grasp

the key, when the whole pile would tumble to pieces, and all the

treasures buried beneath it by the Moors would be revealed.

  Notwithstanding this ominous prediction, we ventured to pass through

the spell-bound gateway, feeling some little assurance against magic

art in the protection of the Virgin, a statue of whom we observed

above the portal.

  After passing through the barbican, we ascended a narrow lane,

winding between walls, and came on an open esplanade within the

fortress, called the Plaza de los Algibes, or Place of the Cisterns,

from great reservoirs which undermine it, cut in the living rock by

the Moors to receive the water brought by conduits from the Darro, for

the supply of the fortress. Here, also, is a well of immense depth,

furnishing the purest and coldest of water; another monument of the

delicate taste of the Moors, who were indefatigable in their exertions

to obtain that element in its crystal purity.

  In front of this esplanade is the splendid pile commenced by Charles

V, and intended, it is said, to eclipse the residence of the Moorish

kings. Much of the oriental edifice intended for the winter season was

demolished to make way for this massive pile. The grand entrance was

blocked up; so that the present entrance to the Moorish palace is

through a simple and almost humble portal in a corner. With all the

massive grandeur and architectural merit of the palace of Charles V,

we regarded it as an arrogant intruder, and passing by it with a

feeling almost of scorn, rang at the Moslem portal.

  While waiting for admittance, our self-imposed cicerone, Mateo

Ximenes, informed us that the royal palace was intrusted to the care

of a worthy old maiden dame called Dona Antonia-Molina, but who,

according to Spanish custom, went by the more neighborly appellation

of Tia Antonia (Aunt Antonia), who maintained the Moorish halls and

gardens in order and showed them to strangers. While we were

talking, the door was opened by a plump little black-eyed Andalusian

damsel, whom Mateo addressed as Dolores, but who from her bright looks

and cheerful disposition evidently merited a merrier name. Mateo

informed me in a whisper that she was the niece of Tia Antonia, and

I found she was the good fairy who was to conduct us through the

enchanted palace. Under her guidance we crossed the threshold, and

were at once transported, as if by magic wand, into other times and an

oriental realm, and were treading the scenes of Arabian story. Nothing

could be in greater contrast than the unpromising exterior of the pile

with the scene now before us.

  We found ourselves in a vast patio or court one hundred and fifty

feet in length, and upwards of eighty feet in breadth, paved with

white marble, and decorated at each end with light Moorish peristyles,

one of which supported an elegant gallery of fretted architecture.

Along the mouldings of the cornices and on various parts of the

walls were escutcheons and ciphers, and cufic and Arabic characters in

high relief, repeating the pious mottoes of the Moslem monarchs, the

builders of the Alhambra, or extolling their grandeur and munificence.

Along the centre of the court extended an immense basin or tank

(estanque) a hundred and twenty-four feet in length, twenty-seven in

breadth, and five in depth, receiving its water from two marble vases.

Hence it is called the Court of the Alberca (from al Beerkah, the

Arabic for a pond or tank). Great numbers of gold-fish were to be seen

gleaming through the waters of the basin, and it was bordered by

hedges of roses.

  Passing from the Court of the Alberca under a Moorish archway, we

entered the renowned Court of Lions. No part of the edifice gives a

more complete idea of its original beauty than this, for none has

suffered so little from the ravages of time. In the centre stands

the fountain famous in song and story. The alabaster basins still shed

their diamond drops; the twelve lions which support them, and give the

court its name, still cast forth crystal streams as in the days of

Boabdil. The lions, however, are unworthy of their fame, being of

miserable sculpture, the work probably of some Christian captive.

The court is laid out in flower-beds, instead of its ancient and

appropriate pavement of tiles or marble; the alteration, an instance

of bad taste, was made by the French when in possession of Granada.

Round the four sides of the court are light Arabian arcades of open

filigree work supported by slender pillars of white marble, which it

is supposed were originally gilded. The architecture, like that in

most parts of the interior of the palace, is characterized by

elegance, rather than grandeur, bespeaking a delicate and graceful

taste, and a disposition to indolent enjoyment. When one looks upon

the fairy traces of the peristyles, and the apparently fragile

fretwork of the walls, it is difficult to believe that so much has

survived the wear and tear of centuries, the shocks of earthquakes,

the violence of war, and the quiet, though no less baneful, pilferings

of the tasteful traveller; it is almost sufficient to excuse the

popular tradition that the whole is protected by a magic charm.

  On one side of the court a rich portal opens into the Hall of the

Abencerrages; so called from the gallant cavaliers of that illustrious

line who were here perfidiously massacred. There are some who doubt

the whole story, but our humble cicerone Mateo pointed out the very

wicket of the portal through which they were introduced one by one

into the Court of Lions, and the white marble fountain in the centre

of the hall beside which they were beheaded. He showed us also certain

broad ruddy stains on the pavement, traces of their blood, which,

according to popular belief, can never be effaced.

  Finding we listened to him apparently with easy faith, he added,

that there was often heard at night, in the Court of Lions, a low

confused sound, resembling the murmuring of a multitude; and now and

then a faint tinkling, like the distant clank of chains. These

sounds were made by the spirits of the murdered Abencerrages, who

nightly haunt the scene of their suffering and invoke the vengeance of

Heaven on their destroyer.

  The sounds in question had no doubt been produced, as I had

afterwards an opportunity of ascertaining, by the bubbling currents

and tinkling falls of water conducted under the pavement through pipes

and channels to supply the fountains; but I was too considerate to

intimate such an idea to the humble chronicler of the Alhambra.

  Encouraged by my easy credulity, Mateo gave me the following as an

undoubted fact, which he had from his grandfather:

  There was once an invalid soldier, who had charge of the Alhambra to

show it to strangers: as he was one evening, about twilight, passing

through the Court of Lions, he heard footsteps on the Hall of the

Abencerrages; supposing some strangers to be lingering there, he

advanced to attend upon them, when to his astonishment he beheld

four Moors richly dressed, with gilded cuirasses and cimeters, and

poniards glittering with precious stones. They were walking to and

fro, with solemn pace, but paused and beckoned to him. The old

soldier, however, took to flight, and could never afterwards be

prevailed upon to enter the Alhambra. Thus it is that men sometimes

turn their backs upon fortune; for it is the firm opinion of Mateo,

that the Moors intended to reveal the place where their treasures

lay buried. A successor to the invalid soldier was more knowing; he

came to the Alhambra poor; but at the end of a year went off to

Malaga, bought houses, set up a carriage, and still lives there one of

the richest as well as oldest men of the place; all which, Mateo

sagely surmised, was in consequence of his finding out the golden

secret of these phantom Moors.

  I now perceived I had made an invaluable acquaintance in this son of

the Alhambra, one who knew all the apocryphal history of the place,

and firmly believed in it, and whose memory was stuffed with a kind of

knowledge for which I have a lurking fancy, but which is too apt to be

considered rubbish by less indulgent philosophers. I determined to

cultivate the acquaintance of this learned Theban.

  Immediately opposite the Hall of the Abencerrages a portal, richly

adorned, leads into a hall of less tragical associations. It is

light and lofty, exquisitely graceful in its architecture, paved

with white marble, and bears the suggestive name of the Hall of the

Two Sisters. Some destroy the romance of the name by attributing it to

two enormous slabs of alabaster which lie side by side, and form a

great part of the pavement; an opinion strongly supported by Mateo

Ximenes. Others are disposed to give the name a more poetical

significance, as the vague memorial of Moorish beauties who once

graced this hall, which was evidently a part of the royal harem.

This opinion I was happy to find entertained by our little bright-eyed

guide, Dolores, who pointed to a balcony over an inner porch, which

gallery, she had been told, belonged to the women's apartment. "You

see, senor," said she, "it is all grated and latticed, like the

gallery in a convent chapel where the nuns hear mass; for the

Moorish kings," added she, indignantly, "shut up their wives just like

nuns."

  The latticed "jalousies," in fact, still remain, whence the

dark-eyed beauties of the harem might gaze unseen upon the zambras and

other dances and entertainments of the hall below.

  On each side of this hall are recesses or alcoves for ottomans and

couches, on which the voluptuous lords of the Alhambra indulged in

that dreamy repose so dear to the Orientalists. A cupola or lantern

admits a tempered light from above and a free circulation of air;

while on one side is heard the refreshing sound of waters from the

fountain of the lions, and on the other side the soft plash from the

basin in the garden of Lindaraxa.

  It is impossible to contemplate this scene so perfectly Oriental

without feeling the early associations of Arabian romance, and

almost expecting to see the white arm of some mysterious princess

beckoning from the gallery, or some dark eye sparkling through the

lattice. The abode of beauty is here, as if it had been inhabited

but yesterday; but where are the two sisters; where the Zoraydas and

Lindaraxas!

  An abundant supply of water, brought from the mountains by old

Moorish aqueducts, circulates throughout the palace, supplying its

baths and fishpools, sparkling in jets within its halls, or

murmuring in channels along the marble pavements. When it has paid its

tribute to the royal pile, and visited its gardens and parterres, it

flows down the long avenue leading to the city, tinkling in rills,

gushing in fountains, and maintaining a perpetual verdure in those

groves that embower and beautify the whole hill of the Alhambra.

  Those only who have sojourned in the ardent climates of the South,

can appreciate the delights of an abode, combining the breezy coolness

of the mountain with the freshness and verdure of the valley. While

the city below pants with the noontide heat, and the parched Vega

trembles to the eye, the delicate airs from the Sierra Nevada play

through these lofty halls, bringing with them the sweetness of the

surrounding gardens. Every thing invites to that indolent repose,

the bliss of southern climes; and while the half-shut eye looks out

from shaded balconies upon the glittering landscape, the ear is lulled

by the rustling of groves, and the murmur of running streams.

  I forbear for the present, however, to describe the other delightful

apartments of the palace. My object is merely to give the reader a

general introduction into an abode where, if so disposed, he may

linger and loiter with me day by day until we gradually become

familiar with all its localities.



               Note on Morisco Architecture



  To an unpractised eye the light relievos and fanciful arabesques

which cover the walls of the Alhambra appear to have been sculptured

by the hand, with a minute and patient labor, an inexhaustible variety

of detail, yet a general uniformity and harmony of design truly

astonishing; and this may especially be said of the vaults and

cupolas, which are wrought like honey-combs, or frostwork, with

stalactites and pendants which confound the beholder with the

seeming intricacy of their patterns. The astonishment ceases, however,

when it is discovered that this is all stucco-work: plates of

plaster of Paris, cast in moulds and skilfully joined so as to form

patterns of every size and form. This mode of diapering walls with

arabesques and stuccoing the vaults with grotto-work, was invented

in Damascus, but highly improved by the Moors in Morocco, to whom

Saracenic architecture owes its most graceful and fanciful details.

The process by which all this fairy tracery was produced was

ingeniously simple: The wall in its naked state was divided off by

lines crossing at right angles, such as artists use in copying a

picture; over these were drawn a succession of intersecting segments

of circles. By the aid of these the artists could work with celerity

and certainty, and from the mere intersection of the plain and

curved lines arose the interminable variety of patterns and the

general uniformity of their character.

  Much gilding was used in the stucco-work, especially of the cupolas:

and the interstices were delicately pencilled with brilliant colors,

such as vermilion and lapis lazuli, laid on with the whites of eggs.

The primitive colors alone were used, says Ford, by the Egyptians,

Greeks, and Arabs, in the early period of art; and they prevail in the

Alhambra whenever the artist has been Arabic or Moorish. It is

remarkable how much of their original brilliancy remains after the

lapse of several centuries.

  The lower part of the walls in the saloons, to the height of several

feet, is incrusted with glazed tiles, joined like the plates of

stucco-work, so as to form various patterns. On some of them are

emblazoned the escutcheons of the Moslem kings, traversed with a

band and motto. These glazed tiles (azulejos in Spanish, az-zulaj in

Arabic) are of Oriental origin; their coolness, cleanliness, and

freedom from vermin, render them admirably fitted in sultry climates

for paving halls and fountains, incrusting bathing rooms, and lining

the walls of chambers. Ford is inclined to give them great

antiquity. From their prevailing colors, sapphire and blue, he deduces

that they may have formed the kind of pavements alluded to in the

sacred Scriptures- "There was under his feet as it were a paved work

of a sapphire stone" (Exod. xxiv. 10); and again, "Behold I will lay

thy stones with fair colors, and lay thy foundations with

sapphires." (Isaiah liv. 11.)

  These glazed or porcelain tiles were introduced into Spain at an

early date by the Moslems. Some are to be seen among the Moorish ruins

which have been there upwards of eight centuries. Manufactures of them

still exist in the peninsula, and they are much used in the best

Spanish houses, especially in the southern provinces, for paving and

lining the summer apartments.

  The Spaniards introduced them into the Netherlands when they had

possession of that country. The people of Holland adopted them with

avidity, as wonderfully suited to their passion for household

cleanliness; and thus these Oriental inventions, the azulejos of the

Spanish, the az-zulaj of the Arabs, have come to be commonly known

as Dutch tiles.

                   Important Negotiations.



                  The Author Succeeds to the

                     Throne of Boabdil.



  THE DAY was nearly spent before we could tear ourselves from this

region of poetry and romance to descend to the city and return to

the forlorn realities of a Spanish posada. In a visit of ceremony to

the Governor of the Alhambra, to whom we had brought letters, we dwelt

with enthusiasm on the scenes we had witnessed, and could not but

express surprise that he should reside in the city when he had such

a paradise at his command. He pleaded the inconvenience of a residence

in the palace from its situation on the crest of a hill, distant

from the seat of business and the resorts of social intercourse. It

did very well for monarchs, who often had need of castle walls to

defend them from their own subjects. "But senores," added he, smiling,

"if you think a residence there so desirable, my apartments in the

Alhambra are at your service."

  It is a common and almost indispensable point of politeness in a

Spaniard, to tell you his house is yours.- "Esta casa es siempre a

la disposicion de Vm." "This house is always at the command of your

Grace." In fact, any thing of his which you admire, is immediately

offered to you. It is equally a mark of good breeding in you not to

accept it; so we merely bowed our acknowledgments of the courtesy of

the Governor in offering us a royal palace. We were mistaken, however.

The Governor was in earnest. "You will find a rambling set of empty,

unfurnished rooms," said he; "but Tia Antonia, who has charge of the

palace, may be able to put them in some kind of order; and to take

care of you while you are there. If you can make any arrangement

with her for your accommodation, and are content with scanty fare in a

royal abode, the palace of King Chico is at your service."

  We took the Governor at his word, and hastened up the steep Calle de

los Gomeres, and through the Great Gate of Justice, to negotiate

with Dame Antonia; doubting at times if this were not a dream, and

fearing at times that the sage Duena of the fortress might be slow

to capitulate. We knew we had one friend at least in the garrison, who

would be in our favor, the bright-eyed little Dolores, whose good

graces we had propitiated on our first visit, and who hailed our

return to the palace with her brightest looks.

  All, however, went smoothly. The good Tia Antonia had a little

furniture to put in the rooms, but it was of the commonest kind. We

assured her we could bivouac on the floor. She could supply our table,

but only in her own simple way- we wanted nothing better. Her niece,

Dolores, would wait upon us and at the word we threw up our hats and

the bargain was complete.

  The very next day we took up our abode in the palace, and never

did sovereigns share a divided throne with more perfect harmony.

Several days passed by like a dream, when my worthy associate, being

summoned to Madrid on diplomatic duties, was compelled to abdicate,

leaving me sole monarch of this shadowy realm. For myself, being in

a manner a haphazard loiterer about the world and prone to linger in

its pleasant places, here have I been suffering day by day to steal

away unheeded, spellbound, for aught I know, in this old enchanted

pile. Having always a companionable feeling for my reader, and being

prone to live with him on confidential terms, I shall make it a

point to communicate to him my reveries and researches during this

state of delicious thraldom. If they have the power of imparting to

his imagination any of the witching charms of the place, he will not

repine at lingering with me for a season in the legendary halls of the

Alhambra.

  At first it is proper to give him some idea of my domestic

arrangements; they are rather of a simple kind for the occupant of a

regal palace; but I trust they will be less liable to disastrous

reverses than those of my royal predecessors.

  My quarters are at one end of the Governor's apartment, a suite of

empty chambers, in front of the palace, looking out upon the great

esplanade called la plaza de los algibes (the place of the

cisterns); the apartment is modern, but the end opposite to my

sleeping-room communicates with a cluster of little chambers, partly

Moorish, partly Spanish, allotted to the chatelaine Dona Antonia and

her family. In consideration of keeping the palace in order, the

good dame is allowed all the perquisites received from visitors, and

all the produce of the gardens; excepting that she is expected to

pay an occasional tribute of fruits and flowers to the Governor. Her

family consists of a nephew and niece, the children of two different

brothers. The nephew, Manuel Molina, is a young man of sterling

worth and Spanish gravity. He had served in the army, both in Spain

and the West Indies, but is now studying medicine in the hope of one

day or other becoming physician to the fortress, a post worth at least

one hundred and forty dollars a year. The niece is the plump little

black-eyed Dolores already mentioned; and who, it is said, will one

day inherit all her aunt's possessions, consisting of certain petty

tenements in the fortress, in a somewhat ruinous condition it is true,

but which, I am privately assured by Mateo Ximenes, yield a revenue of

nearly one hundred and fifty dollars; so that she is quite an

heiress in the eyes of the ragged son of the Alhambra. I am also

informed by the same observant and authentic personage, that a quiet

courtship is going on between the discreet Manuel and his

bright-eyed cousin, and that nothing is wanting to enable them to join

their hands and expectations but his doctor's diploma, and a

dispensation from the Pope on account of their consanguinity.

  The good dame Antonia fulfils faithfully her contract in regard to

my board and lodging; and as I am easily pleased, I find my fare

excellent; while the merry-hearted little Dolores keeps my apartment

in order, and officiates as handmaid at meal-times. I have also at

my command a tall, stuttering, yellow-haired lad, named Pepe, who

works in the gardens, and would fain have acted as valet; but, in

this, he was forestalled by Mateo Ximenes, "the son of the

Alhambra." This alert and officious wight has managed, somehow or

other, to stick by me ever since I first encountered him at the

outer gate of the fortress, and to weave himself into all my plans,

until he has fairly appointed and installed himself my valet,

cicerone, guide, guard, and historio-graphic squire; and I have been

obliged to improve the state of his wardrobe, that he may not disgrace

his various functions; so that he has cast his old brown mantle, as

a snake does his skin, and now appears about the fortress with a smart

Andalusian hat and jacket, to his infinite satisfaction, and the great

astonishment of his comrades. The chief fault of honest Mateo is an

over-anxiety to be useful. Conscious of having foisted himself into my

employ, and that my simple and quiet habits render his situation a

sinecure, he is at his wit's ends to devise modes of making himself

important to my welfare. I am, in a manner, the victim of his

officiousness; I cannot put my foot over the threshold of the

palace, to stroll about the fortress, but he is at my elbow, to

explain every thing I see; and if I venture to ramble among the

surrounding hills, he insists upon attending me as a guard, though I

vehemently suspect he would be more apt to trust to the length of

his legs than the strength of his arms, in case of attack. After

all, however, the poor fellow is at times an amusing companion; he

is simple-minded, and of infinite good humor, with the loquacity and

gossip of a village barber, and knows all the small-talk of the

place and its environs; but what he chiefly values himself on, is

his stock of local information, having the most marvellous stories

to relate of every tower, and vault, and gateway of the fortress, in

all of which he places the most implicit faith.

  Most of these he has derived, according to his own account, from his

grandfather, a little legendary tailor, who lived to the age of nearly

a hundred years, during which he made but two migrations beyond the

precincts of the fortress. His shop, for the greater part of a

century, was the resort of a knot of venerable gossips, where they

would pass half the night talking about old times, and the wonderful

events and hidden secrets of the place. The whole living, moving,

thinking, and acting, of this historical little tailor, had thus

been bounded by the walls of the Alhambra; within them he had been

born, within them he lived, breathed, and had his being; within them

he died, and was buried. Fortunately for posterity, his traditionary

lore died not with him. The authentic Mateo, when an urchin, used to

be an attentive listener to the narratives of his grandfather, and

of the gossip group assembled round the shopboard; and is thus

possessed of a stock of valuable knowledge concerning the Alhambra,

not to be found in books, and well worthy the attention of every

curious traveller.

  Such are the personages that constitute my regal household; and I

question whether any of the potentates, Moslem or Christian, who

have preceded me in the palace, have been waited upon with greater

fidelity, or enjoyed a serener sway.

  When I rise in the morning, Pepe, the stuttering lad from the

gardens, brings me a tribute of fresh culled flowers, which are

afterwards arranged in vases, by the skilful hand of Dolores, who

takes a female pride in the decorations of my chamber. My meals are

made wherever caprice dictates; sometimes in one of the Moorish halls,

sometimes under the arcades of the Court of Lions, surrounded by

flowers and fountains: and when I walk out, I am conducted by the

assiduous Mateo, to the most romantic retreats of the mountains, and

delicious haunts of the adjacent valleys, not one of which but is

the scene of some wonderful tale.

  Though fond of passing the greater part of my day alone, yet I

occasionally repair in the evenings to the little domestic circle of

Dona Antonia. This is generally held in an old Moorish chamber,

which serves the good dame for parlor, kitchen and hall of audience,

and which must have boasted of some splendor in the time of the Moors,

if we may judge from the traces yet remaining; but a rude fireplace

has been made in modern times in one corner, the smoke from which

has discolored the walls, and almost obliterated the ancient

arabesques. A window, with a balcony overhanging the valley of the

Darro, lets in the cool evening breeze; and here I take my frugal

supper of fruit and milk, and mingle with the conversation of the

family. There is a natural talent or mother wit, as it is called,

about the Spaniards, which renders them intellectual and agreeable

companions, whatever may be their condition in life, or however

imperfect may have been their education: add to this, they are never

vulgar; nature has endowed them with an inherent dignity of spirit.

The good Tia Antonia is a woman of strong and intelligent, though

uncultivated mind; and the bright-eyed Dolores, though she has read

but three or four books in the whole course of her life, has an

engaging mixture of naivete and good sense, and often surprises me

by the pungency of her artless sallies. Sometimes the nephew

entertains us by reading some old comedy of Calderon or Lope de

Vega, to which he is evidently prompted by a desire to improve, as

well as amuse his cousin Dolores; though, to his great

mortification, the little damsel generally falls asleep before the

first act is completed. Sometimes Tia Antonia has a little levee of

humble friends and dependents, the inhabitants of the adjacent hamlet,

or the wives of the invalid soldiers. These look up to her with

great deference, as the custodian of the palace, and pay their court

to her by bringing the news of the place, or the rumors that may

have straggled up from Granada. In listening to these evening

gossipings I have picked up many curious facts, illustrative of the

manners of the people and the peculiarities of the neighborhood.

  These are simple details of simple pleasures; it is the nature of

the place alone that gives them interest and importance. I tread

haunted ground, and am surrounded by romantic associations. From

earliest boyhood, when, on the banks of the Hudson, I first pored over

the pages of old Gines Perez de Hytas's apocryphal but chivalresque

history of the civil wars of Granada, and the feuds of its gallant

cavaliers, the Zegries and Abencerrages, that city has ever been a

subject of my waking dreams, and often have I trod in fancy the

romantic halls of the Alhambra. Behold for once a day-dream

realized; yet I can scarce credit my senses, or believe that I do

indeed inhabit the palace of Boabdil, and look down from its balconies

upon chivalric Granada. As I loiter through these Oriental chambers,

and hear the murmur of fountains and the song of the nightingale; as I

inhale the odor of the rose, and feel the influence of the balmy

climate, I am almost tempted to fancy myself in the paradise of

Mahomet, and that the plump little Dolores is one of the bright-eyed

houris, destined to administer to the happiness of true believers.

