




                Legend of the Rose of the Alhambra.



  FOR SOME time after the surrender of Granada by the Moors, that

delightful city was a frequent and favorite residence of the Spanish

sovereigns, until they were frightened away by successive shocks of

earthquakes, which toppled down various houses, and made the old

Moslem towers rock to their foundation.

  Many, many years then rolled away, during which Granada was rarely

honored by a royal guest. The palaces of the nobility remained

silent and shut up; and the Alhambra, like a slighted beauty, sat in

mournful desolation, among her neglected gardens. The tower of the

Infantas, once the residence of the three beautiful Moorish

princesses, partook of the general desolation; the spider spun her web

athwart the gilded vault, and bats and owls nestled in those

chambers that had been graced by the presence of Zayda, Zorayda, and

Zorahayda. The neglect of this tower may partly have been owing to

some superstitious notions of the neighbors. It was rumored that the

spirit of the youthful Zorahayda, who had perished in that tower,

was often seen by moonlight seated beside the fountain in the hall, or

moaning about the battlements, and that the notes of her silver lute

would be heard at midnight by wayfarers passing along the glen.

  At length the city of Granada was once more welcomed by the royal

presence. All the world knows that Philip V was the first Bourbon that

swayed the Spanish sceptre. All the world knows that he married, in

second nuptials, Elizabetta or Isabella (for they are the same), the

beautiful princess of Parma; and all the world knows that by this

chain of contingencies a French prince and an Italian princess were

seated together on the Spanish throne. For a visit of this illustrious

pair, the Alhambra was repaired and fitted up with all possible

expedition. The arrival of the court changed the whole aspect of the

lately deserted palace. The clangor of drum and trumpet, the tramp

of steed about the avenues and outer court, the glitter of arms and

display of banners about barbican and battlement, recalled the ancient

and warlike glories of the fortress. A softer spirit, however, reigned

within the royal palace. There was the rustling of robes and the

cautious tread and murmuring voice of reverential courtiers about

the antechambers; a loitering of pages and maids of honor about the

gardens, and the sound of music stealing from open casements.

  Among those who attended in the train of the monarchs was a favorite

page of the queen, named Ruyz de Alarcon. To say that he was a

favorite page of the queen was at once to speak his eulogium, for

every one in the suite of the stately Elizabetta was chosen for grace,

and beauty, and accomplishments. He was just turned of eighteen, light

and lithe of form, and graceful as a young Antinous. To the queen he

was all deference and respect, yet he was at heart a roguish

stripling, petted and spoiled by the ladies about the court, and

experienced in the ways of women far beyond his years.

  This loitering page was one morning rambling about the groves of the

Generalife, which overlook the grounds of the Alhambra. He had taken

with him for his amusement a favorite gerfalcon of the queen. In the

course of his rambles, seeing a bird rising from a thicket, he

unhooded the hawk and let him fly. The falcon towered high in the air,

made a swoop at his quarry, but missing it, soared away, regardless of

the calls of the page. The latter followed the truant bird with his

eye, in its capricious flight, until he saw it alight upon the

battlements of a remote and lonely tower, in the outer wall of the

Alhambra, built on the edge of a ravine that separated the royal

fortress from the grounds of the Generalife. It was in fact the "Tower

of the Princesses."

  The page descended into the ravine and approached the tower, but

it had no entrance from the glen, and its lofty height rendered any

attempt to scale it fruitless. Seeking one of the gates of the

fortress, therefore, he made a wide circuit to that side of the

tower facing within the walls.

  A small garden, inclosed by a trellis-work of reeds overhung with

myrtle, lay before the tower. Opening a wicket, the page passed

between beds of flowers and thickets of roses to the door. It was

closed and bolted. A crevice in the door gave him a peep into the

interior. There was a small Moorish hall with fretted walls, light

marble columns, and an alabaster fountain surrounded with flowers.

In the centre hung a gilt cage containing a singing bird, beneath

it, on a chair, lay a tortoise-shell cat among reels of silk and other

articles of female labor, and a guitar decorated with ribbons leaned

against the fountain.

  Ruyz de Alarcon was struck with these traces of female taste and

elegance in a lonely, and, as he had supposed, deserted tower. They

reminded him of the tales of enchanted halls current in the

Alhambra; and the tortoise-shell cat might be some spell-bound

princess.

  He knocked gently at the door. A beautiful face peeped out from a

little window above, but was instantly withdrawn. He waited, expecting

that the door would be opened, but he waited in vain; no footstep

was to be heard within- all was silent. Had his senses deceived him,

or was this beautiful apparition the fairy of the tower? He knocked

again, and more loudly. After a little while the beaming face once

more peeped forth; it was that of a blooming damsel of fifteen.

  The page immediately doffed his plumed bonnet, and entreated in

the most courteous accents to be permitted to ascend the tower in

pursuit of his falcon.

  "I dare not open the door, senor," replied the little damsel,

blushing, "my aunt has forbidden it."

  "I do beseech you, fair maid- it is the favorite falcon of the

queen. I dare not return to the palace without it."

  "Are you then one of the cavaliers of the court?"

  "I am, fair maid; but I shall lose the queen's favor and my place,

if I lose this hawk."

  "Santa Maria! It is against you cavaliers of the court my aunt has

charged me especially to bar the door."

  "Against wicked cavaliers doubtless, but I am none of these, but a

simple harmless page, who will be ruined and undone if you deny me

this small request."

  The heart of the little damsel was touched by the distress of the

page. It was a thousand pities he should be ruined for the want of

so trifling a boon. Surely too he could not be one of those

dangerous beings whom her aunt had described as a species of cannibal,

ever on the prowl to make prey of thoughtless damsels; he was gentle

and modest, and stood so entreatingly with cap in hand, and looked

so charming.

  The sly page saw that the garrison began to waver, and redoubled his

entreaties in such moving terms that it was not in the nature of

mortal maiden to deny him; so the blushing little warden of the

tower descended, and opened the door with a trembling hand, and if the

page had been charmed by a mere glimpse of her countenance from the

window, he was ravished by the full length portrait now revealed to

him.

  Her Andalusian bodice and trim basquina set off the round but

delicate symmetry of her form, which was as yet scarce verging into

womanhood. Her glossy hair was parted on her forehead with

scrupulous exactness, and decorated with a fresh-plucked rose,

according to the universal custom of the country. It is true her

complexion was tinged by the ardor of a southern sun, but it served to

give richness to the mantling bloom of her cheek, and to heighten

the lustre of her melting eyes.

  Ruyz de Alarcon beheld all this with a single glance, for it

became him not to tarry; he merely murmured his acknowledgments, and

then bounded lightly up the spiral staircase in quest of his falcon.

  He soon returned with the truant bird upon his fist. The damsel,

in the mean time, had seated herself by the fountain in the hall,

and was winding silk; but in her agitation she let fall the reel

upon the pavement. The page sprang and picked it up, then dropping

gracefully on one knee, presented it to her; but, seizing the hand

extended to receive it, imprinted on it a kiss more fervent and devout

than he had ever imprinted on the fair hand of his sovereign.

  "Ave Maria, senor!" exclaimed the damsel, blushing still deeper with

confusion and surprise, for never before had she received such a

salutation.

  The modest page made a thousand apologies, assuring her it was the

way, at court, of expressing the most profound homage and respect.

  Her anger, if anger she felt, was easily pacified, but her agitation

and embarrassment continued, and she sat blushing deeper and deeper,

with her eyes cast down upon her work, entangling the silk which she

attempted to wind.

  The cunning page saw the confusion in the opposite camp, and would

fain have profited by it, but the fine speeches he would have

uttered died upon his lips; his attempts at gallantry were awkward and

ineffectual; and to his surprise, the adroit page, who had figured

with such grace and effrontery among the most knowing and

experienced ladies of the court, found himself awed and abashed in the

presence of a simple damsel of fifteen.

  In fact, the artless maiden, in her own modesty and innocence, had

guardians more effectual than the bolts and bars prescribed by her

vigilant aunt. Still, where is the female bosom proof against the

first whisperings of love? The little damsel, with all her

artlessness, instinctively comprehended all that the faltering

tongue of the page failed to express, and her heart was fluttered at

beholding, for the first time, a lover at her feet- and such a lover!

  The diffidence of the page, though genuine, was short-lived, and

he was recovering his usual ease and confidence, when a shrill voice

was heard at a distance.

  "My aunt is returning from mass!" cried the damsel in affright; "I

pray you, senor, depart."

  "Not until you grant me that rose from your hair as a remembrance."

  She hastily untwisted the rose from her raven locks. "Take it,"

cried she, agitated and blushing, "but pray begone."

  The page took the rose, and at the same time covered with kisses the

fair hand that gave it. Then, placing the flower in his bonnet, and

taking the falcon upon his fist, he bounded off through the garden,

bearing away with him the heart of the gentle Jacinta.

  When the vigilant aunt arrived at the tower, she remarked the

agitation of her niece, and an air of confusion in the hall; but a

word of explanation sufficed. "A gerfalcon had pursued his prey into

the hall."

  "Mercy on us! to think of a falcon flying into the tower. Did ever

one hear of so saucy a hawk? Why, the very bird in the cage is not

safe!"

  The vigilant Fredegonda was one of the most wary of ancient

spinsters. She had a becoming terror and distrust of what she

denominated "the opposite sex," which had gradually increased

through a long life of celibacy. Not that the good lady had ever

suffered from their wiles, nature having set up a safeguard in her

face that forbade all trespass upon her premises; but ladies who

have least cause to fear for themselves are most ready to keep a watch

over their more tempting neighbors.

  The niece was the orphan of an officer who had fallen in the wars.

She had been educated in a convent, and had recently been

transferred from her sacred asylum to the immediate guardianship of

her aunt, under whose overshadowing care she vegetated in obscurity,

like an opening rose blooming beneath a brier. Nor indeed is this

comparison entirely accidental; for, to tell the truth, her fresh

and dawning beauty had caught the public eye, even in her seclusion,

and, with that poetical turn common to the people of Andalusia, the

peasantry of the neighborhood had given her the appellation of "the

Rose of the Alhambra."

  The wary aunt continued to keep a faithful watch over her tempting

little niece as long as the court continued at Granada, and

flattered herself that her vigilance had been successful. It is

true, the good lady was now and then discomposed by the tinkling of

guitars and chanting of love ditties from the moonlit groves beneath

the tower; but she would exhort her niece to shut her ears against

such idle minstrelsy, assuring her that it was one of the arts of

the opposite sex, by which simple maids were often lured to their

undoing. Alas! what chance with a simple maid has a dry lecture

against a moonlight serenade?

  At length King Philip cut short his sojourn at Granada, and suddenly

departed with all his train. The vigilant Fredegonda watched the royal

pageant as it issued forth from the Gate of Justice, and descended the

great avenue leading to the city. When the last banner disappeared

from her sight, she returned exulting to her tower, for all her

cares were over. To her surprise, a light Arabian steed pawed the

ground at the wicket-gate of the garden- to her horror, she saw

through the thickets of roses a youth, in gayly-embroidered dress,

at the feet of her niece. At the sound of her footsteps he gave a

tender adieu, bounded lightly over the barrier of reeds and myrtles,

sprang upon his horse, and was out of sight in an instant.

  The tender Jacinta, in the agony of her grief, lost all thought of

her aunt's displeasure. Throwing herself into her arms, she broke

forth into sobs and tears.

  "Ay de mi!" cried she; "he's gone!- he's gone!- he's gone! and I

shall never see him more!"

  "Gone!- who is gone?- what youth is that I saw at your feet?"

  "A queen's page, aunt, who came to bid me farewell."

  "A queen's page, child!" echoed the vigilant Fredegonda, faintly;

"and when did you become acquainted with the queen's page?"

  "The morning that the gerfalcon came into the tower. It was the

queen's gerfalcon, and he came in pursuit of it."

  "Ah silly, silly girl! know that there are no gerfalcons half so

dangerous as these young prankling pages, and it is precisely such

simple birds as thee that they pounce upon."

  The aunt was at first indignant at learning that in despite of her

boasted vigilance, a tender intercourse had been carried on by the

youthful lovers, almost beneath her eye; but when she found that her

simple-hearted niece, though thus exposed, without the protection of

bolt or bar, to all the machinations of the opposite sex, had come

forth unsinged from the fiery ordeal, she consoled herself with the

persuasion that it was owing to the chaste and cautious maxims in

which she had, as it were, steeped her to the very lips.

  While the aunt laid this soothing unction to her pride, the niece

treasured up the oft-repeated vows of fidelity of the page. But what

is the love of restless, roving man? A vagrant stream that dallies for

a time with each flower upon its bank, then passes on, and leaves them

all in tears.

  Days, weeks, months elapsed, and nothing more was heard of the page.

The pomegranate ripened, the vine yielded up its fruit, the autumnal

rains descended in torrents from the mountains; the Sierra Nevada

became covered with a snowy mantle, and wintry blasts howled through

the halls of the Alhambra- still he came not. The winter passed

away. Again the genial spring burst forth with song and blossom and

balmy zephyr; the snows melted from the mountains, until none remained

but on the lofty summit of Nevada, glistening through the sultry

summer air. Still nothing was heard of the forgetful page.

  In the mean time, the poor little Jacinta grew pale and

thoughtful. Her former occupations and amusements were abandoned,

her silk lay entangled, her guitar unstrung, her flowers were

neglected, the notes of her bird unheeded, and her eyes, once so

bright, were dimmed with secret weeping. If any solitude could be

devised to foster the passion of a love-lorn damsel, it would be

such a place as the Alhambra, where every thing seems disposed to

produce tender and romantic reveries. It is a very paradise for

lovers: how hard then to be alone in such a paradise- and not merely

alone, but forsaken!

  "Alas, silly child!" would the staid and immaculate Fredegonda

say, when she found her niece in one of her desponding moods- "did I

not warn thee against the wiles and deceptions of these men? What

couldst thou expect, too, from one of a haughty and aspiring family-

thou an orphan, the descendant of a fallen and impoverished line? Be

assured, if the youth were true, his father, who is one of the

proudest nobles about the court, would prohibit his union with one

so humble and portionless as thou. Pluck up thy resolution, therefore,

and drive these idle notions from thy mind."

  The words of the immaculate Fredegonda only served to increase the

melancholy of her niece, but she sought to indulge it in private. At a

late hour one midsummer night, after her aunt had retired to rest, she

remained alone in the hall of the tower, seated beside the alabaster

fountain. It was here that the faithless page had first knelt and

kissed her hand; it was here that he had often vowed eternal fidelity.

The poor little damsel's heart was overladen with sad and tender

recollections, her tears began to flow, and slowly fell drop by drop

into the fountain. By degrees the crystal water became agitated,

and- bubble- bubble- bubble- boiled up and was tossed about, until a

female figure, richly clad in Moorish robes, slowly rose to view.

  Jacinta was so frightened that she fled from the hall, and did not

venture to return. The next morning she related what she had seen to

her aunt, but the good lady treated it as a phantasy of her troubled

mind, or supposed she had fallen asleep and dreamt beside the

fountain. "Thou hast been thinking of the story of the three Moorish

princesses that once inhabited this tower," continued she, "and it has

entered into thy dreams."

  "What story, aunt? I know nothing of it."

  "Thou hast certainly heard of the three princesses, Zayda,

Zorayda, and Zorahayda, who were confined in this tower by the king

their father, and agreed to fly with three Christian cavaliers. The

two first accomplished their escape, but the third failed in her

resolution, and, it is said, died in this tower."

  "I now recollect to have heard of it," said Jacinta, "and to have

wept over the fate of the gentle Zorahayda."

  "Thou mayest well weep over her fate," continued the aunt, "for

the lover of Zorahayda was thy ancestor. He long bemoaned his

Moorish love; but time cured him of his grief, and he married a

Spanish lady, from whom thou art descended."

  Jacinta ruminated upon these words. "That what I have seen is no

phantasy of the brain," said she to herself, "I am confident. If

indeed it be the spirit of the gentle Zorahayda, which I have heard

lingers about this tower, of what should I be afraid? I'll watch by

the fountain to-night- perhaps the visit will be repeated."

  Towards midnight, when every thing was quiet, she again took her

seat in the hall. As the bell in the distant watchtower of the

Alhambra struck the midnight hour, the fountain was again agitated;

and bubble- bubble- bubble- it tossed about the waters until the

Moorish female again rose to view. She was young and beautiful; her

dress was rich with jewels, and in her hand she held a silver lute.

Jacinta trembled and was faint, but was reassured by the soft and

plaintive voice of the apparition, and the sweet expression of her

pale, melancholy countenance.

  "Daughter of mortality," said she, "what aileth thee? Why do thy

tears trouble my fountain, and thy sighs and plaints disturb the quiet

watches of the night?"

  "I weep because of the faithlessness of man, and I bemoan my

solitary and forsaken state."

  "Take comfort; thy sorrows may yet have an end. Thou beholdest a

Moorish princess, who, like thee, was unhappy in her love. A Christian

knight, thy ancestor, won my heart, and would have borne me to his

native land and to the bosom of his church. I was a convert in my

heart, but I lacked courage equal to my faith, and lingered till too

late. For this the evil genii are permitted to have power over me, and

I remain enchanted in this tower until some pure Christian will

deign to break the magic spell. Wilt thou undertake the task?"

  "I will," replied the damsel, trembling.

  "Come hither then, and fear not; dip thy hand in the fountain,

sprinkle the water over me, and baptize me after the manner of thy

faith; so shall the enchantment be dispelled, and my troubled spirit

have repose."

  The damsel advanced with faltering steps, dipped her hand in the

fountain, collected water in the palm, and sprinkled it over the

pale face of the phantom.

  The latter smiled with ineffable benignity. She dropped her silver

lute at the feet of Jacinta, crossed her white arms upon her bosom,

and melted from sight, so that it seemed merely as if a shower of

dew-drops had fallen into the fountain.

  Jacinta retired from the hall filled with awe and wonder. She

scarcely closed her eyes that night; but when she awoke at daybreak

out of a troubled slumber, the whole appeared to her like a

distempered dream. On descending into the hall, however, the truth

of the vision was established, for, beside the fountain, she beheld

the silver lute glittering in the morning sunshine.

  She hastened to her aunt, to relate all that had befallen her, and

called her to behold the lute as a testimonial of the reality of her

story. If the good lady had any lingering doubts, they were removed

when Jacinta touched the instrument, for she drew forth such ravishing

tones as to thaw even the frigid bosom of the immaculate Fredegonda,

that region of eternal winter, into a genial flow. Nothing but

supernatural melody could have produced such an effect.

  The extraordinary power of the lute became every day more and more

apparent. The wayfarer passing by the tower was detained, and, as it

were, spell-bound, in breathless ecstasy. The very birds gathered in

the neighboring trees, and hushing their own strains, listened in

charmed silence.

  Rumor soon spread the news abroad. The inhabitants of Granada

thronged to the Alhambra to catch a few notes of the transcendent

music that floated about the Tower of Las Infantas.

  The lovely little minstrel was at length drawn forth from her

retreat. The rich and powerful of the land contended who should

entertain and do honor to her; or rather, who should secure the charms

of her lute to draw fashionable throngs to their saloons. Wherever she

went her vigilant aunt kept a dragon watch at her elbow, awing the

throngs of impassioned admirers, who hung in raptures on her

strains. The report of her wonderful powers spread from city to

city. Malaga, Seville, Cordova, all became successively mad on the

theme; nothing was talked of throughout Andalusia but the beautiful

minstrel of the Alhambra. How could it be otherwise among a people

so musical and gallant as the Andalusians, when the lute was magical

in its powers, and the minstrel inspired by love!

  While all Andalusia was thus music mad, a different mood prevailed

at the court of Spain. Philip V, as is well known, was a miserable

hypochondriac, and subject to all kinds of fancies. Sometimes he would

keep to his bed for weeks together, groaning under imaginary

complaints. At other times he would insist upon abdicating his throne,

to the great annoyance of his royal spouse, who had a strong relish

for the splendors of a court and the glories of a crown, and guided

the sceptre of her imbecile lord with an expert and steady hand.

  Nothing was found to be so efficacious in dispelling the royal

megrims as the power of music; the queen took care, therefore, to have

the best performers, both vocal and instrumental, at hand, and

retained the famous Italian singer Farinelli about the court as a kind

of royal physician.

  At the moment we treat of, however, a freak had come over the mind

of this sapient and illustrious Bourbon that surpassed all former

vagaries. After a long spell of imaginary illness, which set all the

strains of Farinelli and the consultations of a whole orchestra of

court fiddlers at defiance, the monarch fairly, in idea, gave up the

ghost, and considered himself absolutely dead.

  This would have been harmless enough, and even convenient both to

his queen and courtiers, had he been content to remain in the quietude

befitting a dead man; but to their annoyance he insisted upon having

the funeral ceremonies performed over him, and, to their inexpressible

perplexity, began to grow impatient, and to revile bitterly at them

for negligence and disrespect, in leaving him unburied. What was to be

done? To disobey the king's positive commands was monstrous in the

eyes of the obsequious courtiers of a punctilious court- but to obey

him, and bury him alive would be downright regicide!

  In the midst of this fearful dilemma a rumor reached the court, of

the female minstrel who was turning the brains of all Andalusia. The

queen dispatched missions in all haste to summon her to St. Ildefonso,

where the court at that time resided.

  Within a few days, as the queen with her maids of honor was

walking in those stately gardens, intended, with their avenues and

terraces and fountains, to eclipse the glories of Versailles, the

far-famed minstrel was conducted into her presence. The imperial

Elizabetta gazed with surprise at the youthful and unpretending

appearance of the little being that had set the world madding. She was

in her picturesque Andalusian dress, her silver lute in hand, and

stood with modest and downcast eyes, but with a simplicity and

freshness of beauty that still bespoke her "the Rose of the Alhambra."

  As usual she was accompanied by the ever-vigilant Fredegonda, who

gave the whole history of her parentage and descent to the inquiring

queen. If the stately Elizabetta had been interested by the appearance

of Jacinta, she was still more pleased when she learnt that she was of

a meritorious though impoverished line, and that her father had

bravely fallen in the service of the crown. "If thy powers equal their

renown," said she, "and thou canst cast forth this evil spirit that

possesses thy sovereign, thy fortunes shall henceforth be my care, and

honors and wealth attend thee."

  Impatient to make trial of her skill, she led the way at once to the

apartment of the moody monarch.

  Jacinta followed with downcast eyes through files of guards and

crowds of courtiers. They arrived at length at a great chamber hung

with black. The windows were closed to exclude the light of day: a

number of yellow wax tapers in silver sconces diffused a lugubrious

light, and dimly revealed the figures of mutes in mourning dresses,

and courtiers who glided about with noiseless step and woebegone

visage. In the midst of a funeral bed or bier, his hands folded on his

breast, and the tip of his nose just visible, lay extended this

would-be-buried monarch.

  The queen entered the chamber in silence, and pointing to a

footstool in an obscure corner, beckoned to Jacinta to sit down and

commence.

  At first she touched her lute with a faltering hand, but gathering

confidence and animation as she proceeded, drew forth such soft aerial

harmony, that all present could scarce believe it mortal. As to the

monarch, who had already considered himself in the world of spirits,

he set it down for some angelic melody or the music of the spheres. By

degrees the theme was varied, and the voice of the minstrel

accompanied the instrument. She poured forth one of the legendary

ballads treating of the ancient glories of the Alhambra and the

achievements of the Moors. Her whole soul entered into the theme,

for with the recollections of the Alhambra was associated the story of

her love. The funeral chamber resounded with the animating strain.

It entered into the gloomy heart of the monarch. He raised his head

and gazed around: he sat up on his couch, his eye began to kindle-

at length, leaping upon the floor, he called for sword and buckler.

  The triumph of music, or rather of the enchanted lute, was complete;

the demon of melancholy was cast forth; and, as it were, a dead man

brought to life. The windows of the apartment were thrown open; the

glorious effulgence of Spanish sunshine burst into the late lugubrious

chamber; all eyes sought the lovely enchantress, but the lute had

fallen from her hand, she had sunk upon the earth, and the next moment

was clasped to the bosom of Ruyz de Alarcon.

  The nuptials of the happy couple were celebrated soon afterwards

with great splendor, and the Rose of the Alhambra became the

ornament and delight of the court. "But hold- not so fast"- I hear the

reader exclaim, "this is jumping to the end of a story at a furious

rate! First let us know how Ruyz de Alarcon managed to account to

Jacinta for his long neglect?" Nothing more easy; the venerable,

time-honored excuse, the opposition to his wishes by a proud,

pragmatical old father: besides, young people, who really like one

another, soon come to an amicable understanding, and bury all past

grievances when once they meet.

  But how was the proud pragmatical old father reconciled to the

match?

  Oh! as to that, his scruples were easily overcome by a word or two

from the queen; especially as dignities and rewards were showered upon

the blooming favorite of royalty. Besides, the lute of Jacinta, you

know, possessed a magic power, and could control the most stubborn

head and hardest breast.

  And what came of the enchanted lute?

  Oh, that is the most curious matter of all, and plainly proves the

truth of the whole story. That lute remained for some time in the

family, but was purloined and carried off, as was supposed, by the

great singer Farinelli, in pure jealousy. At his death it passed

into other hands in Italy, who were ignorant of its mystic powers, and

melting down the silver, transferred the strings to an old Cremona

fiddle. The strings still retain something of their magic virtues. A

word in the reader's ear, but let it go no further- that fiddle is now

bewitching the whole world- it is the fiddle of Paganini!

                       The Veteran.



  AMONG the curious acquaintances I made in my rambles about the

fortress, was a brave and battered old colonel of Invalids, who was

nestled like a hawk in one of the Moorish towers. His history, which

he was fond of telling, was a tissue of those adventures, mishaps, and

vicissitudes that render the life of almost every Spaniard of note

as varied and whimsical as the pages of Gil Blas.

  He was in America at twelve years of age, and reckoned among the

most signal and fortunate events of his life, his having seen

General Washington. Since then he had taken a part in all the wars

of his country; he could speak experimentally of most of the prisons

and dungeons of the Peninsula; had been lamed of one leg, crippled

in his hands, and so cut up and carbonadoed that he was a kind of

walking monument of the troubles of Spain, on which there was a scar

for every battle and broil, as every year of captivity was notched

upon the tree of Robinson Crusoe. The greatest misfortune of the brave

old cavalier, however, appeared to have been his having commanded at

Malaga during a time of peril and confusion, and been made a general

by the inhabitants, to protect them from the invasion of the French.

This had entailed upon him a number of just claims upon government,

that I feared would employ him until his dying day in writing and

printing petitions and memorials, to the great disquiet of his mind,

exhaustion of his purse, and penance of his friends; not one of whom

could visit him without having to listen to a mortal document of

half an hour in length, and to carry away half a dozen pamphlets in

his pocket. This, however, is the case throughout Spain; every where

you meet with some worthy wight brooding in a corner, and nursing up

some pet grievance and cherished wrong. Besides, a Spaniard who has

a lawsuit, or a claim upon government, may be considered as

furnished with employment for the remainder of his life.

  I visited the veteran in his quarters in the upper part of the Torre

del Vino, or Wine Tower. His room was small but snug, and commanded

a beautiful view of the Vega. It was arranged with a soldier's

precision. Three muskets and a brace of pistols, all bright and

shining, were suspended against the wall, with a sabre and a cane

hanging side by side, and above them, two cocked hats, one for parade,

and one for ordinary use. A small shelf, containing some half dozen

books, formed his library, one of which, a little old mouldy volume of

philosophical maxims, was his favorite reading. This he thumbed and

pondered over day by day; applying every maxim to his own particular

case, provided it had a little tinge of wholesome bitterness, and

treated of the injustice of the world.

  Yet he was social and kind-hearted, and provided he could be

diverted from his wrongs and his philosophy, was an entertaining

companion. I like these old weather-beaten sons of fortune, and

enjoy their rough campaigning anecdotes. In the course of my visits to

the one in question, I learnt some curious facts about an old military

commander of the fortress, who seems to have resembled him in some

respects, and to have had similar fortunes in the wars. These

particulars have been augmented by inquiries among some of the old

inhabitants of the place, particularly the father of Mateo Ximenes, of

whose traditional stories the worthy I am about to introduce to the

reader, was a favorite hero.

               The Governor and the Notary.



  IN FORMER times there ruled, as governor of the Alhambra, a

doughty old cavalier, who, from having lost one arm in the wars, was

commonly known by the name of el Gobernador Manco, or "the one-armed

governor." He in fact prided himself upon being an old soldier, wore

his mustaches curled up to his eyes, a pair of campaigning boots,

and a Toledo as long as a spit, with his pocket handkerchief in the

basket-hilt.

  He was, moreover, exceedingly proud and punctilious, and tenacious

of all his privileges and dignities. Under his sway the immunities

of the Alhambra, as a royal residence and domain, were rigidly

exacted. No one was permitted to enter the fortress with firearms,

or even with a sword or staff, unless he were of a certain rank; and

every horseman was obliged to dismount at the gate, and lead his horse

by the bridle. Now as the hill of the Alhambra rises from the very

midst of the city of Granada, being, as it were, an excrescence of the

capital, it must at all times be somewhat irksome to the

captain-general, who commands the province, to have thus an imperium

in imperio, a petty independent post in the very centre of his

domains. It was rendered the more galling, in the present instance,

from the irritable jealousy of the old governor, that took fire on the

least question of authority and jurisdiction; and from the loose

vagrant character of the people who had gradually nestled themselves

within the fortress, as in a sanctuary, and thence carried on a system

of roguery and depredation at the expense of the honest inhabitants of

the city.

  Thus there was a perpetual feud and heart-burning between the

captain-general and the governor, the more virulent on the part of the

latter, inasmuch as the smallest of two neighboring potentates is

always the most captious about his dignity. The stately palace of

the captain-general stood in the Plaza Nueva, immediately at the

foot of the hill of the Alhambra, and here was always a bustle and

parade of guards, and domestics, and city functionaries. A beetling

bastion of the fortress overlooked the palace and public square in

front of it; and on this bastion the old governor would occasionally

strut backwards and forwards, with his Toledo girded by his side,

keeping a wary eye down upon his rival, like a hawk reconnoitering his

quarry from his nest in a dry tree.

  Whenever he descended into the city it was in grand parade, on

horseback, surrounded by his guards, or in his state coach, an ancient

and unwieldy Spanish edifice of carved timber and gilt leather,

drawn by eight mules, with running footmen, outriders, and lackeys; on

which occasions he flattered himself he impressed every beholder

with awe and admiration as vicegerent of the king; though the wits

of Granada, particularly those who loitered about the palace of the

captain-general, were apt to sneer at his petty parade, and in

allusion to the vagrant character of his subjects, to greet him with

the appellation of "the king of the beggars." One of the most fruitful

sources of dispute between these two doughty rivals was the right

claimed by the governor to have all things passed free of duty through

the city, that were intended for the use of himself or his garrison.

By degrees this privilege had given rise to extensive smuggling. A

nest of contrabandistas took up their abode in the hovels of the

fortress, and the numerous caves in its vicinity, and drove a thriving

business under the connivance of the soldiers of the garrison.

  The vigilance of the captain-general was aroused. He consulted his

legal adviser and factotum, a shrewd meddlesome escribano, or

notary, who rejoiced in an opportunity of perplexing the old potentate

of the Alhambra, and involving him in a maze of legal subtilties. He

advised the captain-general to insist upon the right of examining

every convoy passing through the gates of his city, and penned a

long letter for him in vindication of the right. Governor Manco was

a straightforward cut-and-thrust old soldier, who hated an escribano

worse than the devil and this one in particular worse than all other

escribanos.

  "What!" said he, curling up his mustaches fiercely, "does the

captain-general set his man of the pen to practise confusions upon me?

I'll let him see an old soldier is not to be baffled by schoolcraft."

  He seized his pen and scrawled a short letter in a crabbed hand,

in which, without deigning to enter into argument, he insisted on

the right of transit free of search, and denounced vengeance on any

custom-house officer who should lay his unhallowed hand on any

convoy protected by the flag of the Alhambra. While this question

was agitated between the two pragmatical potentates, it so happened

that a mule laden with supplies for the fortress arrived one day at

the gate of Xenil, by which it was to traverse a suburb of the city on

its way to the Alhambra. The convoy was headed by a testy old

corporal, who had long served under the governor, and was a man

after his own heart; as rusty and stanch as an old Toledo blade.

  As they approached the gate of the city, the corporal placed the

banner of the Alhambra on the pack-saddle of the mule, and drawing

himself up to a perfect perpendicular, advanced with his head

dressed to the front, but with the wary side-glance of a cur passing

through hostile ground, and ready for a snap and a snarl.

  "Who goes there?" said the sentinel at the gate.

  "Soldier of the Alhambra!" said the corporal, without turning his

head.

  "What have you in charge?"

  "Provisions for the garrison."

  "Proceed."

  The corporal marched straight forward, followed by the convoy, but

had not advanced many paces before a posse of custom-house officers

rushed out of a small toll-house.

  "Hallo there!" cried the leader. "Muleteer, halt, and open those

packages."

  The corporal wheeled round, and drew himself up in battle array.

"Respect the flag of the Alhambra," said he; "these things are for the

governor."

  "A figo for the governor, and a figo for his flag. Muleteer, halt, I

say."

  "Stop the convoy at your peril!" cried the corporal, cocking his

musket.

  The muleteer gave his beast a hearty thwack; the custom-house

officer sprang forward and seized the halter; whereupon the corporal

levelled his piece, and shot him dead.

  The street was immediately in an uproar.

  The old corporal was seized, and after undergoing sundry kicks,

and cuffs, and cudgellings, which are generally given impromptu by the

mob in Spain, as a foretaste of the after penalties of the law, he was

loaded with irons, and conducted to the city prison; while his

comrades were permitted to proceed with the convoy, after it had

been well rummaged, to the Alhambra.

  The old governor was in a towering passion when he heard of this

insult to his flag and capture of his corporal. For a time he

stormed about the Moorish halls, and vapored about the bastions, and

looked down fire and sword upon the palace of the captain-general.

Having vented the first ebullition of his wrath, he dispatched a

message demanding the surrender of the corporal, as to him alone

belonged the right of sitting in judgment on the offences of those

under his command. The captain-general, aided by the pen of the

delighted escribano, replied at great length, arguing that as the

offence had been committed within the walls of his city, and against

one of his civil officers, it was clearly within his proper

jurisdiction. The governor rejoined by a repetition of his demand; the

captain-general gave a sur-rejoinder of still greater length and legal

acumen; the governor became hotter and more peremptory in his demands,

and the captain-general cooler and more copious in his replies;

until the old lion-hearted soldier absolutely roared with fury at

being thus entangled in the meshes of legal controversy.

  While the subtle escribano was thus amusing himself at the expense

of the governor, he was conducting the trial of the corporal, who,

mewed up in a narrow dungeon of the prison, had merely a small

grated window at which to show his iron-bound visage and receive the

consolations of his friends.

  A mountain of written testimony was diligently heaped up,

according to Spanish form, by the indefatigable escribano; the

corporal was completely overwhelmed by it. He was convicted of murder,

and sentenced to be hanged.

  It was in vain the governor sent down remonstrance and menace from

the Alhambra. The fatal day was at hand, and the corporal was put in

capilla, that is to say, in the chapel of the prison, as is always

done with culprits the day before execution, that they may meditate on

their approaching end and repent them of their sins.

  Seeing things drawing to extremity, the old governor determined to

attend to the affair in person. For this purpose he ordered out his

carriage of state, and, surrounded by his guards, rumbled down the

avenue of the Alhambra into the city. Driving to the house of the

escribano, he summoned him to the portal.

  The eye of the old governor gleamed like a coal at beholding the

smirking man of the law advancing with an air of exultation.

  "What is this I hear," cried he, "that you are about to put to death

one of my soldiers?"

  "All according to law- all in strict form of justice," said the

self-sufficient escribano, chuckling and rubbing his hands. "I can

show your excellency the written testimony in the case."

  "Fetch it hither," said the governor. The escribano bustled into his

office, delighted with having another opportunity of displaying his

ingenuity at the expense of the hard-headed veteran.

  He returned with a satchel full of papers, and began to read a

long deposition with professional volubility. By this time a crowd had

collected, listening with outstretched necks and gaping mouths.

  "Prithee, man, get into the carriage, out of this pestilent

throng, that I may the better hear thee," said the governor.

  The escribano entered the carriage, when, in a twinkling, the door

was closed, the coachman smacked his whip- mules, carriage, guards and

all dashed off at a thundering rate, leaving the crowd in gaping

wonderment; nor did the governor pause until he had lodged his prey in

one of the strongest dungeons of the Alhambra.

  He then sent down a flag of truce in military style, proposing a

cartel or exchange of prisoners- the corporal for the notary. The

pride of the captain-general was piqued; he returned a contemptuous

refusal, and forthwith caused a gallows, tall and strong, to be

erected in the centre of the Plaza Nueva for the execution of the

corporal.

  "Oho! is that the game?" said Governor Manco. He gave orders, and

immediately a gibbet was reared on the verge of the great beetling

bastion that overlooked the Plaza. "Now," said he in a message to

the captain-general, "hang my soldier when you please; but at the same

time that he is swung off in the square, look up to see your escribano

dangling against the sky."

  The captain-general was inflexible; troops were paraded in the

square; the drums beat, the bell tolled. An immense multitude of

amateurs gathered together to behold the execution. On the other hand,

the governor paraded his garrison on the bastion, and tolled the

funeral dirge of the notary from the Torre de la Campana, or Tower

of the Bell.

  The notary's wife pressed through the crowd with a whole progeny

of little embryo escribanos at her heels, and throwing herself at

the feet of the captain-general, implored him not to sacrifice the

life of her husband, and the welfare of herself and her numerous

little ones, to a point of pride; "for you know the old governor too

well," said she, "to doubt that he will put his threat in execution,

if you hang the soldier."

  The captain-general was overpowered by her tears and lamentations,

and the clamors of her callow brood. The corporal was sent up to the

Alhambra, under a guard, in his gallows garb, like a hooded friar, but

with head erect and a face of iron. The escribano was demanded in

exchange, according to the cartel. The once bustling and

self-sufficient man of the law was drawn forth from his dungeon more

dead than alive. All his flippancy and conceit had evaporated; his

hair, it is said, had nearly turned gray with affright, and he had a

downcast, dogged look, as if he still felt the halter round his neck.

  The old governor stuck his one arm akimbo, and for a moment surveyed

him with an iron smile. "Henceforth, my friend," said he, "moderate

your zeal in hurrying others to the gallows; be not too certain of

your safety, even though you should have the law on your side; and

above all take care how you play off your schoolcraft another time

upon an old soldier."

               Governor Manco and the Soldier.



  WHILE Governor Manco, or "the one-armed," kept up a show of military

state in the Alhambra, he became nettled at the reproaches continually

cast upon his fortress, of being a nestling place of rogues and

contrabandistas. On a sudden, the old potentate determined on

reform, and setting vigorously to work, ejected whole nests of

vagabonds out of the fortress and the gipsy caves with which the

surrounding hills are honeycombed. He sent out soldiers, also, to

patrol the avenues and footpaths, with orders to take up all

suspicious persons.

  One bright summer morning, a patrol, consisting of the testy old

corporal who had distinguished himself in the affair of the notary,

a trumpeter and two privates, was seated under the garden wall of

the Generalife, beside the road which leads down from the mountain

of the sun, when they heard the tramp of a horse, and a male voice

singing in rough, though not unmusical tones, an old Castilian

campaigning song.

  Presently they beheld a sturdy, sunburnt fellow, clad in the

ragged garb of a foot-soldier, leading a powerful Arabian horse,

caparisoned in the ancient Morisco fashion.

  Astonished at the sight of a strange soldier descending, steed in

hand, from that solitary mountain, the corporal stepped forth and

challenged him.

  "Who goes there?"

  "A friend."

  "Who and what are you?"

  "A poor soldier just from the wars, with a cracked crown and empty

purse for a reward."

  By this time they were enabled to view him more narrowly. He had a

black patch across his forehead, which, with a grizzled beard, added

to a certain dare-devil cast of countenance, while a slight squint

threw into the whole an occasional gleam of roguish good humor.

  Having answered the questions of the patrol, the soldier seemed to

consider himself entitled to make others in return. "May I ask,"

said he, "what city is that which I see at the foot of the hill?"

  "What city!" cried the trumpeter; "come, that's too bad. Here's a

fellow lurking about the mountain of the sun, and demands the name

of the great city of Granada!"

  "Granada! Madre de Dios! can it be possible?"

  "Perhaps not!" rejoined the trumpeter; "and perhaps you have no idea

that yonder are the towers of the Alhambra."

  "Son of a trumpet," replied the stranger, "do not trifle with me; if

this be indeed the Alhambra, I have some strange matters to reveal

to the governor."

  "You will have an opportunity," said the corporal, "for we mean to

take you before him." By this time the trumpeter had seized the bridle

of the steed, the two privates had each secured an arm of the soldier,

the corporal put himself in front, gave the word, "Forward- march!"

and away they marched for the Alhambra.

  The sight of a ragged foot-soldier and a fine Arabian horse, brought

in captive by the patrol, attracted the attention of all the idlers of

the fortress, and of those gossip groups that generally assemble about

wells and fountains at early dawn. The wheel of the cistern paused

in its rotations, and the slipshod servant-maid stood gaping, with

pitcher in hand, as the corporal passed by with his prize. A motley

train gradually gathered in the rear of the escort.

  Knowing nods and winks and conjectures passed from one to another.

"It is a deserter," said one. "A contrabandista," said another. "A

bandalero," said a third- until it was affirmed that a captain of a

desperate band of robbers had been captured by the prowess of the

corporal and his patrol. "Well, well," said the old crones, one to

another, "captain or not, let him get out of the grasp of old Governor

Manco if he can, though he is but one-handed."

  Governor Manco was seated in one of the inner halls of the Alhambra,

taking his morning's cup of chocolate in company with his confessor, a

fat Franciscan friar, from the neighboring convent. A demure,

dark-eyed damsel of Malaga, the daughter of his housekeeper, was

attending upon him. The world hinted that the damsel, who, with all

her demureness, was a sly buxom baggage, had found out a soft spot

in the iron heart of the old governor, and held complete control

over him. But let that pass- the domestic affairs of these mighty

potentates of the earth should not be too narrowly scrutinized.

  When word was brought that a suspicious stranger had been taken

lurking about the fortress, and was actually in the outer court, in

durance of the corporal, waiting the pleasure of his excellency, the

pride and stateliness of office swelled the bosom of the governor.

Giving back his chocolate cup into the hands of the demure damsel,

he called for his basket-hilted sword, girded it to his side,

twirled up his mustaches, took his seat in a large high-backed

chair, assumed a bitter and forbidding aspect, and ordered the

prisoner into his presence. The soldier was brought in, still

closely pinioned by his captors, and guarded by the corporal. He

maintained, however, a resolute self-confident air, and returned the

sharp, scrutinizing look of the governor with an easy squint, which by

no means pleased the punctilious old potentate.

  "Well, culprit," said the governor, after he had regarded him for

a moment in silence, "what have you to say for yourself- who are you?"

  "A Soldier, just from the wars, who has brought away nothing but

scars and bruises."

  "A soldier- humph- a foot-soldier by your garb. I understand you

have a fine Arabian horse. I presume you brought him too from the

wars, besides your scars and bruises."

  "May it please your excellency, I have something strange to tell

about that horse. Indeed I have one of the most wonderful things to

relate. Something too that concerns the security of this fortress,

indeed of all Granada. But it is a matter to be imparted only to

your private ear, or in presence of such only as are in your

confidence."

  The governor considered for a moment, and then directed the corporal

and his men to withdraw, but to post themselves outside of the door,

and be ready at a call. "This holy friar," said he, "is my

confessor, you may say any thing in his presence- and this damsel,"

nodding toward the handmaid, who had loitered with an air of great

curiosity, "this damsel is of great secrecy and discretion, and to

be trusted with any thing."

  The soldier gave a glance between a squint and a leer at the

demure handmaid. "I am perfectly willing," said he, "that the damsel

should remain."

  When all the rest had withdrawn, the soldier commenced his story. He

was a fluent, smooth-tongued varlet, and had a command of language

above his apparent rank.

  "May it please your excellency," said he, "I am, as I before

observed, a soldier, and have seen some hard service, but my term of

enlistment being expired, I was discharged, not long since, from the

army at Valladolid, and set out on foot for my native village in

Andalusia. Yesterday evening the sun went down as I was traversing a

great dry plain of Old Castile."

  "Hold," cried the governor, "what is this you say? Old Castile is

some two or three hundred miles from this."

  "Even so," replied the soldier, coolly; "I told your excellency I

had strange things to relate; but not more strange than true; as

your excellency will find, if you will deign me a patient hearing."

  "Proceed, culprit," said the governor, twirling up his mustaches.

  "As the sun went down," continued the soldier, "I cast my eyes about

in search of quarters for the night, but as far as my sight could

reach, there were no signs of habitation. I saw that I should have

to make my bed on the naked plain, with my knapsack for a pillow;

but your excellency is an old soldier, and knows that to one who has

been in the wars, such a night's lodging is no great hardship."

  The governor nodded assent, as he drew his pocket handkerchief out

of the basket-hilt, to drive away a fly that buzzed about his nose.

  "Well, to make a long story short," continued the soldier, "I

trudged forward for several miles until I came to a bridge over a deep

ravine, through which ran a little thread of water, almost dried up by

the summer heat. At one end of the bridge was a Moorish tower, the

upper end all in ruins, but a vault in the foundation quite entire.

Here, thinks I, is a good place to make a halt; so I went down to

the stream, took a hearty drink, for the water was pure and sweet, and

I was parched with thirst; then, opening my wallet, I took out an

onion and a few crusts, which were all my provisions, and seating

myself on a stone on the margin of the stream, began to make my

supper, intending afterwards to quarter myself for the night in the

vault of the tower; and capital quarters they would have been for a

campaigner just from the wars, as your excellency, who is an old

soldier, may suppose."

  "I have put up gladly with worse in my time," said the governor,

returning his pocket handkerchief into the hilt of his sword.

  "While I was quietly crunching my crust," pursued the soldier, "I

heard something stir within the vault; I listened- it was the tramp of

a horse. By and by a man came forth from a door in the foundation of

the tower, close by the water's edge, leading a powerful horse by

the bridle. I could not well make out what he was by the starlight. It

had a suspicious look to be lurking among the ruins of a tower, in

that wild solitary place. He might be a mere wayfarer, like myself; he

might be a contrabandista; he might be a bandalero! what of that?

thank heaven and my poverty, I had nothing to lose; so I sat still and

crunched my crust.

  "He led his horse to the water, close by where I was sitting, so

that I had a fair opportunity of reconnoitering him. To my surprise he

was dressed in a Moorish garb, with a cuirass of steel, and a polished

skull-cap that I distinguished by the reflection of the stars upon it.

His horse, too, was harnessed in the Morisco fashion, with great

shovel stirrups. He led him, as I said, to the side of the stream,

into which the animal plunged his head almost to the eyes, and drank

until I thought he would have burst.

  "'Comrade,' said I, 'your steed drinks well; it's a good sign when a

horse plunges his muzzle bravely into the water.'

  "'He may well drink,' said the stranger, speaking with a Moorish

accent; 'it is a good year since he had his last draught.'

  "'By Santiago,' said I, 'that beats even the camels I have seen in

Africa. But come, you seem to be something of a soldier, will you

sit down and take part of a soldier's fare?' In fact, I felt the

want of a companion in this lonely place, and was willing to put up

with an infidel. Besides, as your excellency well knows, a soldier

is never very particular about the faith of his company, and

soldiers of all countries are comrades on peaceable ground."

  The governor again nodded assent.

  "Well, as I was saying, I invited him to share my supper, such as it

was, for I could not do less in common hospitality. 'I have no time to

pause for meat or drink,' said he, 'I have a long journey to make

before morning.'

  "'In which direction?' said I.

  "'Andalusia,' said he.

  "'Exactly my route,' said I, 'so, as you won't stop and eat with me,

perhaps you will let me mount and ride with you. I see your horse is

of a powerful frame, I'll warrant he'll carry double.'

  "'Agreed,' said the trooper; and it would not have been civil and

soldier-like to refuse, especially as I had offered to share my supper

with him. So up he mounted, and up I mounted behind him.

  "'Hold fast,' said he, 'my steed goes like the wind.'

  "'Never fear me,' said I, and so off we set.

  "From a walk the horse soon passed to a trot, from a trot to a

gallop, and from a gallop to a harum-scarum scamper. It seemed as if

rocks, trees, houses, every thing, flew hurry-scurry behind us.

  "'What town is this?' said I.

  "'Segovia,' said he; and before the word was out of his mouth, the

towers of Segovia were out of sight. We swept up the Guadarama

mountains, and down by the Escurial; and we skirted the walls of

Madrid, and we scoured away across the plains of La Mancha. In this

way we went up hill and down dale, by towers and cities, all buried in

deep sleep, and across mountains, and plains, and rivers, just

glimmering in the starlight.

  "To make a long story short, and not to fatigue your excellency, the

trooper suddenly pulled up on the side of a mountain. 'Here we are,'

said he, 'at the end of our journey.' I looked about, but could see no

signs of habitation; nothing but the mouth of a cavern. While I looked

I saw multitudes of people in Moorish dresses, some on horseback, some

on foot, arriving as if borne by the wind from all points of the

compass, and hurrying into the mouth of the cavern like bees into a

hive. Before I could ask a question the trooper struck his long

Moorish spurs into the horse's flanks, and dashed in with the

throng. We passed along a steep winding way, that descended into the

very bowels of the mountain. As we pushed on, a light began to glimmer

up, by little and little, like the first glimmerings of day, but

what caused it I could not discern. It grew stronger and stronger, and

enabled me to see every thing around. I now noticed, as we passed

along, great caverns, opening to the right and left, like halls in

an arsenal. In some there were shields, and helmets, and cuirasses,

and lances, and cimeters, hanging against the walls; in others there

were great heaps of warlike munitions, and camp equipage lying upon

the ground.

  "It would have done your excellency's heart good, being an old

soldier, to have seen such grand provision for war. Then, in other

caverns, there were long rows of horsemen armed to the teeth, with

lances raised and banners unfurled, all ready for the field; but

they all sat motionless in their saddles like so many statues. In

other halls were warriors sleeping on the ground beside their

horses, and foot-soldiers in groups ready to fall into the ranks.

All were in old-fashioned Moorish dresses and armor.

  "Well, your excellency, to cut a long story short, we at length

entered an immense cavern, or I may say palace, of grotto work, the

walls of which seemed to be veined with gold and silver, and to

sparkle with diamonds and sapphires and all kinds of precious

stones. At the upper end sat a Moorish king on a golden throne, with

his nobles on each side, and a guard of African blacks with drawn

cimeters. All the crowd that continued to flock in, and amounted to

thousands and thousands, passed one by one before his throne, each

paying homage as he passed. Some of the multitude were dressed in

magnificent robes, without stain or blemish and sparkling with jewels;

others in burnished and enamelled armor; while others were in

mouldered and mildewed garments, and in armor all battered and

dented and covered with rust.

  "I had hitherto held my tongue, for your excellency well knows it is

not for a soldier to ask many questions when on duty, but I could keep

silent no longer.

  "'Prithee, comrade,' said I, 'what is the meaning of all this?'

  "'This,' said the trooper, 'is a great and fearful mystery. Know,

O Christian, that you see before you the court and army of Boabdil the

last king of Granada.'

  "'What is this you tell me?' cried I. 'Boabdil and his court were

exiled from the land hundreds of years agone, and all died in Africa.'

  "'So it is recorded in your lying chronicles,' replied the Moor;

'but know that Boabdil and the warriors who made the last struggle for

Granada were all shut up in the mountain by powerful enchantment. As

for the king and army that marched forth from Granada at the time of

the surrender, they were a mere phantom train of spirits and demons,

permitted to assume those shapes to deceive the Christian

sovereigns. And furthermore let me tell you, friend, that all Spain is

a country under the power of enchantment. There is not a mountain

cave, not a lonely watchtower in the plains, nor ruined castle on

the hills, but has some spell-bound warriors sleeping from age to

age within its vaults, until the sins are expiated for which Allah

permitted the dominion to pass for a time out of the hands of the

faithful. Once every year, on the eve of St. John, they are released

from enchantment, from sunset to sunrise, and permitted to repair here

to pay homage to their sovereign! and the crowds which you beheld

swarming into the cavern are Moslem warriors from their haunts in

all parts of Spain. For my own part, you saw the ruined tower of the

bridge in Old Castile, where I have now wintered and summered for many

hundred years, and where I must be back again by daybreak. As to the

battalions of horse and foot which you beheld drawn up in array in the

neighboring caverns, they are the spell-bound warriors of Granada.

It is written in the book of fate, that when the enchantment is

broken, Boabdil will descend from the mountain at the head of this

army, resume his throne in the Alhambra and his sway of Granada, and

gathering together the enchanted warriors, from all parts of Spain,

will reconquer the Peninsula and restore it to Moslem rule.'

  "'And when shall this happen?' said I.

  "'Allah alone knows: we had hoped the day of deliverance was at

hand; but there reigns at present a vigilant governor in the Alhambra,


a stanch old soldier, well known as Governor Manco. While such a

warrior holds command of the very outpost, and stands ready to check

the first irruption from the mountain, I fear Boabdil and his soldiery

must be content to rest upon their arms.'

  Here the governor raised himself somewhat perpendicularly,

adjusted his sword, and twirled up his mustaches.

  "To make a long story short, and not to fatigue your excellency, the

trooper, having given me this account, dismounted from his steed.

  "'Tarry here,' said he, 'and guard my steed while I go and bow the

knee to Boabdil.' So saying, he strode away among the throng that

pressed forward to the throne.

  "'What's to be done?' thought I, when thus left to myself; 'shall

I wait here until this infidel returns to whisk me off on his goblin

steed, the Lord knows where; or shall I make the most of my time and

beat a retreat from this hobgoblin community? A soldier's mind is soon

made up, as your excellency well knows. As to the horse, he belonged

to an avowed enemy of the faith and the realm, and was a fair prize

according to the rules of war. So hoisting myself from the crupper

into the saddle, I turned the reins, struck the Moorish stirrups

into the sides of the steed, and put him to make the best of his way

out of the passage by which he had entered. As we scoured by the halls

where the Moslem horsemen sat in motionless battalions, I thought I

heard the clang of armor and a hollow murmur of voices. I gave the

steed another taste of the stirrups and doubled my speed. There was

now a sound behind me like a rushing blast; I heard the clatter of a

thousand hoofs; a countless throng overtook me. I was borne along in

the press, and hurled forth from the mouth of the cavern, while

thousands of shadowy forms were swept off in every direction by the

four winds of heaven.

  "In the whirl and confusion of the scene I was thrown senseless to

the earth. When I came to myself I was lying on the brow of a hill,

with the Arabian steed standing beside me; for in falling, my arm

had slipped within the bridle, which, I presume, prevented his

whisking off to Old Castile.

  "Your excellency may easily judge of my surprise, on looking

round, to behold hedges of aloes and Indian figs and other proofs of a

southern climate, and to see a great city below me, with towers, and

palaces, and a grand cathedral.

  "I descended the hill cautiously, leading my steed, for I was afraid

to mount him again, lest he should play me some slippery trick. As I

descended I met with your patrol, who let me into the secret that it

was Granada that lay before me; and that I was actually under the

walls of the Alhambra, the fortress of the redoubted Governor Manco,

the terror of all enchanted Moslems. When I heard this, I determined

at once to seek your excellency, to inform you of all that I had seen,

and to warn you of the perils that surround and undermine you, that

you may take measures in time to guard your fortress, and the

kingdom itself, from this intestine army that lurks in the very bowels

of the land."

  "And prithee, friend, you who are a veteran campaigner, and have

seen so much service," said the governor, "how would you advise me

to proceed, in order to prevent this evil?"

  "It is not for a humble private of the ranks," said the soldier,

modestly, "to pretend to instruct a commander of your excellency's

sagacity, but it appears to me that your excellency might cause all

the caves and entrances into the mountains to be walled up with

solid mason work, so that Boabdil and his army might be completely

corked up in their subterranean habitation. If the good father,

too," added the soldier, reverently bowing to the friar, and

devoutly crossing himself, "would consecrate the barricadoes with

his blessing, and put up a few crosses and relics and images of

saints, I think they might withstand all the power of infidel

enchantments."

  "They doubtless would be of great avail," said the friar.

  The governor now placed his arm akimbo, with his hand resting on the

hilt of his Toledo, fixed his eye upon the soldier, and gently wagging

his head from one side to the other.

  "So, friend," said he, "then you really suppose I am to be gulled

with this cock-and-bull story about enchanted mountains and

enchanted Moors? Hark ye, culprit!- not another word. An old soldier

you may be, but you'll find you have an older soldier to deal with,

and one not easily outgeneralled. Ho! guards there! put this fellow in

irons."

  The demure handmaid would have put in a word in favor of the

prisoner, but the governor silenced her with a look.

  As they were pinioning the soldier, one of the guards felt something

of bulk in his pocket, and drawing it forth, found a long leathern

purse that appeared to be well filled. Holding it by one corner, he

turned out the contents upon the table before the governor, and

never did freebooter's bag make more gorgeous delivery. Out tumbled

rings, and jewels, and rosaries of pearls, and sparkling diamond

crosses, and a profusion of ancient golden coin, some of which fell

jingling to the floor, and rolled away to the uttermost parts of the

chamber.

  For a time the functions of justice were suspended; there was a

universal scramble after the glittering fugitives. The governor alone,

who was imbued with true Spanish pride, maintained his stately

decorum, though his eye betrayed a little anxiety until the last

coin and jewel was restored to the sack.

  The friar was not so calm; his whole face glowed like a furnace, and

his eyes twinkled and flashed at sight of the rosaries and crosses.

  "Sacrilegious wretch that thou art!" exclaimed he; "what church or

sanctuary hast thou been plundering of these sacred relics?"

  "Neither one nor the other, holy father. If they be sacrilegious

spoils, they must have been taken, in times long past, by the

infidel trooper I have mentioned. I was just going to tell his

excellency when he interrupted me, that on taking possession of the

trooper's horse, I unhooked a leathern sack which hung at the

saddle-bow, and which I presume contained the plunder of his

campaignings in days of old, when the Moors overran the country."

  "Mighty well; at present you will make up your mind to take up

your quarters in a chamber of the Vermilion Tower, which, though not

under a magic spell, will hold you as safe as any cave of your

enchanted Moors."

  "Your excellency will do as you think proper," said the prisoner,

coolly. "I shall be thankful to your excellency for any

accommodation in the fortress. A soldier who has been in the wars,

as your excellency well knows, is not particular about his lodgings:

provided I have a snug dungeon and regular rations, I shall manage

to make myself comfortable. I would only entreat that while your

excellency is so careful about me, you would have an eye to your

fortress, and think on the hint I dropped about stopping up the

entrances to the mountain."

  Here ended the scene. The prisoner was conducted to a strong dungeon

in the Vermilion Tower, the Arabian steed was led to his

excellency's stable, and the trooper's sack was deposited in his

excellency's strong box. To the latter, it is true, the friar made

some demur, questioning whether the sacred relics, which were

evidently sacrilegious spoils, should not be placed in custody of

the church; but as the governor was peremptory on the subject, and was

absolute lord in the Alhambra, the friar discreetly dropped the

discussion, but determined to convey intelligence of the fact to the

church dignitaries in Granada.

  To explain these prompt and rigid measures on the part of old

Governor Manco, it is proper to observe, that about this time the

Alpuxarra mountains in the neighborhood of Granada were terribly

infested by a gang of robbers, under the command of a daring chief

named Manuel Borasco, who were accustomed to prowl about the

country, and even to enter the city in various disguises, to gain

intelligence of the departure of convoys of merchandise, or travellers

with well-lined purses, whom they took care to waylay in distant and

solitary passes of the road. These repeated and daring outrages had

awakened the attention of government, and the commanders of the

various posts had received instructions to be on the alert, and to

take up all suspicious stragglers. Governor Manco was particularly

zealous in consequence of the various stigmas that had been cast

upon his fortress, and he now doubted not he had entrapped some

formidable desperado of this gang.

  In the mean time the story took wind, and became the talk, not

merely of the fortress, but of the whole city of Granada. It was

said that the noted robber Manuel Borasco, the terror of the

Alpuxarras, had fallen into the clutches of old Governor Manco, and

been cooped up by him in a dungeon of the Vermilion Tower; and every

one who had been robbed by him flocked to recognize the marauder.

The Vermilion Tower, as is well known, stands apart from the

Alhambra on a sister hill, separated from the main fortress by the

ravine down which passes the main avenue. There were no outer walls,

but a sentinel patrolled before the tower. The window of the chamber

in which the soldier was confined was strongly grated, and looked upon

a small esplanade. Here the good folks of Granada repaired to gaze

at him, as they would at a laughing hyena, grinning through the cage

of a menagerie. Nobody, however, recognized him for Manuel Borasco,

for that terrible robber was noted for a ferocious physiognomy, and

had by no means the good-humored squint of the prisoner. Visitors came

not merely from the city, but from all parts of the country; but

nobody knew him, and there began to be doubts in the minds of the

common people whether there might not be some truth in his story. That

Boabdil and his army were shut up in the mountain, was an old

tradition which many of the ancient inhabitants had heard from their

fathers. Numbers went up to the mountain of the sun, or rather of

St. Elena, in search of the cave mentioned by the soldier; and saw and

peeped into the deep dark pit, descending, no one knows how far,

into the mountain, and which remains there to this day- the fabled

entrance to the subterranean abode of Boabdil.

  By degrees the soldier became popular with the common people. A

freebooter of the mountains is by no means the opprobrious character

in Spain that a robber is in any other country: on the contrary, he is

a kind of chivalrous personage in the eyes of the lower classes. There

is always a disposition, also, to cavil at the conduct of those in

command, and many began to murmur at the high-handed measures of old

Governor Manco, and to look upon the prisoner in the light of a

martyr.

  The soldier, moreover, was a merry, waggish fellow, that had a

joke for every one who came near his window, and a soft speech for

every female. He had procured an old guitar also, and would sit by his

window and sing ballads and love-ditties to the delight of the women

of the neighborhood, who would assemble on the esplanade in the

evening and dance boleros to his music. Having trimmed off his rough

beard, his sunburnt face found favor in the eyes of the fair, and

the demure handmaid of the governor declared that his squint was

perfectly irresistible. This kind-hearted damsel had from the first

evinced a deep sympathy in his fortunes, and having in vain tried to

mollify the governor, had set to work privately to mitigate the

rigor of his dispensations. Every day she brought the prisoner some

crumbs of comfort which had fallen from the governor's table, or

been abstracted from his larder, together with, now and then, a

consoling bottle of choice Val de Penas, or rich Malaga.

  While this petty treason was going on, in the very centre of the old

governor's citadel, a storm of open war was brewing up among his

external foes. The circumstance of a bag of gold and jewels having

been found upon the person of the supposed robber, had been

reported, with many exaggerations, in Granada. A question of

territorial jurisdiction was immediately started by the governor's

inveterate rival, the captain-general. He insisted that the prisoner

had been captured without the precincts of the Alhambra, and within

the rules of his authority. He demanded his body therefore, and the

spolia opima taken with him. Due information having been carried

likewise by the friar to the grand inquisitor of the crosses and

rosaries, and other relics contained in the bag, he claimed the

culprit as having been guilty of sacrilege, and insisted that his

plunder was due to the church, and his body to the next auto-da-fe.

The feuds ran high; the governor was furious, and swore, rather than

surrender his captive, he would hang him up within the Alhambra, as

a spy caught within the purlieus of the fortress.

  The captain-general threatened to send a body of soldiers to

transfer the prisoner from the Vermilion Tower to the city. The

grand inquisitor was equally bent upon dispatching a number of the

familiars of the Holy Office. Word was brought late at night to the

governor of these machinations. "Let them come," said he, "they'll

find me beforehand with them; he must rise bright and early who

would take in an old soldier." He accordingly issued orders to have

the prisoner removed, at daybreak, to the donjon keep within the walls

of the Alhambra. "And d'ye hear, child," said he to his demure

handmaid, "tap at my door, and wake me before cock-crowing, that I may

see to the matter myself."

  The day dawned, the cock crowed, but nobody tapped at the door of

the governor. The sun rose high above the mountain-tops, and glittered

in at his casement, ere the governor was awakened from his morning

dreams by his veteran corporal, who stood before him with terror

stamped upon his iron visage.

  "He's off! he's gone!" cried the corporal, gasping for breath.

  "Who's off- who's gone?"

  "The soldier- the robber- the devil, for aught I know; his dungeon

is empty, but the door locked: no one knows how he has escaped out

of it."

  "Who saw him last?"

  "Your handmaid, she brought him his supper."

  "Let her be called instantly."

  Here was new matter of confusion. The chamber of the demure damsel

was likewise empty, her bed had not been slept in: she had doubtless

gone off with the culprit, as she had appeared, for some days past, to

have frequent conversations with him.

  This was wounding the old governor in a tender part, but he had

scarce time to wince at it, when new misfortunes broke upon his

view. On going into his cabinet he found his strong box open, the

leather purse of the trooper abstracted, and with it, a couple of

corpulent bags of doubloons.

  But how, and which way had the fugitives escaped? An old peasant who

lived in a cottage by the road-side, leading up into the Sierra,

declared that he had heard the tramp of a powerful steed just before

daybreak, passing up into the mountains. He had looked out at his

casement, and could just distinguish a horseman, with a female

seated before him.

  "Search the stables!" cried Governor Manco. The stables were

searched; all the horses were in their stalls, excepting the Arabian

steed. In his place was a stout cudgel tied to the manger, and on it a

label bearing these words, "A gift to Governor Manco, from an Old

Soldier."

