





               Panorama from the Tower of Comares.



  IT IS A serene and beautiful morning: the sun has not gained

sufficient power to destroy the freshness of the night. What a morning

to mount to the summit of the Tower of Comares, and take a

bird's-eye view of Granada and its environs!

  Come then, worthy reader and comrade, follow my steps into this

vestibule, ornamented with rich tracery, which opens into the Hall

of Ambassadors. We will not enter the hall, however, but turn to

this small door opening into the wall. Have a care! here are steep

winding steps and but scanty light; yet up this narrow, obscure, and

spiral staircase, the proud monarchs of Granada and their queens

have often ascended to the battlements to watch the approach of

invading armies, or gaze with anxious hearts on the battles in the

Vega.

  At length we have reached the terraced roof, and may take breath for

a moment, while we cast a general eye over the splendid panorama of

city and country; of rocky mountain, verdant valley, and fertile

plain; of castle, cathedral, Moorish towers, and Gothic domes,

crumbling ruins, and blooming groves. Let us approach the battlements,

and cast our eyes immediately below. See, on this side we have the

whole plain of the Alhambra laid open to us, and can look down into

its courts and gardens. At the foot of the tower is the Court of the

Alberca, with its great tank or fishpool, bordered with flowers; and

yonder is the Court of Lions, with its famous fountain, and its

light Moorish arcades; and in the centre of the pile is the little

garden of Lindaraxa, buried in the heart of the building, with its

roses and citrons, and shrubbery of emerald green.

  That belt of battlements, studded with square towers straggling

round the whole brow of the hill, is the outer boundary of the

fortress. Some of the towers, you may perceive, are in ruins, and

their massive fragments buried among vines, fig-trees and aloes.

  Let us look on this northern side of the tower. It is a giddy

height; the very foundations of the tower rise above the groves of the

steep hill-side. And see I a long fissure in the massive walls,

shows that the tower has been rent by some of the earthquakes, which

from time to time have thrown Granada into consternation; and which,

sooner or later, must reduce this crumbling pile to a mere mass of

ruin. The deep narrow glen below us, which gradually widens as it

opens from the mountains, is the valley of the Darro; you see the

little river winding its way under imbowered terraces, and among

orchards and flower-gardens. It is a stream famous in old times for

yielding gold, and its sands are still sifted occasionally, in

search of the precious ore. Some of those white pavilions, which

here and there gleam from among groves and vineyards, were rustic

retreats of the Moors, to enjoy the refreshment of their gardens. Well

have they been compared by one of their poets to so many pearls set in

a bed of emeralds.

  The airy palace, with its tall white towers and long arcades,

which breasts yon mountain, among pompous groves and hanging

gardens, is the Generalife, a summer palace of the Moorish kings, to

which they resorted during the sultry months to enjoy a still more

breezy region than that of the Alhambra. The naked summit of the

height above it, where you behold some shapeless ruins, is the Silla

del Moro, or Seat of the Moor, so called from having been a retreat of

the unfortunate Boabdil during the time of an insurrection, where he

seated himself, and looked down mournfully upon his rebellious city.

  A murmuring sound of water now and then rises from the valley. It is

from the aqueduct of yon Moorish mill, nearly at the foot of the hill.

The avenue of trees beyond is the Alameda, along the bank of the

Darro, a favorite resort in evenings, and a rendezvous of lovers in

the summer nights, when the guitar may be heard at a late hour from

the benches along its walks. At present you see none but a few

loitering monks there, and a group of water-carriers. The latter are

burdened with water jars of ancient Oriental construction, such as

were used by the Moors. They have been filled at the cold and limpid

spring called the fountain of Avellanos. Yon mountain path leads to

the fountain, a favorite resort of Moslems as well as Christians;

for this is said to be the Adinamar (Aynu-l-adamar), the "Fountain

of Tears," mentioned by Ibn Batuta the traveller, and celebrated in

the histories and romances of the Moors.

  You start! 'tis nothing but a hawk that we have frightened from

his nest. This old tower is a complete breeding-place for vagrant

birds; the swallow and martlet abound in every chink and cranny, and

circle about it the whole day long; while at night, when all other

birds have gone to rest, the moping owl comes out of its

lurking-place, and utters its boding cry from the battlements. See how

the hawk we have dislodged sweeps away below us, skimming over the

tops of the trees, and sailing up to the ruins above the Generalife!

  I see you raise your eyes to the snowy summit of yon pile of

mountains, shining like a white summer cloud in the blue sky. It is

the Sierra Nevada, the pride and delight of Granada; the source of her

cooling breezes and perpetual verdure; of her gushing fountains and

perennial streams. It is this glorious pile of mountains which gives

to Granada that combination of delights so rare in a southern city:

the fresh vegetation and temperate airs of a northern climate, with

the vivifying ardor of a tropical sun, and the cloudless azure of a

southern sky. It is this aerial treasury of snow, which, melting in

proportion to the increase of the summer heat, sends down rivulets and

streams through every glen and gorge of the Alpuxarras, diffusing

emerald verdure and fertility throughout a chain of happy and

sequestered valleys.

  Those mountains may be well called the glory of Granada. They

dominate the whole extent of Andalusia, and may be seen from its

most distant parts. The muleteer hails them, as he views their

frosty peaks from the sultry level of the plain; and the Spanish

mariner on the deck of his bark, far, far off on the bosom of the blue

Mediterranean, watches them with a pensive eye, thinks of delightful

Granada, and chants, in low voice, some old romance about the Moors.

  See to the south at the foot of those mountains a line of arid

hills, down which a long train of mules is slowly moving. Here was the

closing scene of Moslem domination. From the summit of one of those

hills the unfortunate Boabdil cast back his last look upon Granada,

and gave vent to the agony of his soul. It is the spot famous in

song and story, "The last sigh of the Moor."

  Further this way these arid hills slope down into the luxurious

Vega, from which he had just emerged: a blooming wilderness of grove

and garden, and teeming orchard, with the Xenil winding through it

in silver links, and feeding innumerable rills; which, conducted

through ancient Moorish channels, maintain the landscape in

perpetual verdure. Here were the beloved bowers and gardens, and rural

pavilions, for which the unfortunate Moors fought with such

desperate valor. The very hovels and rude granges, now inhabited by

boors, show, by the remains of arabesques and other tasteful

decoration, that they were elegant residences in the days of the

Moslems. Behold, in the very centre of this eventful plain, a place

which in a manner links the history of the Old World with that of

the New. Yon line of walls and towers gleaming in the morning sun,

is the city of Santa Fe, built by the Catholic sovereigns during the

siege of Granada, after a conflagration had destroyed their camp. It

was to these walls Columbus was called back by the heroic queen, and

within them the treaty was concluded which led to the discovery of the

Western World. Behind yon promontory to the west is the bridge of

Pinos, renowned for many a bloody fight between Moors and

Christians. At this bridge the messenger overtook Columbus when,

despairing of success with the Spanish sovereigns, he was departing to

carry his project of discovery to the court of France.

  Above the bridge a range of mountains bounds the Vega to the west:

the ancient barrier between Granada and the Christian territories.

Among their heights you may still discern warrior towns, their gray

walls And battlements seeming of a piece with the rocks on which

they are built. Here and there a solitary atalaya, or watchtower,

perched on a mountain peak, looks down as it were from the sky into

the valley on either side. How often have these atalayas given notice,

by fire at night or smoke by day, of an approaching foe I It was

down a cragged defile of these mountains, called the Pass of Lope,

that the Christian armies descended into the Vega. Round the base of

yon gray and naked mountain (the mountain of Elvira), stretching its

bold rocky promontory into the bosom of the plain, the invading

squadrons would come bursting into view, with flaunting banners and

clangor of drum and trumpet.

  Five hundred years have elapsed since Ismael ben Ferrag, a Moorish

king of Granada, beheld from this very tower an invasion of the

kind, and an insulting ravage of the Vega; on which occasion he

displayed an instance of chivalrous magnanimity, often witnessed in

the Moslem princes, "whose history," says an Arabian writer,

"abounds in generous actions and noble deeds that will last through

all succeeding ages, and live for ever in the memory of man."- But let

us sit down on this parapet and I will relate the anecdote.

  It was in the year of grace 1319, that Ismael ben Ferrag beheld from

this tower a Christian camp whitening the skirts of yon mountain of

Elvira. The royal princes, Don Juan and Don Pedro, regents of

Castile during the minority of Alfonso XI, had already laid waste

the country from Alcaudete to Alcala la Real, capturing the castle

of Illora and setting fire to its suburbs, and they now carried

their insulting ravages to the very gates of Granada, defying the king

to sally forth and give them battle.

  Ismael, though a young and intrepid prince, hesitated to accept

the challenge. He had not sufficient force at hand, and awaited the

arrival of troops summoned from the neighboring towns. The Christian

princes, mistaking his motives, gave up all hope of drawing him forth,

and having glutted themselves with ravage, struck their tents and

began their homeward march. Don Pedro led the van, and Don Juan

brought up the rear, but their march was confused and irregular, the

army being greatly encumbered by the spoils and captives they had

taken.

  By this time King Ismael had received his expected resources, and

putting them under the command of Osmyn, one of the bravest of his

generals, sent them forth in hot pursuit of the enemy. The

Christians were overtaken in the defiles of the mountains. A panic

seized them; they were completely routed, and driven with great

slaughter across the borders. Both of the princes lost their lives.

The body of Don Pedro was carried off by his soldiers, but that of Don

Juan was lost in the darkness of the night. His son wrote to the

Moorish king, entreating that the body of his father might be sought

and honorably treated. Ismael forgot in a moment that Don Juan was

an enemy, who had carried ravage and insult to the very gate of his

capital; he only thought of him as a gallant cavalier and a royal

prince. By his command diligent search was made for the body. It was

found in a barranco and brought to Granada. There Ismael caused it

to be laid out in state on a lofty bier, surrounded by torches and

tapers, in one of these halls of the Alhambra. Osmyn and other of

the noblest cavaliers were appointed as a guard of honor, and the

Christian captives were assembled to pray around it.

  In the meantime, Ismael wrote to the son of Prince Juan to send a

convoy for the body, assuring him it should be faithfully delivered

up. In due time, a band of Christian cavaliers arrived for the

purpose. They were honorably received and entertained by Ismael,

and, on their departure with the body, the guard of honor of Moslem

cavaliers escorted the funeral train to the frontier.

  But enough- the sun is high above the mountains, and pours his

full fervor on our heads. Already the terraced roof is hot beneath our

feet; let us abandon it, and refresh ourselves under the Arcades by

the Fountain of the Lions.

                        The Truant.



  WE HAVE had a scene of a petty tribulation in the Alhambra, which

has thrown a cloud over the sunny countenance of Dolores. This

little damsel has a female passion for pets of all kinds, and from the

superabundant kindness of her disposition one of the ruined courts

of the Alhambra is thronged with her favorites. A stately peacock

and his hen seem to hold regal sway here, over pompous turkeys,

querulous guinea-fowls, and a rabble rout of common cocks and hens.

The great delight of Dolores, however has for some time past been

centred in a youthful pair of pigeons, who have lately entered into

the holy state of wedlock, and even supplanted a tortoise-shell cat

and kittens in her affections.

  As a tenement for them wherein to commence housekeeping, she had

fitted up a small chamber adjacent to the kitchen, the window of which

looked into one of the quiet Moorish courts. Here they lived in

happy ignorance of any world beyond the court and its sunny roofs.

Never had they aspired to soar above the battlements, or to mount to

the summit of the towers. Their virtuous union was at length crowned

by two spotless and milk-white eggs, to the great joy of their

cherishing little mistress. Nothing could be more praiseworthy than

the conduct of the young married folks on this interesting occasion.

They took turns to sit upon the nest until the eggs were hatched,

and while their callow progeny required warmth and shelter; while

one thus stayed at home, the other foraged abroad for food, and

brought home abundant supplies.

  This scene of conjugal felicity has suddenly met with a reverse.

Early this morning, as Dolores was feeding the male pigeon, she took a

fancy to give him a peep at the great world. Opening a window,

therefore, which looks down upon the valley of the Darro, she launched

him at once beyond the walls of the Alhambra. For the first time in

his life the astonished bird had to try the full vigor of his wings.

He swept down into the valley, and then rising upwards with a surge,

soared almost to the clouds. Never before had he risen to such a

height, or experienced such delight in flying; and, like a young

spendthrift just come to his estate, he seemed giddy with excess of

liberty, and with the boundless field of action suddenly opened to

him. For the whole day he has been circling about in capricious

flights, from tower to tower, and tree to tree. Every attempt has been

vain to lure him back by scattering grain upon the roofs; he seems

to have lost all thought of home, of his tender helpmate, and his

callow young. To add to the anxiety of Dolores, he has been joined

by two palomas ladrones, or robber pigeons, whose instinct it is to

entice wandering pigeons to their own dovecotes. The fugitive, like

many other thoughtless youths on their first launching upon the world,

seems quite fascinated with these knowing but graceless companions,

who have undertaken to show him life, and introduce him to society. He

has been soaring with them over all the roofs and steeples of Granada.

A thunder-storm has passed over the city, but he has not sought his

home; night has closed in, and still he comes not. To deepen the

pathos of the affair, the female pigeon, after remaining several hours

on the nest without being relieved, at length went forth to seek her

recreant mate; but stayed away so long that the young ones perished

for want of the warmth and shelter of the parent bosom. At a late hour

in the evening, word was brought to Dolores, that the truant bird

had been seen upon the towers of the Generalife. Now it happens that

the Administrador of that ancient palace has likewise a dovecote,

among the inmates of which are said to be two or three of these

inveigling birds, the terror of all neighboring pigeon-fanciers.

Dolores immediately concluded, that the two feathered sharpers who had

been seen with her fugitive, were these bloods of the Generalife. A

council of war was forthwith held in the chamber of Tia Antonia. The

Generalife is a distinct jurisdiction from the Alhambra, and of course

some punctilio, if not jealousy, exists between their custodians. It

was determined, therefore, to send Pepe, the stuttering lad of the

gardens, as ambassador to the Administrador, requesting that if such

fugitive should be found in his dominions, he might be given up as a

subject of the Alhambra. Pepe departed accordingly, on his

diplomatic expedition, through the moonlit groves and avenues, but

returned in an hour with the afflicting intelligence that no such bird

was to be found in the dovecote of the Generalife. The

Administrador, however, pledged his sovereign word that if such

vagrant should appear there, even at midnight, he should instantly

be arrested, and sent back prisoner to his little black-eyed mistress.

  Thus stands the melancholy affair, which has occasioned much

distress throughout the palace, and has sent the inconsolable

Dolores to a sleepless pillow.

  "Sorrow endureth for a night," says the proverb, "but joy cometh

in the morning." The first object that met my eyes, on leaving my room

this morning, was Dolores, with the truant pigeon in her hands, and

her eyes sparkling with joy. He had appeared at an early hour on the

battlements, hovering shyly about from roof to roof, but at length

entered the window, and surrendered himself prisoner. He gained little

credit, however, by his return; for the ravenous manner in which he

devoured the food set before him showed that, like the prodigal son,

he had been driven home by sheer famine. Dolores upbraided him for his

faithless conduct, calling him all manner of vagrant names, though,

woman-like, she fondled him at the same time to her bosom, and covered

him with kisses. I observed, however, that she had taken care to

clip his wings to prevent all future soarings; a precaution which I

mention for the benefit of all those who have truant lovers or

wandering husbands. More than one valuable moral might be drawn from

the story of Dolores and her pigeon.

                        The Balcony.



  I HAVE spoken of a balcony of the central window of the Hall of

Ambassadors. It served as a kind of observatory, where I used often to

take my seat, and consider not merely the heaven above but the earth

beneath. Besides the magnificent prospect which it commanded of

mountain, valley, and vega, there was a little busy scene of human

life laid open to inspection immediately below. At the foot of the

hill was an alameda, or public walk, which, though not so

fashionable as the more modern and splendid paseo of the Xenil,

still boasted a varied and picturesque concourse. Hither resorted

the small gentry of the suburbs, together with priests and friars, who

walked for appetite and digestion; majos and majas, the beaux and

belles of the lower classes, in their Andalusian dresses; swaggering

contrabandistas, and sometimes half-muffled and mysterious loungers of

the higher ranks, on some secret assignation.

  It was a moving picture of Spanish life and character, which I

delighted to study; and as the astronomer has his grand telescope with

which to sweep the skies, and, as it were, bring the stars nearer

for his inspection, so I had a smaller one, of pocket size, for the

use of my observatory, with which I could sweep the regions below, and

bring the countenances of the motley groups so close as almost, at

times, to make me think I could divine their conversation by the

play and expression of their features. I was thus, in a manner, an

invisible observer, and, without quitting my solitude, could throw

myself in an instant into the midst of society- a rare advantage to

one of somewhat shy and quiet habits, and fond, like myself, of

observing the drama of life without becoming an actor in the scene.

  There was a considerable suburb lying below the Alhambra, filling

the narrow gorge of the valley, and extending up the opposite hill

of the Albaycin. Many of the houses were built in the Moorish style,

round patios, or courts, cooled by fountains and open to the sky;

and as the inhabitants passed much of their time in these courts,

and on the terraced roofs during the summer season, it follows that

many a glance at their domestic life might be obtained by an aerial

spectator like myself, who could look down on them from the clouds.

  I enjoyed, in some degree, the advantages of the student in the

famous old Spanish story, who beheld all Madrid unroofed for his

inspection; and my gossiping squire, Mateo Ximenes, officiated

occasionally as my Asmodeus, to give me anecdotes of the different

mansions and their inhabitants.

  I preferred, however, to form conjectural histories for myself,

and thus would sit for hours, weaving, from casual incidents and

indications passing under my eye, a whole tissue of schemes,

intrigues, and occupations of the busy mortals below. There was scarce

a pretty face or a striking figure that I daily saw, about which I had

not thus gradually framed a dramatic story, though some of my

characters would occasionally act in direct opposition to the part

assigned them, and disconcert the whole drama. Reconnoitering one

day with my glass the streets of the Albaycin, I beheld the procession

of a novice about to take the veil; and remarked several circumstances

which excited the strongest sympathy in the fate of the youthful being

thus about to be consigned to a living tomb. I ascertained to my

satisfaction that she was beautiful; and, from the paleness of her

cheek, that she was a victim, rather than a votary. She was arrayed in

bridal garments, and decked with a chaplet of white flowers, but her

heart evidently revolted at this mockery of a spiritual union, and

yearned after its earthly loves. A tall, stern-looking man walked near

her in the procession; it was, of course, the tyrannical father,

who, from some bigoted or sordid motive, had compelled this sacrifice.

Amid the crowd was a dark handsome youth, in Andalusian garb, who

seemed to fix on her an eye of agony. It was doubtless the secret

lover from whom she was for ever to be separated. My indignation

rose as I noted the malignant expression painted on the countenances

of the attendant monks and friars. The procession arrived at the

chapel of the convent; the sun gleamed for the last time upon the

chaplet of the poor novice, as she crossed the fatal threshold, and

disappeared within the building. The throng poured in with cowl, and

cross, and minstrelsy; the lover paused for a moment at the door. I

could divine the tumult of his feelings; but he mastered them, and

entered. There was a long interval- I pictured to myself the scene

passing within; the poor novice despoiled of her transient finery, and

clothed in the conventual garb; the bridal chaplet taken from her

brow, and her beautiful head shorn of its long silken tresses. I heard

her murmur the irrevocable vow. I saw her extended on a bier: the

death-pall spread over her, the funeral service performed that

proclaimed her dead to the world; her sighs were drowned in the deep

tones of the organ, and the plaintive requiem of the nuns; the

father looked on, unmoved, without a tear; the lover- no- my

imagination refused to portray the anguish of the lover- there the

picture remained a blank.

  After a time the throng again poured forth, and dispersed various

ways, to enjoy the light of the sun and mingle with the stirring

scenes of life; but the victim, with her bridal chaplet, was no longer

there. The door of the convent closed that severed her from the

world for ever. I saw the father and the lover issue forth; they

were in earnest conversation. The latter was vehement in his

gesticulations; I expected some violent termination to my drama; but

an angle of a building interfered and closed the scene. My eye

afterwards was frequently turned to that convent with painful

interest. I remarked late at night a solitary light twinkling from a

remote lattice of one of its towers. "There," said I, "the unhappy nun

sits weeping in her cell, while perhaps her lover paces the street

below in unavailing anguish."

  The officious Mateo interrupted my meditations and destroyed in an

instant the cobweb tissue of my fancy. With his usual zeal he had

gathered facts concerning the scene, which put my fictions all to

flight. The heroine of my romance was neither young nor handsome;

she had no lover; she had entered the convent of her own free will, as

a respectable asylum, and was one of the most cheerful residents

within its walls.

  It was some little while before I could forgive the wrong done me by

the nun in being thus happy in her cell, in contradiction to all the

rules of romance; I diverted my spleen, however, by watching, for a

day or two, the pretty coquetries of a dark-eyed brunette, who, from

the covert of a balcony shrouded with flowering shrubs and a silken

awning, was carrying on a mysterious correspondence with a handsome,

dark, well-whiskered cavalier, who lurked frequently in the street

beneath her window. Sometimes I saw him at an early hour, stealing

forth wrapped to the eyes in a mantle. Sometimes he loitered at a

corner, in various disguises, apparently waiting for a private

signal to slip into the house. Then there was the tinkling of a guitar

at night, and a lantern shifted from place to place in the balcony.

I imagined another intrigue like that of Almaviva; but was again

disconcerted in all my suppositions. The supposed lover turned out

to be the husband of the lady, and a noted contrabandista; and all his

mysterious signs and movements had doubtless some smuggling scheme

in view.

  I occasionally amused myself with noting from this balcony the

gradual changes of the scenes below, according to the different stages

of the day.

  Scarce has the gray dawn streaked the sky, and the earliest cock

crowed from the cottages of the hill-side, when the suburbs give

sign of reviving animation; for the fresh hours of dawning are

precious in the summer season in a sultry climate. All are anxious

to get the start of the sun, in the business of the day. The

muleteer drives forth his loaded train for the journey; the

traveller slings his carbine behind his saddle, and mounts his steed

at the gate of the hostel; the brown peasant from the country urges

forward his loitering beasts, laden with panniers of sunny fruit and

fresh dewy vegetables: for already the thrifty housewives are

hastening to the market.

  The sun is up and sparkles along the valley, tipping the transparent

foliage of the groves. The matin bells resound melodiously through the

pure bright air, announcing the hour of devotion. The muleteer halts

his burdened animals before the chapel, thrusts his staff through

his belt behind, and enters with hat in hand, smoothing his coal-black

hair, to hear a mass, and put up a prayer for a prosperous wayfaring

across the sierra. And now steals forth on fairy foot the gentle

senora, in trim basquina, with restless fan in hand, and dark eye

flashing from beneath the gracefully folded mantilla; she seeks some

well-frequented church to offer up her morning orisons; but the

nicely-adjusted dress, the dainty shoe and cobweb stocking, the

raven tresses exquisitely braided, the fresh plucked rose, gleaming

among them like a gem, show that earth divides with Heaven the

empire of her thoughts. Keep an eye upon her, careful mother, or

virgin aunt, or vigilant duenna, whichever you be, that walk behind I

  As the morning advances, the din of labor augments on every side;

the streets are thronged with man, and steed, and beast of burden, and

there is a hum and murmur, like the surges of the ocean. As the sun

ascends to his meridian the hum and bustle gradually decline; at the

height of noon there is a pause. The panting city sinks into

lassitude, and for several hours there is a general repose. The

windows are closed, the curtains drawn; the inhabitants retired into

the coolest recesses of their mansions; the full-fed monk snores in

his dormitory; the brawny porter lies stretched on the pavement beside

his burden; the peasant and the laborer sleep beneath the trees of the

Alameda, lulled by the sultry chirping of the locust. The streets

are deserted, except by the water-carrier, who refreshes the ear by

proclaiming the merits of his sparkling beverage, "colder than the

mountain snow (mas fria que la nieve)."

  As the sun declines, there is again a gradual reviving, and when the

vesper bell rings out his sinking knell, all nature seems to rejoice

that the tyrant of the day has fallen. Now begins the bustle of

enjoyment, when the citizens pour forth to breathe the evening air,

and revel away the brief twilight in the walks and gardens of the

Darro and Xenil.

  As night closes, the capricious scene assumes new features. Light

after light gradually twinkles forth; here a taper from a balconied

window; there a votive lamp before the image of a Saint. Thus, by

degrees, the city emerges from the pervading gloom, and sparkles

with scattered lights, like the starry firmament. Now break forth from

court and garden, and street and lane, the tinkling of innumerable

guitars, and the clicking of castanets; blending, at this lofty

height, in a faint but general concert. "Enjoy the moment," is the

creed of the gay and amorous Andalusian, and at no time does he

practise it more zealously than in the balmy nights of summer,

wooing his mistress with the dance, the love ditty, and the passionate

serenade.

  I was one evening seated in the balcony, enjoying the light breeze

that came rustling along the side of the hill, among the tree-tops,

when my humble historiographer Mateo, who was at my elbow, pointed out

a spacious house, in an obscure street of the Albaycin, about which he

related, as nearly as I can recollect, the following anecdote.

                 The Adventure of the Mason.



  THERE WAS once upon a time a poor mason, or bricklayer, in

Granada, who kept all the saints' days and holidays, and Saint

Monday into the bargain, and yet, with all his devotion, he grew

poorer and poorer, and could scarcely earn bread for his numerous

family. One night he was roused from his first sleep by a knocking

at his door. He opened it, and beheld before him a tall, meagre,

cadaverous-looking priest.

  "Hark ye, honest friend!" said the stranger; "I have observed that

you are a good Christian, and one to be trusted; will you undertake

a job this very night?"

  "With all my heart, Senor Padre, on condition that I am paid

accordingly."

  "That you shall be; but you must suffer yourself to be blindfolded."

  To this the mason made no objection; so, being hoodwinked, he was

led by the priest through various rough lanes and winding passages,

until they stopped before the portal of a house. The priest then

applied a key, turned a creaking lock, and opened what sounded like

a ponderous door. They entered, the door was closed and bolted, and

the mason was conducted through an echoing corridor, and a spacious

hall, to an interior part of the building. Here the bandage was

removed from his eyes, and he found himself in a patio, or court,

dimly lighted by a single lamp. In the centre was the dry basin of

an old Moorish fountain, under which the priest requested him to

form a small vault, bricks and mortar being at hand for the purpose.

He accordingly worked all night, but without finishing the job. Just

before daybreak the priest put a piece of gold into his hand, and

having again blindfolded him, conducted him back to his dwelling.

  "Are you willing," said he, "to return and complete your work?"

  "Gladly, Senor Padre, provided I am so well paid."

  "Well, then, to-morrow at midnight I will call again."

  He did so, and the vault was completed.

  "Now," said the priest, "you must help me to bring forth the

bodies that are to be buried in this vault."

  The poor mason's hair rose on his head at these words: he followed

the priest, with trembling steps, into a retired chamber of the

mansion, expecting to behold some ghastly spectacle of death, but

was relieved on perceiving three or four portly jars standing in one

corner. They were evidently full of money, and it was with great labor

that he and the priest carried them forth and consigned them to

their tomb. The vault was then closed, the pavement replaced, and

all traces of the work were obliterated. The mason was again

hoodwinked and led forth by a route different from that by which he

had come.

  After they had wandered for a long time through a perplexed maze

of lanes and alleys, they halted. The priest then put two pieces of

gold into his hand. "Wait here," said he, "until you hear the

cathedral bell toll for matins. If you presume to uncover your eyes

before that time, evil will befall you." So saying, he departed.

  The mason waited faithfully, amusing himself by weighing the gold

pieces in his hand, and clinking them against each other. The moment

the cathedral bell rang its matin peal, he uncovered his eyes, and

found himself on the banks of the Xenil; whence he made the best of

his way home, and revelled with his family for a whole fortnight on

the profits of his two nights' work; after which, he was as poor as

ever.

  He continued to work a little, and pray a good deal, and keep

saints' days and holidays, from year to year, while his family grew up

as gaunt and ragged as a crew of gipsies. As he was seated one evening

at the door of his hovel, he was accosted by a rich old curmudgeon,

who was noted for owning many houses, and being a griping landlord.

The man of money eyed him for a moment from beneath a pair of

anxious shagged eyebrows.

  "I am told, friend, that you are very poor."

  "There is no denying the fact, senor- it speaks for itself"

  "I presume then, that you will be glad of a job, and will work

cheap."

  "As cheap, my master, as any mason in Granada."

  "That's what I want. I have an old house fallen into decay, which

costs me more money than it is worth to keep it in repair, for

nobody will live in it; so I must contrive to patch it up and keep

it together at as small expense as possible."

  The mason was accordingly conducted to a large deserted house that

seemed going to ruin. Passing through several empty halls and

chambers, he entered an inner court, where his eye was caught by an

old Moorish fountain. He paused for a moment, for a dreaming

recollection of the place came over him.

  "Pray," said he, "who occupied this house formerly?"

  "A pest upon him!" cried the landlord, "it was an old miserly

priest, who cared for nobody but himself He was said to be immensely

rich, and, having no relations, it was thought he would leave all

his treasures to the church. He died suddenly, and the priests and

friars thronged to take possession of his wealth; but nothing could

they find but a few ducats in a leathern purse. The worst luck has

fallen on me, for, since his death, the old fellow continues to occupy

my house without paying rent, and there is no taking the law of a dead

man. The people pretend to hear the clinking of gold all night in

the chamber where the old priest slept, as if he were counting over

his money, and sometimes a groaning and moaning about the court.

Whether true or false, these stories have brought a bad name on my

house, and not a tenant will remain in it."

  "Enough," said the mason sturdily, "let me live in your house

rent-free until some better tenant present, and I will engage to put

it in repair, and to quiet the troubled spirit that disturbs it. I

am a good Christian and a poor man, and am not to be daunted by the

Devil himself, even though he should come in the shape of a big bag of

money!"

  The offer of the honest mason was gladly accepted; he moved with his

family into the house, and fulfilled all his engagements. By little

and little he restored it to its former state; the clinking of gold

was no more heard at night in the chamber of the defunct priest, but

began to be heard by day in the pocket of the living mason. In a word,

he increased rapidly in wealth, to the admiration of all his

neighbors, and became one of the richest men in Granada: he gave large

sums to the church, by way, no doubt, of satisfying his conscience,

and never revealed the secret of the vault until on his deathbed to

his son and heir.

                   The Court of Lions.



  THE peculiar charm of this dreamy old palace is its power of calling

up vague reveries and picturings of the past, and thus clothing

naked realities with the illusions of the memory and the

imagination. As I delight to walk in these "vain shadows," I am

prone to seek those parts of the Alhambra which are most favorable

to this phantasmagoria of the mind; and none are more so than the

Court of Lions, and its surrounding halls. Here the hand of time has

fallen the lightest, and the traces of Moorish elegance and splendor

exist in almost their original brilliancy. Earthquakes have shaken the

foundations of this pile, and rent its rudest towers; yet see! not one

of those slender columns has been displaced, not an arch of that light

and fragile colonnade given way, and all the fairy fretwork of these

domes, apparently as unsubstantial as the crystal fabrics of a

morning's frost, exist after the lapse of centuries, almost as fresh

as if from the hand of the Moslem artist. I write in the midst of

these mementos of the past, in the fresh hour of early morning, in the

fated Hall of the Abencerrages. The blood-stained fountain, the

legendary monument of their massacre, is before me; the lofty jet

almost casts its dew upon my paper. How difficult to reconcile the

ancient tale of violence and blood with the gentle and peaceful

scene around! Everything here appears calculated to inspire kind and

happy feelings, for everything is delicate and beautiful. The very

light falls tenderly from above, through the lantern of a dome

tinted and wrought as if by fairy hands. Through the ample and fretted

arch of the portal I behold the Court of Lions, with brilliant

sunshine gleaming along its colonnades, and sparkling in its

fountains. The lively swallow dives into the court and, rising with

a surge, darts away twittering over the roofs; the busy bee toils

humming among the flower beds, and painted butterflies hover from

plant to plant, and flutter up and sport with each other in the

sunny air. It needs but a slight exertion of the fancy to picture some

pensive beauty of the harem, loitering in these secluded haunts of

Oriental luxury.

  He, however, who would behold this scene under an aspect more in

unison with its fortunes, let him come when the shadows of evening

temper the brightness of the court, and throw a gloom into surrounding

halls. Then nothing can be more serenely melancholy, or more in

harmony with the tale of departed grandeur.

  At such times I am apt to seek the Hall of Justice, whose deep

shadowy arcades extend across the upper end of the court. Here was

performed, in presence of Ferdinand and Isabella, and their triumphant

court, the pompous ceremonial of high mass, on taking possession of

the Alhambra. The very cross is still to be seen upon the wall,

where the altar was erected, and where officiated the Grand Cardinal

of Spain, and others of the highest religious dignitaries of the land.

I picture to myself the scene when this place was filled with the

conquering host, that mixture of mitred prelate and shaven monk, and

steel-clad knight and silken courtier; when crosses and crosiers and

religious standards were mingled with proud armorial ensigns and the

banners of haughty chiefs of Spain, and flaunted in triumph through

these Moslem halls. I picture to myself Columbus, the future

discoverer of a world, taking his modest stand in a remote corner, the

humble and neglected spectator of the pageant. I see in imagination

the Catholic sovereigns prostrating themselves before the altar, and

pouring forth thanks for their victory; while the vaults resound

with sacred minstrelsy, and the deep-toned Te Deum.

  The transient illusion is over- the pageant melts from the fancy-

monarch, priest, and warrior, return into oblivion, with the Moslems

over whom they exulted. The hall of their triumph is waste and

desolate. The bat flits about its twilight vault, and the owl hoots

from the neighboring Tower of Comares.

  Entering the Court of the Lions a few evenings since, I was almost

startled at beholding a turbaned Moor quietly seated near the

fountain. For a moment one of the fictions of the place seemed

realized: an enchanted Moor had broken the spell of centuries, and

become visible. He proved, however, to be a mere ordinary mortal; a

native of Tetuan in Barbary, who had a shop in the Zacatin of Granada,

where he sold rhubarb, trinkets, and perfumes. As he spoke Spanish

fluently, I was enabled to hold conversation with him, and found him

shrewd and intelligent. He told me that he came up the hill

occasionally in the summer, to pass a part of the day in the Alhambra,

which reminded him of the old palaces in Barbary, being built and

adorned in similar style, though with more magnificence.

  As we walked about the palace, he pointed out several of the

Arabic inscriptions, as possessing much poetic beauty.

  "Ah, senor," said he, "when the Moors held Granada, they were a

gayer people than they are nowadays. They thought only of love, music,

and poetry. They made stanzas upon every occasion, and set them all to

music. He who could make the best verses, and she who had the most

tuneful voice, might be sure of favor and preferment. In those days,

if anyone asked for bread, the reply was, make me a couplet; and the

poorest beggar, if he begged in rhyme, would often be rewarded with

a piece of gold."

  "And is the popular feeling for poetry," said I, "entirely lost

among you?"

  "By no means, senor; the people of Barbary, even those of lower

classes, still make couplets, and good ones too, as in old times,

but talent is not rewarded as it was then; the rich prefer the

jingle of their gold to the sound of poetry or music."

  As he was talking, his eye caught one of the inscriptions which

foretold perpetuity to the power and glory of the Moslem monarchs, the

masters of this pile. He shook his head, and shrugged his shoulders,

as he interpreted it. "Such might have been the case," said he; "the

Moslems might still have been reigning in the Alhambra, had not

Boabdil been a traitor, and given up his capital to the Christians.

The Spanish monarchs would never have been able to conquer it by

open force."

  I endeavored to vindicate the memory of the unlucky Boabdil from

this aspersion, and to show that the dissensions which led to the

downfall of the Moorish throne, originated in the cruelty of his

tiger-hearted father; but the Moor would admit of no palliation.

  "Muley Abul Hassan," said he, "might have been cruel; but he was

brave, vigilant, and patriotic. Had he been properly seconded, Granada

would still have been ours; but his son Boabdil thwarted his plans,

crippled his power, sowed treason in his palace, and dissension in his

camp. May the curse of God light upon him for his treachery!" With

these words the Moor left the Alhambra.

  The indignation of my turbaned companion agrees with an anecdote

related by a friend, who, in the course of a tour in Barbary, had an

interview with the Pacha of Tetuan. The Moorish governor was

particular in his inquiries about Spain and especially concerning

the favored region of Andalusia, the delights of Granada, and the

remains of its royal palace. The replies awakened all those fond

recollections, so deeply cherished by the Moors, of the power and

splendor of their ancient empire in Spain. Turning to his Moslem

attendants, the Pacha stroked his beard, and broke forth in passionate

lamentations, that such a sceptre should have fallen from the sway

of true believers. He consoled himself, however, with the

persuasion, that the power and prosperity of the Spanish nation were

on the decline; that a time would come when the Moors would

reconquer their rightful domains; and that the day was perhaps not far

distant, when Mohammedan worship would again be offered up in the

Mosque of Cordova, and a Mohammedan prince sit on his throne in the

Alhambra.

  Such is the general aspiration and belief among the Moors of

Barbary, who consider Spain, or Andaluz, as it was anciently called,

their rightful heritage, of which they have been despoiled by

treachery and violence. These ideas are fostered and perpetuated by

the descendants of the exiled Moors of Granada, scattered among the

cities of Barbary. Several of these reside in Tetuan, preserving their

ancient names, such as Paez and Medina, and refraining from

intermarriage with any families who cannot claim the same high origin.

Their vaunted lineage is regarded with a degree of popular

deference, rarely shown in Mohammedan communities to any hereditary

distinction, excepting in the royal line.

  These families, it is said, continue to sigh after the terrestrial

paradise of their ancestors, and to put up prayers in their mosques on

Fridays, imploring Allah to hasten the time when Granada shall be

restored to the faithful: an event to which they look forward as

fondly and confidently as did the Christian crusaders to the

recovery of the Holy Sepulchre. Nay, it is added, that some of them

retain the ancient maps and deeds of the estates and gardens of

their ancestors at Granada, and even the keys of the houses, holding

them as evidences of their hereditary claims, to be produced at the

anticipated day of restoration.

  My conversation with the Moor set me to musing on the fate of

Boabdil. Never was surname more applicable than that bestowed upon him

by his subjects of El Zogoybi, or the Unlucky. His misfortunes began

almost in his cradle, and ceased not even with his death. If ever he

cherished the desire of leaving an honorable name on the historic

page, how cruelly has he been defrauded of his hopes! Who is there

that has turned the least attention to the romantic history of the

Moorish domination in Spain, without kindling with indignation at

the alleged atrocities of Boabdil? Who has not been touched with the

woes of his lovely and gentle queen, subjected by him to a trial of

life and death, on a false charge of infidelity? Who has not been

shocked by his alleged murder of his sister and her two children, in a

transport of passion? Who has not felt his blood boil, at the

inhuman massacre of the gallant Abencerrages, thirty-six of whom, it

is affirmed, he ordered to be beheaded in the Court of Lions? All

these charges have been reiterated in various forms; they have

passed into ballads, dramas, and romances, until they have taken too

thorough possession of the public mind to be eradicated. There is

not a foreigner of education that visits the Alhambra but asks for the

fountain where the Abencerrages were beheaded, and gazes with horror

at the grated gallery where the queen is said to have been confined;

not a peasant of the Vega or the Sierra, but sings the story in rude

couplets, to the accompaniment of his guitar, while his hearers

learn to execrate the very name of Boabdil.

  Never, however, was name more foully and unjustly slandered. I

have examined all the authentic chronicles and letters written by

Spanish authors, contemporary with Boabdil, some of whom were in the

confidence of the Catholic sovereigns, and actually present in the

camp throughout the war. I have examined all the Arabian authorities I

could get access to, through the medium of translation, and have found

nothing to justify these dark and hateful accusations. The most of

these tales may be traced to a work commonly called The Civil Wars

of Granada, containing a pretended history of the feuds of the Zegries

and Abencerrages, during the last struggle of the Moorish empire.

The work appeared originally in Spanish, and professed to be

translated from the Arabic by one Gines Perez de Hita, an inhabitant

of Murcia. It has since passed into various languages, and Florian has

taken from it much of the fable of his Gonsalvo of Cordova; it has

thus, in a great measure, usurped the authority of real history, and

is currently believed by the people, and especially the peasantry of

Granada. The whole of it, however, is a mass of fiction, mingled

with a few disfigured truths, which give it an air of veracity. It

bears internal evidence of its falsity; the manners and customs of the

Moors being extravagantly misrepresented in it, and scenes depicted

totally incompatible with their habits and their faith, and which

never could have been recorded by a Mahometan writer.

  I confess there seems to me something almost criminal, in the wilful

perversions of this work: great latitude is undoubtedly to be

allowed to romantic fiction, but there are limits which it must not

pass; and the names of the distinguished dead, which belong to

history, are no more to be calumniated than those of the illustrious

living. One would have thought, too, that the unfortunate Boabdil

had suffered enough for his justifiable hostility to the Spaniards, by

being stripped of his kingdom, without having his name thus wantonly

traduced, and rendered a by-word and a theme of infamy in his native

land, and in the very mansion of his fathers!

  If the reader is sufficiently interested in these questions to

tolerate a little historical detail, the following facts, gleaned from

what appear to be authentic sources, and tracing the fortunes of the

Abencerrages, may serve to exculpate the unfortunate Boabdil from

the perfidious massacre of that illustrious line so shamelessly

charged to him. It will also serve to throw a proper light upon the

alleged accusation and imprisonment of his queen.

                     The Abencerrages.



  A GRAND line of distinction existed among the Moslems of Spain,

between those of Oriental origin and those from Western Africa.

Among the former the Arabs considered themselves the purest race, as

being descended from the countrymen of the Prophet, who first raised

the standard of Islam; among the latter, the most warlike and powerful

were the Berber tribes from Mount Atlas and the deserts of Sahara,

commonly known as Moors, who subdued the tribes of the sea-coast,

founded the city of Morocco, and for a long time disputed with the

oriental races the control of Moslem Spain.

  Among the oriental races the Abencerrages held a distinguished rank,

priding themselves on a pure Arab descent from the Beni Seraj, one

of the tribes who were Ansares or Companions of the Prophet. The

Abencerrages flourished for a time at Cordova; but probably repaired

to Granada after the downfall of the Western Caliphat; it was there

they attained their historical and romantic celebrity, being

foremost among the splendid chivalry which graced the court of the

Alhambra.

  Their highest and most dangerous prosperity was during the

precarious reign of Muhamed Nasar, surnamed El Hayzari, or the

Left-handed. That ill-starred monarch, when he ascended the throne

in 1423, lavished his favors upon this gallant line, making the head

of the tribe, Yusef Aben Zeragh, his vizier, or prime minister, and

advancing his relatives and friends to the most distinguished posts

about the court. This gave great offence to other tribes, and caused

intrigues among their chiefs. Muhamed lost popularity also by his

manners. He was vain, inconsiderate, and haughty; disdained to

mingle among his subjects; forbade those jousts and tournaments, the

delight of high and low; and passed his time in the luxurious

retirement of the Alhambra. The consequence was a popular

insurrection; the palace was stormed; the king escaped through the

gardens, fled to the sea-coast, crossed in disguise to Africa, and

took refuge with his kinsman, the sovereign of Tunis.

  Muhamed el Zaguer, cousin of the fugitive monarch, took possession

of the vacant throne. He pursued a different course from his

predecessor. He not only gave fetes and tourneys, but entered the

lists himself, in grand and sumptuous array; he distinguished

himself in managing his horse, in tilting, riding at the ring, and

other chivalrous exercises; feasted with his cavaliers, and made

them magnificent presents.

  Those who had been in favor with his predecessor, now experienced

a reverse; he manifested such hostility to them that more than five

hundred of the principal cavaliers left the city. Yusef Aben Zeragh,

with forty of the Abencerrages, abandoned Granada in the night, and

sought the court of Juan the king of Castile. Moved by their

representations, that young and generous monarch wrote letters to

the sovereign of Tunis, inviting him to assist in punishing the

usurper and restoring the exiled king to his throne. The faithful

and indefatigable vizier accompanied the bearer of these letters to

Tunis, where he rejoined his exiled sovereign. The letters were

successful. Muhamed el Hayzari landed in Andalusia with five hundred

African horse, and was joined by the Abencerrages and others of his

adherents and by his Christian allies; wherever he appeared the people

submitted to him; troops sent against him deserted to his standard;

Granada was recovered without a blow; the usurper retreated to the

Alhambra, but was beheaded by his own soldiers (1428), after

reigning between two and three years.

  El Hayzari, once more on the throne, heaped honors on the loyal

vizier, through whose faithful services he had been restored, and once

more the line of the Abencerrages basked in the sunshine of royal

favor. El Hayzari sent ambassadors to King Juan, thanking him for

his aid, and proposing a perpetual league of amity. The king of

Castile required homage and yearly tribute. These the left-handed

monarch refused, supposing the youthful king too, much engaged in

civil war to enforce his claims. Again the kingdom of Granada was

harassed by invasions, and its Vega laid waste. Various battles took

place with various success. But El Hayzari's greatest danger was

near at home. There was at that time in Granada a cavalier, Don

Pedro Venegas by name, a Moslem by faith, but Christian by descent,

whose early history borders on romance. He was of the noble house of

Luque, but captured when a child, eight years of age, by Cid Yahia

Alnayar, prince of Almeria, who adopted him as his son, educated him

in the Moslem faith, and brought him up among his children, the

Cetimerian princes, a proud family, descended in direct line from Aben

Hud, one of the early Granadian kings. A mutual attachment sprang up

between Don Pedro and the princess Cetimerien, a daughter of Cid

Yahia, famous for her beauty, and whose name is perpetuated by the

ruins of her palace in Granada; still bearing traces of Moorish

elegance and luxury. In process of time they were married; and thus

a scion of the Spanish house of Luque became engrafted on the royal

stock of Aben Hud.

  Such is the early story of Don Pedro Venegas, who at the time of

which we treat was a man mature in years, and of an active,

ambitious spirit. He appears to have been the soul of a conspiracy set

on foot about this time, to topple Muhamed the Left-handed from his

unsteady throne, and elevate in his place Yusef Aben Alhamar, the

eldest of the Cetimerian princes. The aid of the king of Castile was

to be secured, and Don Pedro proceeded on a secret embassy to

Cordova for the purpose. He informed King Juan of the extent of the

conspiracy; that Yusef Aben Alhamar could bring a large force to his

standard as soon as he should appear in the Vega, and would

acknowledge himself his vassal, if with his aid he should attain the

crown. The aid was promised, and Don Pedro hastened back to Granada

with the tidings. The conspirators now left the city, a few at a time,

under various pretexts; and when King Juan passed the frontier,

Yusef Aben Alhamar brought eight thousand men to his standard and

kissed his hand in token of allegiance.

  It is needless to recount the various battles by which the kingdom

was desolated, and the various intrigues by which one half of it was

roused to rebellion. The Abencerrages stood by the failing fortunes of

Muhamed throughout the struggle; their last stand was at Loxa, where

their chief, the vizier Yusef Aben Zeragh, fell bravely fighting,

and many of their noblest cavaliers were slain: in fact, in that

disastrous war the fortunes of the family were nearly wrecked.

  Again, the ill-starred Muhamed was driven from his throne, and

took refuge in Malaga, the alcayde of which still remained true to

him.

  Yusef Aben Alhamar, commonly known as Yusef II, entered Granada in

triumph on the first of January, 1432, but he found it a melancholy

city, where half of the inhabitants were in mourning. Not a noble

family but had lost some member; and in the slaughter of the

Abencerrages at Loxa, had fallen some of the brightest of the

chivalry.

  The royal pageant passed through silent streets, and the barren

homage of a court in the halls of the Alhambra ill supplied the want

of sincere and popular devotion. Yusef Aben Alhamar felt the

insecurity of his position. The deposed monarch was at hand in Malaga;

the sovereign of Tunis espoused his cause, and pleaded with the

Christian monarchs in his favor; above all, Yusef felt his own

unpopularity in Granada; previous fatigues had impaired his health,

a profound melancholy settled upon him, and in the course of six

months he sank into the grave.

  At the news of his death, Muhamed the Left-handed hastened from

Malaga, and again was placed on the throne. From the wrecks of the

Abencerrages he chose as viziers Abdelbar, one of the worthiest of

that magnanimous line. Through his advice he restrained his vindictive

feelings and adopted a conciliatory policy. He pardoned most of his

enemies. Yusef, the defunct usurper, had left three children. His

estates were apportioned among them. Aben Celim, the oldest son, was

confirmed in the title of Prince of Almeria and Lord of Marchena in

the Alpuxarras. Ahmed, the youngest, was made Senor of Luchar; and

Equivila, the daughter, received rich patrimonial lands in the fertile

Vega, and various houses and shops in the Zacatin of Granada. The

vizier Abdelbar counselled the king, moreover, to secure the adherence

of the family by matrimonial connections. An aunt of Muhamed was

accordingly given in marriage to Aben Celim, while the prince Nasar,

younger brother of the deceased usurper, received the hand of the

beautiful Lindaraxa, daughter of Muhamed's faithful adherent, the

alcayde of Malaga. This was the Lindaraxa whose name still

designates one of the gardens of the Alhambra.

  Don Pedro de Venegas alone, the husband of the princess

Cetimerien, received no favor. He was considered as having produced

the late troubles by his intrigues. The Abencerrages charged him

with the reverses of their family and the deaths of so many of their

bravest cavaliers. The king never spoke of him but by the

opprobrious appellation of the Tornadizo, or Renegade. Finding himself

in danger of arrest and punishment, he took leave of his wife, the

princess, his two sons, Abul Cacim and Reduan, and his daughter,

Cetimerien, and fled to Jaen. There, like his brother-in-law, the

usurper, he expiated his intrigues and irregular ambition by

profound humiliation and melancholy, and died in 1434 a penitent,

because a disappointed man.

  Muhamed el Hayzari was doomed to further reverses. He had two

nephews, Aben Osmyn, surnamed El Anaf, or the Lame, and Aben Ismael.

The former, who was of an ambitious spirit, resided in Almeria; the

latter in Granada, where he had many friends. He was on the point of

espousing a beautiful girl, when his royal uncle interfered and gave

her to one of his favorites. Enraged at this despotic act, the

prince Aben Ismael took horse and weapons and sallied from Granada for

the frontier, followed by numerous cavaliers. The affair gave

general disgust, especially to the Abencerrages who were attached to

the prince. No sooner did tidings reach Aben Osmyn of the public

discontent than his ambition was aroused. Throwing himself suddenly

into Granada, he raised a popular tumult, surprised his uncle in the

Alhambra, compelled him to abdicate, and proclaimed himself king. This

occurred in September, 1445.

  The Abencerrages now gave up the fortunes of the left-handed king as

hopeless, and himself as incompetent to rule. Led by their kinsman,

the vizier Abdelbar, and accompanied by many other cavaliers, they

abandoned the court and took post in Montefrio. Thence Abdelbar

wrote to Prince Aben Ismael, who had taken refuge in Castile, inviting

him to the camp, offering to support his pretensions to the throne,

and advising him to leave Castile secretly, lest his departure

should be opposed by King Juan II. The prince, however, confiding in

the generosity of the Castilian monarch, told him frankly the whole

matter. He was not mistaken. King Juan not merely gave him

permission to depart, but promised him aid, and gave him letters to

that effect to his commanders on the frontiers. Aben Ismael departed

with a brilliant escort, arrived in safety at Montefrio, and was

proclaimed king of Granada by Abdelbar and his partisans, the most

important of whom were the Abencerrages. A long course of civil wars

ensued between the two cousins, rivals for the throne. Aben Osmyn

was aided by the kings of Navarre and Aragon, while Juan II, at war

with his rebellious subjects, could give little assistance to Aben

Ismael.

  Thus for several years the country was torn by internal strife and

desolated by foreign inroads, so that scarce a field but was stained

with blood. Aben Osmyn was brave, and often signalized himself in

arms; but he was cruel and despotic, and ruled with an iron hand. He

offended the nobles by his caprices, and the populace by his

tyranny, while his rival cousin conciliated all hearts by his

benignity. Hence there were continual desertions from Granada to the

fortified camp at Montefrio, and the party of Aben Ismael was

constantly gaining strength. At length the king of Castile, having

made peace with the kings of Aragon and Navarre, was enabled to send a

choice body of troops to the assistance of Aben Ismael. The latter now

left his trenches in Montefrio, and took the field. The combined

forces marched upon Granada. Aben Osmyn sallied forth to the

encounter. A bloody battle ensued, in which both of the rival

cousins fought with heroic valor. Aben Osmyn was defeated and driven

back to his gates. He summoned the inhabitants to arms, but few

answered to his call; his cruelty had alienated all hearts. Seeing his

fortunes at an end, he determined to close his career by a signal

act of vengeance. Shutting himself up in the Alhambra, he summoned

thither a number of the principal cavaliers whom he suspected of

disloyalty. As they entered, they were one by one put to death. This

is supposed by some to be the massacre which gave its fatal name to

the Hall of the Abencerrages. Having perpetrated this atrocious act of

vengeance, and hearing by the shouts of the populace that Aben

Ismael was already proclaimed king in the city, he escaped with his

satellites by the Cerro del Sol and the valley of the Darro to the

Alpuxarra mountains, where he and his followers led a kind of robber

life, laying villages and roads under contribution.

  Aben Ismael II, who thus attained the throne in 1454, secured the

friendship of King Juan II by acts of homage and magnificent presents.

He gave liberal rewards to those who had been faithful to him, and

consoled the families of those who had fallen in his cause. During his

reign, the Abencerrages were again among the most favored of the

brilliant chivalry that graced his court. Aben Ismael, however, was

not of a warlike spirit; his reign was distinguished rather by works

of public utility, the ruins of some of which are still to be seen

on the Cerro del Sol.

  In the same year of 1454 Juan II died, and was succeeded by Henry IV

of Castile, surnamed the Impotent. Aben Ismael neglected to renew

the league of amity with him which had existed with his predecessor,

as he found it to be unpopular with the people of Granada. King

Henry resented the omission, and, under pretext of arrears of tribute,

made repeated forays into the kingdom of Granada. He gave

countenance also to Aben Osmyn and his robber hordes, and took some of

them into pay; but his proud cavaliers refused to associate with

infidel outlaws, and determined to seize Aben Osmyn; who, however,

made his escape, first to Seville, and thence to Castile.

  In the year 1456, on the occasion of a great foray into the Vega

by the Christians, Aben Ismael, to secure a peace, agreed to pay the

king of Castile a certain tribute annually, and at the same time to

liberate six hundred Christian captives; or, should the number of

captives fall short, to make it up in Moorish hostages. Aben Ismael

fulfilled the rigorous terms of the treaty, and reigned for a number

of years with more tranquillity than usually fell to the lot of the

monarchs of that belligerent kingdom. Granada enjoyed a great state of

prosperity during his reign, and was the seat of festivity and

splendor. His sultana was a daughter of Cid Hiaya Abraham Alnayar,

prince of Almeria; and he had by her two sons, Abul Hassan, and Abi

Abdallah, surnamed El Zagal, the father and uncle of Boabdil. We

approach now the eventful period signalized by the conquest of

Granada.

  Muley Abul Hassan succeeded to the throne on the death of his father

in 1465. One of his first acts was to refuse payment of the

degrading tribute exacted by the Castilian monarch. His refusal was

one of the causes of the subsequent disastrous war. I confine

myself, however, to facts connected with the fortunes of the

Abencerrages and the charges advanced against Boabdil.

  The reader will recollect that Don Pedro Venegas, surnamed El

Tornadizo, when he fled from Granada in 1433, left behind him two

sons, Abul Cacim and Reduan, and a daughter, Cetimerien. They always

enjoyed a distinguished rank in Granada, from their royal descent by

the mother's side; and from being connected, through the princes of

Almeria, with the last and the present king. The sons had

distinguished themselves by their talents and bravery, and the

daughter Cetimerien was married to Cid Hiaya, grandson of King Yusef

and brother-in-law of El Zagal. Thus powerfully connected, it is not

surprising to find Abul Cacim Venegas advanced to the post of vizier

of Muley Abul Hassan, and Reduan Venegas one of his most favored

generals. Their rise was regarded with an evil eye by the

Abencerrages, who remembered the disasters brought upon their

family, and the deaths of so many of their line, in the war fomented

by the intrigues of Don Pedro, in the days of Yusef Aben Alhamar. A

feud had existed ever since between the Abencerrages and the house

of Venegas. It was soon to be aggravated by a formidable schism

which took place in the royal harem.

  Muley Abul Hassan, in his youthful days, had married his cousin, the

princess Ayxa la Horra, daughter of his uncle, the ill-starred sultan,

Muhamed the Left-handed; by her he had two sons, the eldest of whom

was Boabdil, heir presumptive to the throne. Unfortunately at an

advanced age he took another wife, Isabella de Solis, a young and

beautiful Christian captive; better known by her Moorish appellation

of Zoraya; by her he had also two sons. Two factions were produced

in the palace by the rivalry of the sultanas, who were each anxious to

secure for their children the succession to the throne. Zoraya was

supported by the vizier Abul Cacim Venegas, his brother Reduan

Venegas, and their numerous connections, partly through sympathy

with her as being, like themselves, of Christian lineage, and partly

because they saw she was the favorite of the doting monarch.

  The Abencerrages, on the contrary, rallied round the sultana Ayxa;

partly through hereditary opposition to the family of Venegas, but

chiefly, no doubt, through a strong feeling of loyalty to her as

daughter of Muhamed Alhayzari, the ancient benefactor of their line.

  The dissensions of the palace went on increasing. Intrigues of all

kinds took place, as is usual in royal palaces. Suspicions were

artfully instilled in the mind of Muley Abul Hassan that Ayxa was

engaged in a plot to depose him and put her son Boabdil on the throne.

In his first transports of rage he confined them both in the Tower

of Comares, threatening the life of Boabdil. At dead of night the

anxious mother lowered her son from a window of the tower by the

scarfs of herself and her female attendants; and some of her

adherents, who were in waiting with swift horses, bore him away to the

Alpuxarras. It is this imprisonment of the sultana Ayxa which possibly

gave rise to the fable of the queen of Boabdil being confined by him

in a tower to be tried for her life. No other shadow of a ground

exists for it, and here we find the tyrant jailer was his father,

and the captive sultana, his mother.

  The massacre of the Abencerrages in the halls of the Alhambra, is

placed by some about this time, and attributed also to Muley Abul

Hassan, on suspicion of their being concerned in the conspiracy. The

sacrifice of a number of the cavaliers of that line is said to have

been suggested by the vizier Abul Cacim Venegas, as a means of

striking terror into the rest. If such were really the case, the

barbarous measure proved abortive. The Abencerrages continued

intrepid, as they were loyal, in their adherence to the cause of

Ayxa and her son Boabdil, throughout the war which ensued, while the

Venegas were ever foremost in the ranks of Muley Abul Hassan and El

Zagal. The ultimate fortunes of these rival families is worthy of

note. The Venegas, in the last struggle of Granada, were among those

who submitted to the conquerors, renounced the Moslem creed,

returned to the faith from which their ancestor had apostatized,

were rewarded with offices and estates, intermarried with Spanish

families, and have left posterity among the nobles of the land. The

Abencerrages remained true to their faith, true to their king, true to

their desperate cause, and went down with the foundering wreck of

Moslem domination, leaving nothing behind them but a gallant and

romantic name in history.

  In this historical outline, I trust I have shown enough to put the

fable concerning Boabdil and the Abencerrages in a true light. The

story of the accusation of his queen, and his cruelty to his sister,

are equally void of foundation. In his domestic relations he appears

to have been kind and affectionate. History gives him but one wife,

Morayma, the daughter of the veteran alcayde of Loxa, old Aliatar,

famous in song and story for his exploits in border warfare; and who

fell in that disastrous foray into the Christian lands in which

Boabdil was taken prisoner. Morayma was true to Boabdil throughout all

his vicissitudes. When he was dethroned by the Castilian monarchs, she

retired with him to the petty domain allotted him in the valleys of

the Alpuxarras. It was only when (dispossessed of this by the

jealous precautions and subtle chicanery of Ferdinand, and elbowed, as

it were, out of his native land) he was preparing to embark for

Africa, that her health and spirits, exhausted by anxiety and long

suffering, gave way, and she fell into a lingering illness, aggravated

by corroding melancholy. Boabdil was constant and affectionate to

her to the last; the sailing of the ships was delayed for several

weeks, to the great annoyance of the suspicious Ferdinand. At length

Morayma sank into the grave, evidently the victim of a broken heart,

and the event was reported to Ferdinand by his agent, as one

propitious to his purposes, removing the only obstacle to the

embarkation of Boabdil.
