




                 A Fete in the Alhambra.



  THE SAINT'S day of my neighbor and rival potentate, the count,

took place during his sojourn in the Alhambra, on which occasion he

gave a domestic fate; assembling round him the members of his family

and household, while the stewards and old servants from his distant

possessions came to pay him reverence and partake of the good cheer,

which was sure to be provided. It presented a type, though doubtless a

faint one, of the establishment of a Spanish noble in the olden time.

  The Spaniards were always grandiose in their notions of style.

Huge palaces; lumbering equipages, laden with footmen and lackeys;

pompous retinues, and useless dependents of all kinds; the dignity

of a noble seemed commensurate with the legions who loitered about his

halls, fed at his expense, and seemed ready to devour him alive. This,

doubtless, originated in the necessity of keeping up hosts of armed

retainers during the wars with the Moors, wars of inroads and

surprises, when a noble was liable to be suddenly assailed in his

castle by a foray of the enemy, or summoned to the field by his

sovereign.

  The custom remained after the wars were at an end, and what

originated in necessity was kept up through ostentation. The wealth

which flowed into the country from conquests and discoveries

fostered the passion for princely establishments. According to

magnificent old Spanish usage, in which pride and generosity bore

equal parts, a superannuated servant was never turned off, but

became a charge for the rest of his days; nay, his children, and his

children's children, and often their relatives to the right and

left, became gradually entailed upon the family. Hence the huge

palaces of the Spanish nobility which have such an air of empty

ostentation from the greatness of their size compared with the

mediocrity and scantiness of their furniture, were absolutely required

in the golden days of Spain, by the patriarchal habits of their

possessors. They were little better than vast barracks for the

hereditary generations of hangers on, that battened at the expense

of a Spanish noble.

  These patriarchal habits of the Spanish nobility have declined

with their revenues; though the spirit which prompted them remains,

and wars sadly with their altered fortunes. The poorest among them

have always some hereditary hangers on, who live at their expense, and

make them poorer. Some who, like my neighbor the count, retain a

modicum of their once princely possessions, keep up a shadow of the

ancient system, and their estates are overrun and the produce consumed

by generations of idle retainers.

  The count held estates in various parts of the kingdom, some

including whole villages, yet the revenues collected from them were

comparatively small; some of them, he assured me, barely fed the

hordes of dependents nestled upon them, who seemed to consider

themselves entitled to live rent free and be maintained into the

bargain, because their forefathers had been so since time immemorial.

  The saint's day of the old count gave me a glimpse into a Spanish

interior. For two or three days previous preparations were made for

the fete. Viands of all kinds were brought up from town, greeting

the olfactory nerves of the old invalid guards, as they were borne

past them through the Gate of Justice. Servants hurried officiously

about the courts; the ancient kitchen of the palace was again alive

with the tread of cooks and scullions, and blazed with unwonted fires.

  When the day arrived I beheld the old count in patriarchal state,

his family and household around him, with functionaries who mismanaged

his estates at a distance and consumed the proceeds; while numerous

old worn-out servants and pensioners were loitering about the courts

and keeping within smell of the kitchen.

  It was a joyous day in the Alhambra. The guests dispersed themselves

about the palace before the hour of dinner, enjoying the luxuries of

its courts and fountains, and embosomed gardens, and music and

laughter resounded through its late silent halls.

  The feast, for a set dinner in Spain is literally a feast, was

served in the beautiful Morisco Hall of "Las Dos Hermanas." The

table was loaded with all the luxuries of the season; there was an

almost interminable succession of dishes; showing how truly the

feast at the rich Camacho's wedding in Don Quixote was a picture of

a Spanish banquet. A joyous conviviality prevailed round the board;

for though Spaniards are generally abstemious, they are complete

revellers on occasions like the present, and none more so than the

Andalusians. For my part, there was something peculiarly exciting in

thus sitting at a feast in the royal halls of the Alhambra, given by

one who might claim remote affinity with its Moorish kings, and who

was a lineal representative of Gonsalvo of Cordova, one of the most

distinguished of the Christian conquerors.

  The banquet ended, the company adjourned to the Hall of Ambassadors.

Here every one endeavored to contribute to the general amusement,

singing, improvising, telling wonderful tales, or dancing popular

dances to that all-pervading talisman of Spanish pleasure, the guitar.

  The count's gifted little daughter was as usual the life and delight

of the assemblage, and I was more than ever struck with her aptness

and wonderful versatility. She took a part in two or three scenes of

elegant comedy with some of her companions, and performed them with

exquisite point and finished grace; she gave imitations of the popular

Italian singers, some serious, some comic, with a rare quality of

voice, and, I was assured, with singular fidelity; she imitated the

dialects, dances, ballads, and movements and manners of the gipsies,

and the peasants of the Vega, with equal felicity, but every thing was

done with an all-pervading grace and a lady-like tact perfectly

fascinating.

  The great charm of every thing she did was its freedom from

pretension or ambitious display, its happy spontaneity. Every thing

sprang from the impulse of the moment; or was in prompt compliance

with a request. She seemed unconscious of the rarity and extent of her

own talent, and was like a child at home revelling in the buoyancy

of its own gay and innocent spirits. Indeed I was told she had never

exerted her talents in general society, but only, as at present, in

the domestic circle.

  Her faculty of observation and her perception of character must have

been remarkably quick, for she could have had only casual and

transient glances at the scenes, manners and customs, depicted with

such truth and spirit. "Indeed it is a continual wonder to us," said

the countess, "where the child (la Nina) has picked up these things;

her life being passed almost entirely at home, in the bosom of the

family."

  Evening approached; twilight began to throw its shadows about the

halls, and the bats to steal forth from their lurking-place and flit

about. A notion seized the little damsel and some of her youthful

companions, to set out, under the guidance of Dolores, and explore the

less frequented parts of the palace in quest of mysteries and

enchantments. Thus conducted, they peeped fearfully into the gloomy

old mosque, but quick drew back on being told that a Moorish king

had been murdered there; they ventured into the mysterious regions

of the bath, frightening themselves with the sounds and murmurs of

hidden aqueducts, and flying with mock panic at the alarm of phantom

Moors. They then undertook the adventure of the Iron Gate, a place

of baleful note in the Alhambra. It is a postern gate, opening into

a dark ravine; a narrow covered way leads down to it, which used to be

the terror of Dolores and her playmates in childhood, as it was said a

hand without a body would sometimes be stretched out from the wall and

seize hold of the passers by.

  The little party of enchantment hunters ventured to the entrance

of the covered way, but nothing would tempt them to enter, in this

hour of gathering gloom; they dreaded the grasp of the phantom arm.

  At length they came running back into the Hall of Ambassadors in a

mock paroxysm of terror; they had positively seen two spectral figures

all in white. They had not stopped to examine them; but could not be

mistaken, for they glared distinctly through the surrounding gloom.

Dolores soon arrived and explained the mystery. The spectres proved to

be two statues of nymphs in white marble, placed at the entrance of

a vaulted passage. Upon this a grave, but, as I thought, somewhat

sly old gentleman present, who, I believe, was the count's advocate or

legal adviser, assured them that these statues were connected with one

of the greatest mysteries of the Alhambra; that there was a curious

history concerning them, and moreover, that they stood a living

monument in marble of female secrecy and discretion. All present

entreated him to tell the history of the statues. He took a little

time to recollect the details, and then gave them in substance the

following legend.

             Legend of the Two Discreet Statues.



  THERE lived once in a waste apartment of the Alhambra, a merry

little fellow, named Lope Sanchez, who worked in the gardens, and

was as brisk and blithe as a grasshopper, singing all day long. He was

the life and soul of the fortress; when his work was over, he would

sit on one of the stone benches of the esplanade, strum his guitar,

and sing long ditties about the Cid, and Bernardo del Carpio, and

Fernando del Pulgar, and other Spanish heroes, for the amusement of

the old soldiers of the fortress, or would strike up a merrier tune,

and set the girls dancing boleros and fandangos.

  Like most little men, Lope Sanchez had a strapping buxom dame for

a wife, who could almost have put him in her pocket; but he lacked the

usual poor man's lot- instead of ten children he had but one. This was

a little black-eyed girl about twelve years of age, named Sanchica,

who was as merry as himself, and the delight of his heart. She

played about him as he worked in the gardens, danced to his guitar

as he sat in the shade, and ran as wild as a young fawn about the

groves and alleys and ruined halls of the Alhambra.

  It was now the eve of the blessed St. John, and the holiday-loving

gossips of the Alhambra, men, women, and children, went up at night to

the mountain of the sun, which rises above the Generalife, to keep

their midsummer vigil on its level summit. It was a bright moonlight

night, and all the mountains were gray and silvery, and the city, with

its domes and spires, lay in shadows below, and the Vega was like a

fairy land, with haunted streams gleaming among its dusky groves. On

the highest part of the mountain they lit up a bonfire, according to

an old custom of the country handed down from the Moors. The

inhabitants of the surrounding country were keeping a similar vigil,

and bonfires, here and there in the Vega, and along the folds of the

mountains, blazed up palely in the moonlight.

  The evening was gayly passed in dancing to the guitar of Lope

Sanchez, who was never so joyous as when on a holiday revel of the

kind. While the dance was going on, the little Sanchica with some of

her playmates sported among the ruins of an old Moorish fort that

crowns the mountain, when, in gathering pebbles in the fosse, she

found a small hand curiously carved of jet, the fingers closed, and

the thumb firmly clasped upon them. Overjoyed with her good fortune,

she ran to her mother with her prize. It immediately became a

subject of sage speculation, and was eyed by some with superstitious

distrust. "Throw it away," said one; "it's Moorish- depend upon it,

there's mischief and witchcraft in it." "By no means," said another;

"you may sell it for something to the jewellers of the Zacatin."

  In the midst of this discussion an old tawny soldier drew near,

who had served in Africa, and was as swarthy as a Moor. He examined

the hand with a knowing look. "I have seen things of this kind,"

said he, "among the Moors of Barbary. It is a great virtue to guard

against the evil eye, and all kinds of spells and enchantments. I give

you joy, friend Lope, this bodes good luck to your child."

  Upon hearing this, the wife of Lope Sanchez tied the little hand

of jet to a ribbon, and hung it round the neck of her daughter.

  The sight of this talisman called up all the favorite

superstitions about the Moors. The dance was neglected, and they sat

in groups on the ground, telling old legendary tales handed down

from their ancestors. Some of their stories turned upon the wonders of

the very mountain upon which they were seated, which is a famous

hobgoblin region. One ancient crone gave a long account of the

subterranean palace in the bowels of that mountain where Boabdil and

all his Moslem court are said to remain enchanted. "Among yonder

ruins," said she, pointing to some crumbling walls and mounds of earth

on a distant part of the mountain, "there is a deep black pit that

goes down, down into the very heart of the mountain. For all the money

in Granada I would not look down into it. Once upon a time a poor

man of the Alhambra, who tended goats upon this mountain, scrambled

down into that pit after a kid that had fallen in. He came out again

all wild and staring, and told such things of what he had seen, that

every one thought his brain was turned. He raved for a day or two

about the hobgoblin Moors that had pursued him in the cavern, and

could hardly be persuaded to drive his goats up again to the mountain.

He did so at last, but, poor man, he never came down again. The

neighbors found his goats browsing about the Moorish ruins, and his

hat and mantle lying near the mouth of the pit, but he was never

more heard of."

  The little Sanchica listened with breathless attention to this

story. She was of a curious nature, and felt immediately a great

hankering to peep into this dangerous pit. Stealing away from her

companions she sought the distant ruins, and after groping for some

time among them came to a small hollow, or basin, near the brow of the

mountain, where it swept steeply down into the valley of the Darro. In

the centre of this basin yawned the mouth of the pit. Sanchica

ventured to the verge, and peeped in. All was as black as pitch, and

gave an idea of immeasurable depth. Her blood ran cold; she drew back,

then peeped in again, then would have run away, then took another

peep- the very horror of the thing was delightful to her. At length

she rolled a large stone, and pushed it over the brink. For some

time it fell in silence; then struck some rocky projection with a

violent crash, then rebounded from side to side, rumbling and

tumbling, with a noise like thunder, then made a final splash into

water, far, far below- and all was again silent.

  The silence, however, did not long continue. It seemed as if

something had been awakened within this dreary abyss. A murmuring

sound gradually rose out of the pit like the hum and buzz of a

beehive. It grew louder and louder; there was the confusion of

voices as of a distant multitude, together with the faint din of arms,

clash of cymbals and clangor of trumpets, as if some army were

marshalling for battle in the very bowels of the mountain.

  The child drew off with silent awe, and hastened back to the place

where she had left her parents and their companions. All were gone.

The bonfire was expiring, and its last wreath of smoke curling up in

the moonshine. The distant fires that had blazed along the mountains

and in the Vega were all extinguished, and every thing seemed to

have sunk to repose. Sanchica called her parents and some of her

companions by name, but received no reply. She ran down the side of

the mountain, and by the gardens of the Generalife, until she

arrived in the alley of trees leading to the Alhambra, when she seated

herself on a bench of a woody recess to recover breath. The bell

from the watchtower of the Alhambra tolled midnight. There was a

deep tranquillity as if all nature slept, excepting the low tinkling

sound of an unseen stream that ran under the covert of the bushes. The

breathing sweetness of the atmosphere was lulling her to sleep, when

her eye was caught by something glittering at a distance, and to her

surprise she beheld a long cavalcade of Moorish warriors pouring

down the mountain side and along the leafy avenues. Some were armed

with lances and shields, others with cimeters and battle-axes, and

with polished cuirasses that flashed in the moonbeams. Their horses

pranced proudly and champed upon their bits, but their tramp caused no

more sound than if they had been shod with felt, and the riders were

all as pale as death. Among them rode a beautiful lady, with a crowned

head and long golden locks entwined with pearls. The housings of her

palfrey were of crimson velvet embroidered with gold, and swept the

earth; but she rode all disconsolate, with eyes ever fixed upon the

ground.

  Then succeeded a train of courtiers magnificently arrayed in robes

and turbans of divers colors, and amidst them, on a cream-colored

charger, rode King Boabdil el Chico, in a royal mantle covered with

jewels, and a crown sparkling with diamonds. The little Sanchica

knew him by his yellow beard, and his resemblance to his portrait,

which she had often seen in the picture gallery of the Generalife. She

gazed in wonder and admiration at this royal pageant, as it passed

glistening among the trees; but though she knew these monarchs and

courtiers and warriors, so pale and silent, were out of the common

course of nature, and things of magic and enchantment, yet she

looked on with a bold heart, such courage did she derive from the

mystic talisman of the hand, which was suspended about her neck.

  The cavalcade having passed by, she rose and followed. It

continued on to the great Gate of Justice, which stood wide open;

the old invalid sentinels on duty lay on the stone benches of the

barbican, buried in profound and apparently charmed sleep, and the

phantom pageant swept noiselessly by them with flaunting banner and

triumphant state. Sanchica would have followed; but to her surprise

she beheld an opening in the earth, within the barbican, leading

down beneath the foundations of the tower. She entered for a little

distance, and was encouraged to proceed by finding steps rudely hewn

in the rock, and a vaulted passage here and there lit up by a silver

lamp, which, while it gave light, diffused likewise a grateful

fragrance. Venturing on, she came at last to a great hall, wrought out

of the heart of the mountain, magnificently furnished in the Moorish

style, and lighted up by silver and crystal lamps. Here, on an

ottoman, sat an old man in Moorish dress, with a long white beard,

nodding and dozing, with a staff in his hand, which seemed ever to

be slipping from his grasp; while at a little distance sat a beautiful

lady, in ancient Spanish dress, with a coronet all sparkling with

diamonds, and her hair entwined with pearls, who was softly playing on

a silver lyre. The little Sanchica now recollected a story she had

heard among the old people of the Alhambra, concerning a Gothic

princess confined in the centre of the mountain by an old Arabian

magician, whom she kept bound up in magic sleep by the power of music.

  The lady paused with surprise at seeing a mortal in that enchanted

hall. "Is it the eve of the blessed St. John?" said she.

  "It is," replied Sanchica.

  "Then for one night the magic charm is suspended. Come hither,

child, and fear not. I am a Christian like thyself, though bound

here by enchantment. Touch my fetters with the talisman that hangs

about thy neck, and for this night I shall be free."

  So saying, she opened her robes and displayed a broad golden band

round her waist, and a golden chain that fastened her to the ground.

The child hesitated not to apply the little hand of jet to the

golden band, and immediately the chain fell to the earth. At the sound

the old man woke and began to rub his eyes; but the lady ran her

fingers over the chords of the lyre, and again he fell into a

slumber and began to nod, and his staff to falter in his hand.

"Now," said the lady, "touch his staff with the talismanic hand of

jet." The child did so, and it fell from his grasp, and he sank in a

deep sleep on the ottoman. The lady gently laid the silver lyre on the

ottoman, leaning it against the head of the sleeping magician; then

touching the chords until they vibrated in his ear- "O potent spirit

of harmony," said she, "continue thus to hold his senses in thraldom

till the return of day. Now follow me, my child," continued she,

"and thou shalt behold the Alhambra as it was in the days of its

glory, for thou hast a magic talisman that reveals all

enchantments." Sanchica followed the lady in silence. They passed up

through the entrance of the cavern into the barbican of the Gate of

Justice, and thence to the Plaza de los Algibes, or esplanade within

the fortress.

  This was all filled with Moorish soldiery, horse and foot,

marshalled in squadrons, with banners displayed. There were royal

guards also at the portal, and rows of African blacks with drawn

cimeters. No one spoke a word, and Sanchica passed on fearlessly after

her conductor. Her astonishment increased on entering the royal

palace, in which she had been reared. The broad moonshine lit up all

the halls and courts and gardens almost as brightly as if it were day,

but revealed a far different scene from that to which she was

accustomed. The walls of the apartments were no longer stained and

rent by time. Instead of cobwebs, they were now hung with rich silks

of Damascus, and the gildings and arabesque paintings were restored to

their original brilliancy and freshness. The halls, no longer naked

and unfurnished, were set out with divans and ottomans of the rarest

stuffs, embroidered with pearls and studded with precious gems, and

all the fountains in the courts and gardens were playing.

  The kitchens were again in full operation; cooks were busy preparing

shadowy dishes, and roasting and boiling the phantoms of pullets and

partridges: servants were hurrying to and fro with silver dishes

heaped up with dainties, and arranging a delicious banquet. The

Court of Lions was thronged with guards, and courtiers, and

alfaquis, as in the old times of the Moors; and at the upper end, in

the saloon of judgment, sat Boabdil on his throne, surrounded by his

court, and swaying a shadowy sceptre for the night. Notwithstanding

all this throng and seeming bustle, not a voice nor a footstep was

to be heard; nothing interrupted the midnight silence but the

splashing of the fountains. The little Sanchica followed her

conductress in mute amazement about the palace, until they came to a

portal opening to the vaulted passages beneath the great Tower of

Comares. On each side of the portal sat the figure of a nymph, wrought

out of alabaster. Their heads were turned aside, and their regards

fixed upon the same spot within the vault. The enchanted lady

paused, and beckoned the child to her.

  "Here," said she, "is a great secret, which I will reveal to thee in

reward for thy faith and courage. These discreet statues watch over

a treasure hidden in old times by a Moorish king. Tell thy father to

search the spot on which their eyes are fixed, and he will find what

will make him richer than any man in Granada. Thy innocent hands

alone, however, gifted as thou art also with the talisman, can

remove the treasure. Bid thy father use it discreetly, and devote a

part of it to the performance of daily masses for my deliverance

from this unholy enchantment."

  When the lady had spoken these words, she led the child onward to

the little garden of Lindaraxa, which is hard by the vault of the

statues. The moon trembled upon the waters of the solitary fountain in

the centre of the garden, and shed a tender light upon the orange

and citron trees. The beautiful lady plucked a branch of myrtle and

wreathed it round the head of the child. "Let this be a memento", said

she, "of what I have revealed to thee, and a testimonial of its truth.

My hour is come; I must return to the enchanted hall; follow me not,

lest evil befall thee- farewell. Remember what I have said, and have

masses performed for my deliverance." So saying, the lady entered a

dark passage leading beneath the Tower of Comares, and was no longer

seen.

  The faint crowing of a cock was now heard from the cottages below

the Alhambra, in the valley of the Darro, and a pale streak of light

began to appear above the eastern mountains. A slight wind arose,

there was a sound like the rustling of dry leaves through the courts

and corridors, and door after door shut to with a jarring sound.

  Sanchica returned to the scenes she had so lately beheld thronged

with the shadowy multitude, but Boabdil and his phantom court were

gone. The moon shone into empty halls and galleries stripped of

their transient splendor, stained and dilapidated by time, and hung

with cobwebs. The bat flitted about in the uncertain light, and the

frog croaked from the fish-pond.

  Sanchica now made the best of her way to a remote staircase that led

up to the humble apartment occupied by her family. The door as usual

was open, for Lope Sanchez was too poor to need bolt or bar; she crept

quietly to her pallet, and, putting the myrtle wreath beneath her

pillow, soon fell asleep.

  In the morning she related all that had befallen her to her

father. Lope Sanchez, however, treated the whole as a mere dream,

and laughed at the child for her credulity. He went forth to his

customary labors in the garden, but had not been there long when his

little daughter came running to him almost breathless. "Father!

father!" cried she, "behold the myrtle wreath which the Moorish lady

bound round my head."

  Lope Sanchez gazed with astonishment, for the stalk of the myrtle

was of pure gold, and every leaf was a sparkling emerald! Being not

much accustomed to precious stones, he was ignorant of the real

value of the wreath, but he saw enough to convince him that it was

something more substantial than the stuff of which dreams are

generally made, and that at any rate the child had dreamt to some

purpose. His first care was to enjoin the most absolute secrecy upon

his daughter; in this respect, however, he was secure, for she had

discretion far beyond her years or sex. He then repaired to the vault,

where stood the statues of the two alabaster nymphs. He remarked

that their heads were turned from the portal, and that the regards

of each were fixed upon the same point in the interior of the

building. Lope Sanchez could not but admire this most discreet

contrivance for guarding a secret. He drew a line from the eyes of the

statues to the point of regard, made a private mark on the wall, and

then retired.

  All day, however, the mind of Lope Sanchez was distracted with a

thousand cares. He could not help hovering within distant view of

the two statues, and became nervous from the dread that the golden

secret might be discovered. Every footstep that approached the place

made him tremble. He would have given any thing could he but have

turned the heads of the statues, forgetting that they had looked

precisely in the same direction for some hundreds of years, without

any person being the wiser.

  "A plague upon them!" he would say to himself, "they'll betray

all; did ever mortal hear of such a mode of guarding a secret?" Then

on hearing any one advance, he would steal off, as though his very

lurking near the place would awaken suspicion. Then he would return

cautiously, and peep from a distance to see if every thing was secure,

but the sight of the statues would again call forth his indignation.

"Ay, there they stand," would he say, "always looking, and looking,

and looking, just where they should not. Confound them! they are

just like all their sex; if they have not tongues to tattle with,

they'll be sure to do it with their eyes."

  At length, to his relief, the long anxious day drew to a close.

The sound of footsteps was no longer heard in the echoing halls of the

Alhambra; the last stranger passed the threshold, the great portal was

barred and bolted, and the bat and the frog and the hooting owl

gradually resumed their nightly vocations in the deserted palace.

  Lope Sanchez waited, however, until the night was far advanced

before he ventured with his little daughter to the hall of the two

nymphs. He found them looking as knowingly and mysteriously as ever at

the secret place of deposit. "By your leaves, gentle ladies,"

thought Lope Sanchez, as he passed between them, "I will relieve you

from this charge that must have set so heavy in your minds for the

last two or three centuries." He accordingly went to work at the

part of the wall which he had marked, and in a little while laid

open a concealed recess, in which stood two great jars of porcelain.

He attempted to draw them forth, but they were immovable, until

touched by the innocent hand of his little daughter. With her aid he

dislodged them from their niche, and found, to his great joy, that

they were filled with pieces of Moorish gold, mingled with jewels

and precious stones. Before daylight he managed to convey them to

his chamber, and left the two guardian statues with their eyes still

fixed on the vacant wall.

  Lope Sanchez had thus on a sudden become a rich man; but riches,

as usual, brought a world of cares to which he had hitherto been a

stranger. How was he to convey away his wealth with safety? How was he

even to enter upon the enjoyment of it without awakening suspicion?

Now, too, for the first time in his life the dread of robbers

entered into his mind. He looked with terror at the insecurity of

his habitation, and went to work to barricade the doors and windows;

yet after all his precautions he could not sleep soundly. His usual

gayety was at an end, he had no longer a joke or a song for his

neighbors, and, in short, became the most miserable animal in the

Alhambra. His old comrades remarked this alteration, pitied him

heartily, and began to desert him; thinking he must be falling into

want, and in danger of looking to them for assistance. Little did they

suspect that his only calamity was riches.

  The wife of Lope Sanchez shared his anxiety, but then she had

ghostly comfort. We ought before this to have mentioned that Lope,

being rather a light inconsiderate little man, his wife was

accustomed, in all grave matters, to seek the counsel and ministry

of her confessor Fray Simon, a sturdy, broad-shouldered, blue-bearded,

bullet-headed friar of the neighboring convent of San Francisco, who

was in fact the spiritual comforter of half the good wives of the

neighborhood. He was moreover in great esteem among divers sisterhoods

of nuns; who requited him for his ghostly services by frequent

presents of those little dainties and knick-knacks manufactured in

convents, such as delicate confections, sweet biscuits, and bottles of

spiced cordials, found to be marvellous restoratives after fasts and

vigils.

  Fray Simon thrived in the exercise of his functions. His oily skin

glistened in the sunshine as he toiled up the hill of the Alhambra

on a sultry day. Yet notwithstanding his sleek condition, the

knotted rope round his waist showed the austerity of his

self-discipline; the multitude doffed their caps to him as a mirror of

piety, and even the dogs scented the odor of sanctity that exhaled

from his garments, and howled from their kennels as he passed.

  Such was Fray Simon, the spiritual counsellor of the comely wife

of Lope Sanchez; and as the father confessor is the domestic confidant

of women in humble life in Spain, he was soon acquainted, in great

secrecy, with the story of the hidden treasure.

  The friar opened his eyes and mouth and crossed himself a dozen

times at the news. After a moment's pause, "Daughter of my soul!" said

he, "know that thy husband has committed a double sin- a sin against

both state and church! The treasure he hath thus seized upon for

himself, being found in the royal domains, belongs of course to the

crown; but being infidel wealth, rescued as it were from the very

fangs of Satan, should be devoted to the church. Still, however, the

matter may be accommodated. Bring hither thy myrtle wreath."

  When the good father beheld it, his eyes twinkled more than ever

with admiration of the size and beauty of the emeralds. "This," said

he, "being the first-fruits of this discovery, should be dedicated

to pious purposes. I will hang it up as a votive offering before the

image of San Francisco in our chapel, and will earnestly pray to

him, this very night, that your husband be permitted to remain in

quiet possession of your wealth."

  The good dame was delighted to make her peace with heaven at so

cheap a rate, and the friar putting the wreath under his mantle,

departed with saintly steps toward his convent.

  When Lope Sanchez came home, his wife told him what had passed. He

was excessively provoked, for he lacked his wife's devotion, and had

for some time groaned in secret at the domestic visitations of the

friar. "Woman," said he, "what hast thou done? thou hast put every

thing at hazard by thy tattling."

  "What!" cried the good woman, "would you forbid my disburdening my

conscience to my confessor?"

  "No, wife! confess as many of your own sins as you please; but as to

this money-digging, it is a sin of my own, and my conscience is very

easy under the weight of it."

  There was no use, however, in complaining; the secret was told, and,

like water spilled on the sand, was not again to be gathered. Their

only chance was, that the friar would be discreet.

  The next day, while Lope Sanchez was abroad there was a humble

knocking at the door, and Fray Simon entered with meek and demure

countenance.

  "Daughter," said he, "I have earnestly prayed to San Francisco,

and he has heard my prayer. In the dead of the night the saint

appeared to me in a dream, but with a frowning aspect. 'Why,' said he,

'dost thou pray to me to dispense with this treasure of the

Gentiles, when thou seest the poverty of my chapel? Go to the house of

Lope Sanchez, crave in my name a portion of the Moorish gold, to

furnish two candlesticks for the main altar, and let him possess the

residue in peace.'

  When the good woman heard of this vision, she crossed herself with

awe, and going to the secret place where Lope had hid the treasure,

she filled a great leathern purse with pieces of Moorish gold, and

gave it to the friar. The pious monk bestowed upon her, in return,

benedictions enough, if paid by Heaven. to enrich her race to the

latest posterity; then slipping the purse into the sleeve of his

habit, he folded his hands upon his breast, and departed with an air

of humble thankfulness.

  When Lope Sanchez heard of this second donation to the church, he

had well nigh lost his senses. "Unfortunate man," cried he, "what will

become of me? I shall be robbed by piece-meal; I shall be ruined and

brought to beggary!"

  It was with the utmost difficulty that his wife could pacify him, by

reminding him of the countless wealth that yet remained, and how

considerate it was for San Francisco to rest contented with so small a

portion.

  Unluckily, Fray Simon had a number of poor relations to be

provided for, not to mention some half-dozen sturdy bullet-headed

orphan children, and destitute foundlings that he had taken under

his care. He repeated his visits, therefore, from day to day, with

solicitations on behalf of Saint Dominick, Saint Andrew, Saint

James, until poor Lope was driven to despair, and found that unless he

got out of the reach of this holy friar, he should have to make

peace-offerings to every saint in the calendar. He determined,

therefore, to pack up his remaining wealth, beat a secret retreat in

the night, and make off to another part of the kingdom.

  Full of his project, he bought a stout mule for the purpose, and

tethered it in a gloomy vault underneath the Tower of the Seven

Floors- the very place whence the Belludo, or goblin horse, is said to

issue forth at midnight, and scour the streets of Granada, pursued

by a pack of hell-hounds. Lope Sanchez had little faith in the

story, but availed himself of the dread occasioned by it, knowing that

no one would be likely to pry into the subterranean stable of the

phantom steed. He sent off his family in the course of the day with

orders to wait for him at a distant village of the Vega. As the

night advanced, he conveyed his treasure to the vault under the tower,

and having loaded his mule, he led it forth, and cautiously

descended the dusky avenue.

  Honest Lope had taken his measures with the utmost secrecy,

imparting them to no one but the faithful wife of his bosom. By some

miraculous revelation, however, they became known to Fray Simon. The

zealous friar beheld these infidel treasures on the point of

slipping for ever out of his grasp, and determined to have one more

dash at them for the benefit of the church and San Francisco.

Accordingly, when the bells had rung for animas, and all the

Alhambra was quiet, he stole out of his convent, and descending

through the Gate of Justice, concealed himself among the thickets of

roses and laurels that border the great avenue. Here he remained,

counting the quarters of hours as they were sounded on the bell of the

watchtower, and listening to the dreary hootings of owls, and the

distant barking of dogs from the gipsy caverns.

  At length he heard the tramp of hoofs, and, through the gloom of the

overshadowing trees, imperfectly beheld a steed descending the avenue.

The sturdy friar chuckled at the idea of the knowing turn he was about

to serve honest Lope.

  Tucking up the skirts of his habit, and wriggling like a cat

watching a mouse, he waited until his prey was directly before him,

when darting forth from his leafy covert, and putting one hand on

the shoulder and the other on the crupper, he made a vault that

would not have disgraced the most experienced master of equitation,

and alighted well-forked astride the steed. "Ah ha!" said the sturdy

friar, "we shall now see who best understands the game." He had scarce

uttered the words when the mule began to kick, and rear, and plunge,

and then set off full speed down the hill. The friar attempted to

check him, but in vain. He bounded from rock to rock, and bush to

bush; the friar's habit was torn to ribbons and fluttered in the wind,

his shaven poll received many a hard knock from the branches of the

trees, and many a scratch from the brambles. To add to his terror

and distress, he found a pack of seven hounds in full cry at his

heels, and perceived, too late, that he was actually mounted upon

the terrible Belludo!

  Away then they went, according to the ancient phrase, "pull devil,

pull friar," down the great avenue, across the Plaza Nueva, along

the Zacatin, around the Vivarrambla- never did huntsman and hound make

a more furious run, or more infernal uproar. In vain did the friar

invoke every saint in the calendar, and the holy Virgin into the

bargain; every time he mentioned a name of the kind it was like a

fresh application of the spur, and made the Belludo bound as high as a

house. Through the remainder of the night was the unlucky Fray Simon

carried hither and thither, and whither he would not, until every bone

in his body ached, and he suffered a loss of leather too grievous to

be mentioned. At length the crowing of a cock gave the signal of

returning day. At the sound the goblin steed wheeled about, and

galloped back for his tower. Again he scoured the Vivarrambla, the

Zacatin, the Plaza Nueva, and the avenue of fountains, the seven

dogs yelling, and barking, and leaping up, and snapping at the heels

of the terrified friar. The first streak of day had just appeared as

they reached the tower; here the goblin steed kicked up his heels,

sent the friar a somerset through the air, plunged into the dark vault

followed by the infernal pack, and a profound silence succeeded to the

late deafening clamor.

  Was ever so diabolical a trick played off upon a holy friar? A

peasant going to his labors at early dawn found the unfortunate Fray

Simon lying under a fig-tree at the foot of the tower, but so

bruised and bedevilled that he could neither speak nor move. He was

conveyed with all care and tenderness to his cell, and the story

went that he had been waylaid and maltreated by robbers. A day or

two elapsed before he recovered the use of his limbs; he consoled

himself, in the meantime, with the thoughts that though the mule

with the treasure had escaped him, he had previously had some rare

pickings at the infidel spoils. His first care on being able to use

his limbs, was to search beneath his pallet, where he had secreted the

myrtle wreath and the leathern pouches of gold extracted from the

piety of Dame Sanchez. What was his dismay at finding the wreath, in

effect, but a withered branch of myrtle, and the leathern pouches

filled with sand and gravel!

  Fray Simon, with all his chagrin, had the discretion to hold his

tongue, for to betray the secret might draw on him the ridicule of the

public, and the punishment of his superior: it was not until many

years afterwards, on his death-bed, that he revealed to his

confessor his nocturnal ride on the Belludo.

  Nothing was heard of Lope Sanchez for a long time after his

disappearance from the Alhambra. His memory was always cherished as

that of a merry companion, though it was feared, from the care and

melancholy observed in his conduct shortly before his mysterious

departure, that poverty and distress had driven him to some extremity.

Some years afterwards one of his old companions, an invalid soldier,

being at Malaga, was knocked down and nearly run over by a coach and

six. The carriage stopped; an old gentleman magnificently dressed,

with a bag-wig and sword, stepped out to assist the poor invalid. What

was the astonishment of the latter to behold in this grand cavalier

his old friend Lope Sanchez, who was actually celebrating the marriage

of his daughter Sanchica with one of the first grandees in the land.

  The carriage contained the bridal party. There was Dame Sanchez, now

grown as round as a barrel, and dressed out with feathers and

jewels, and necklaces of pearls, and necklaces of diamonds, and

rings on every finger, altogether a finery of apparel that had not

been seen since the days of Queen Sheba. The little Sanchica had now

grown to be a woman, and for grace and beauty might have been mistaken

for a duchess, if not a princess outright. The bridegroom sat beside

her- rather a withered spindle-shanked little man, but this only

proved him to be of the true-blue blood, a legitimate Spanish

grandee being rarely above three cubits in stature. The match had been

of the mother's making.

  Riches had not spoiled the heart of honest Lope. He kept his old

comrade with him for several days; feasted him like a king, took him

to plays and bull-fights, and at length sent him away rejoicing,

with a big bag of money for himself, and another to be distributed

among his ancient messmates of the Alhambra.

  Lope always gave out that a rich brother had died in America and

left him heir to a copper mine; but the shrewd gossips of the Alhambra

insist that his wealth was all derived from his having discovered

the secret guarded by the two marble nymphs of the Alhambra. It is

remarked that these very discreet statues continue, even unto the

present day, with their eyes fixed most significantly on the same part

of the wall; which leads many to suppose there is still some hidden

treasure remaining there well worthy the attention of the enterprising

traveller. Though others, and particularly all female visitors, regard

them with great complacency as lasting monuments of the fact that

women can keep a secret.

          The Crusade of the Grand Master of Alcantara.



  IN THE course of a morning's research among the old chronicles in

the Library of the University, I came upon a little episode in the

history of Granada, so strongly characteristic of the bigot zeal,

which sometimes inflamed the Christian enterprises against this

splendid but devoted city, that I was tempted to draw it forth from

the parchment-bound volume in which it lay entombed and submit it to

the reader.

  In the year of redemption, 1394, there was a valiant and devout

grand master of Alcantara, named Martin Yanez de Barbudo, who was

inflamed with a vehement desire to serve God and fight the Moors.

Unfortunately for this brave and pious cavalier, a profound peace

existed between the Christian and Moslem powers. Henry III had just

ascended the throne of Castile, and Yusef ben Mohammed had succeeded

to the throne of Granada, and both were disposed to continue the peace

which had prevailed between their fathers. The grand master looked

with repining at Moorish banners and weapons, which decorated his

castle hall, trophies of the exploits of his predecessors; and repined

at his fate to exist in a period of such inglorious tranquillity.

  At length his impatience broke through all bounds, and seeing that

he could find no public war in which to engage, he resolved to carve

out a little war for himself. Such at least is the account given by

some ancient chronicles, though others give the following as the

motive for this sudden resolution to go campaigning.

  As the grand master was one day seated at table with several of

his cavaliers, a man suddenly entered the hall; tall, meagre and bony,

with haggard countenance and fiery eye. All recognized him for a

hermit, who had been a soldier in his youth, but now led a life of

penitence in a cave. He advanced to the table and struck upon it

with a fist that seemed of iron. "Cavaliers," said he, "why sit ye

here idly, with your weapons resting against the wall, while the

enemies of the faith lord it over the fairest portion of the land?"

  "Holy father, what wouldst thou have us do," asked the grand master,

"seeing the wars are over and our swords bound up by treaties of

peace?"

  "Listen to my words," replied the hermit. "As I was seated late at

night at the entrance of my cave, contemplating the heavens, I fell

into a reverie, and a wonderful vision was presented to me. I beheld

the moon, a mere crescent, yet luminous as the brightest silver, and

it hung in the heavens over the kingdom of Granada. While I was

looking at it, behold there shot forth from the firmament a blazing

star, which, as it went, drew after it all the stars of heaven; and

they assailed the moon and drove it from the skies; and the whole

firmament was filled with the glory of that blazing star. While mine

eyes were yet dazzled by this wondrous sight, some one stood by me

with snowy wings and a shining countenance. 'Oh man of prayer,' said

he, 'get thee to the grand master of Alcantara and tell him of the

vision thou hast beheld. He is the blazing star, destined to drive the

crescent, the Moslem emblem, from the land. Let him boldly draw the

sword and continue the good work begun by Pelazo of old, and victory

will assuredly attend his banner.'"

  The grand master listened to the hermit as to a messenger from

heaven, and followed his counsel in all things. By his advice he

dispatched two of his stoutest warriors, armed cap-a-pie, on an

embassy to the Moorish king. They entered the gates of Granada without

molestation, as the nations were at peace; and made their way to the

Alhambra, where they were promptly admitted to the king, who

received them in the Hall of Ambassadors. They delivered their message

roundly and hardily. "We come, oh king, from Don Martin Yanez de

Barbudo, grand master of Alcantara; who affirms the faith of Jesus

Christ to be true and holy, and that of Mahomet false and

detestable, and he challenges thee to maintain the contrary, hand to

hand, in single combat. Shouldst thou refuse, he offers to combat with

one hundred cavaliers against two hundred; or, in like proportion,

to the number of one thousand, always allowing thy faith a double

number of champions. Remember, oh king, that thou canst not refuse

this challenge; since thy prophet, knowing the impossibility of

maintaining his doctrines by argument, has commanded his followers

to enforce them with the sword."

  The beard of King Yusef trembled with indignation. "The master of

Alcantara," said he, "is a madman to send such a message, and ye are

saucy knaves to bring it."

  So saying, he ordered the ambassadors to be thrown into a dungeon,

by way of giving them a lesson in diplomacy; and they were roughly

treated on their way thither by the populace, who were exasperated

at this insult to their sovereign and their faith.

  The grand master of Alcantara could scarcely credit the tidings of

the maltreatment of his messengers; but the hermit rejoiced when

they were repeated to him. "God," said he, "has blinded this infidel

king for his downfall. Since he has sent no reply to thy defiance,

consider it accepted. Marshal thy forces, therefore; march forward

to Granada; pause not until thou seest the gate of Elvira. A miracle

will be wrought in thy favor. There will be a great battle; the

enemy will be overthrown; but not one of thy soldiers will be slain."

  The grand master called upon every warrior zealous in the

Christian cause to aid him in this crusade. In a little while three

hundred horsemen and a thousand foot-soldiers rallied under his

standard. The horsemen were veterans; seasoned to battle and well

armed; but the infantry were raw and undisciplined. The victory,

however, was to be miraculous; the grand master was a man of

surpassing faith, and knew that the weaker the means the greater the

miracle. He sallied forth confidently, therefore, with his little

army, and the hermit strode ahead bearing a cross on the end of a long

pole, and beneath it the pennon of the order of Alcantara.

  As they approached the city of Cordova they were overtaken by

messengers, spurring in all haste, bearing missives from the Castilian

monarch, forbidding the enterprise. The grand master was a man of a

single mind and a single will; in other words, a man of one idea.

"Were I on any other errand," said he, "I should obey these letters as

coming from my lord the king; but I am sent by a higher power than the

king. In compliance with its commands I have advanced the cross thus

far against the infidels; and it would be treason to the standard of

Christ to turn back without achieving my errand."

  So the trumpets were sounded; the cross was again reared aloft,

and the band of zealots resumed their march. As they passed through

the streets of Cordova the people were amazed at beholding a hermit

bearing a cross at the head of a warlike multitude; but when they

learnt that a miraculous victory was to be effected and Granada

destroyed, laborers and artisans threw by the implements of their

handicrafts and joined in the crusade; while a mercenary rabble

followed on with a view of plunder.

  A number of cavaliers of rank who lacked faith in the promised

miracle, and dreaded the consequences of this unprovoked irruption

into the country of the Moor, assembled at the bridge of the

Guadalquivir and endeavored to dissuade the grand master from

crossing. He was deaf to prayers, expostulations or menaces; his

followers were enraged at this opposition to the cause of the faith;

they put an end to the parley by their clamors; the cross was again

reared and borne triumphantly across the bridge.

  The multitude increased as it proceeded; by the time the grand

master had reached Alcala la Real, which stands on a mountain

overlooking the Vega of Granada, upwards of five thousand men on

foot had joined his standard.

  At Alcala came forth Alonzo Fernandez de Cordova, Lord of Aguilar,

his brother Diego Fernandez, Marshal of Castile, and other cavaliers

of valor and experience. Placing themselves in the way of the grand

master, "What madness is this, Don Martin?" said they. "The Moorish

king has two hundred thousand foot-soldiers and five thousand horse

within his walls; what can you and your handful of cavaliers and

your noisy rabble do against such force? Bethink you of the

disasters which have befallen other Christian commanders, who have

crossed these rocky borders with ten times your force. Think, too,

of the mischief that will be brought upon this kingdom by an outrage

of the kind committed by a man of your rank and importance, a grand

master of Alcantara. Pause, we entreat you, while the truce is yet

unbroken. Await within the borders the reply of the king of Granada to

your challenge. If he agree to meet you singly, or with champions

two or three, it will be your individual contest, and fight it out

in God's name; if he refuse, you may return home with great honor

and the disgrace will fall upon the Moors."

  Several cavaliers, who had hitherto followed the grand master with

devoted zeal, were moved by these expostulations, and suggested to him

the policy of listening to this advice.

  "Cavaliers," said he, addressing himself to Alonzo Fernandez de

Cordova and his companions, "I thank you for the counsel you have so

kindly bestowed upon me, and if I were merely in pursuit of individual

glory I might be swayed by it. But I am engaged to achieve a great

triumph of the faith, which God is to effect by miracle through my

means. As to you, cavaliers," turning to those of his followers who

had wavered, "if your hearts fail you, or you repent of having put

your hands to this good work; return in God's name, and my blessing go

with you. For myself, though I have none to stand by me but this

holy hermit, yet will I assuredly proceed; until I have planted this

sacred standard on the walls of Granada, or perished in the attempt."

  "Don Martin Yanez de Barbudo," replied the cavaliers, "we are not

men to turn our backs upon our commander, however rash his enterprise.

We spoke but in caution. Lead on, therefore, and if it be to the

death, be assured to the death we will follow thee."

  By this time the common soldiers became impatient. "Forward!

forward!" shouted they. "Forward in the cause of faith." So the

grand master gave signal, the hermit again reared the cross aloft, and

they poured down a defile of the mountain, with solemn chants of

triumph.

  That night they encamped at the river of Azores, and the next

morning, which was Sunday, crossed the borders. Their first pause

was at an atalaya or solitary tower, built upon a rock; a frontier

post to keep a watch upon the border, and give notice of invasion.

It was thence called el Torre del Exea (the Tower of the Spy). The

grand master halted before it and summoned its petty garrison to

surrender. He was answered by a shower of stones and arrows, which

wounded him in the hand and killed three of his men.

  "How is this, father?" said he to the hermit, "you assured me that

not one of my followers would be slain!"

  "True, my son; but I meant in the great battle of the infidel

king; what need is there of miracle to aid in the capture of a petty

tower?"

  The grand master was satisfied. He ordered wood to be piled

against the door of the tower to burn it down. In the mean time

provisions were unloaded from the sumpter-mules, and the crusaders,

withdrawing beyond bow-shot, sat down on the grass to a repast to

strengthen them for the arduous day's work before them. While thus

engaged, they were startled by the sudden appearance of a great

Moorish host. The atalayas had given the alarm by fire and smoke

from the mountain tops of "an enemy across the border," and the king

of Granada had sallied forth with a great force to the encounter.

  The crusaders, nearly taken by surprise, flew to arms and prepared

for battle. The grand master ordered his three hundred horsemen to

dismount and fight on foot in support of the infantry. The Moors,

however, charged so suddenly that they separated the cavaliers from

the foot-soldiers and prevented their uniting. The grand master gave

the old war cry, "Santiago! Santiago! and close Spain!" He and his

knights breasted the fury of the battle, but were surrounded by a

countless host and assailed with arrows, stones, darts, and

arquebuses. Still they fought fearlessly, and made prodigious

slaughter. The hermit mingled in the hottest of the fight. In one hand

he bore the cross, in the other he brandished a sword, with which he

dealt about him like a maniac, slaying several of the enemy, until

he sank to the ground covered with wounds. The grand master saw him

fall, and saw too late the fallacy of his prophecies. Despair,

however, only made him fight the more fiercely, until he also fell

overpowered by numbers. His devoted cavaliers emulated his holy

zeal. Not one turned his back nor asked for mercy; all fought until

they fell. As to the foot-soldiers, many were killed, many taken

prisoners; the residue escaped to Alcala la Real. When the Moors

came to strip the slain, the wounds of the cavaliers were all found to

be in front.

  Such was the catastrophe of this fanatic enterprise. The Moors

vaunted it as a decisive proof of the superior sanctity of their

faith, and extolled their king to the skies when he returned in

triumph to Granada.

  As it was satisfactorily shown that this crusade was the

enterprise of an individual and contrary to the express orders of

the king of Castile, the peace of the two kingdoms was not

interrupted. Nay, the Moors evinced a feeling of respect for the valor

of the unfortunate grand master, and readily gave up his body to Don

Alonzo Fernandez de Cordova, who came from Alcala to seek it. The

Christians of the frontier united in paying the last sad honors to his

memory. His body was placed upon a bier, covered with the pennon of

the order of Alcantara; and the broken cross, the emblem of his

confident hopes and fatal disappointment, was borne before it. In this

way his remains were carried back in funeral procession, through the

mountain tract which he had traversed so resolutely. Wherever it

passed, through a town or village, the populace followed, with tears

and lamentations, bewailing him as a valiant knight and a martyr to

the faith. His body was interred in the chapel of the convent of Santa

Maria de Almocovara, and on his sepulchre may still be seen engraven

in quaint and antique Spanish the following testimonial to his

bravery:



            HERE LIES ONE WHOSE HEART NEVER KNEW FEAR

  (Aqui yaz aquel que par neua cosa nunca eve pavor en seu corazon)

                     Spanish Romance.



  IN THE latter part of my sojourn in the Alhambra, I made frequent

descents into the Jesuits' Library of the University; and relished

more and more the old Spanish chronicles, which I found there bound in

parchment. I delight in those quaint histories which treat of the

times when the Moslems maintained a foothold in the Peninsula. With

all their bigotry and occasional intolerance, they are full of noble

acts and generous sentiments, and have a high, spicy, oriental flavor,

not to be found in other records of the times, which were merely

European. In fact, Spain, even at the present day, is a country apart,

severed in history, habits, manners, and modes of thinking, from all

the rest of Europe. It is a romantic country, but its romance has none

of the sentimentality of modern European romance; it is chiefly

derived from the brilliant regions of the East, and from the

high-minded school of Saracenic chivalry.

  The Arab invasion and conquest brought a higher civilization and a

nobler style of thinking, into Gothic Spain. The Arabs were a

quick-witted, sagacious, proud-spirited, and poetical people and

were imbued with oriental science and literature. Wherever they

established a seat of power, it became a rallying place for the

learned and ingenious; and they softened and refined the people whom

they conquered. By degrees, occupancy seemed to give them an

hereditary right to their foothold in the land; they ceased to be

looked upon as invaders, and were regarded as rival neighbors. The

peninsula, broken up into a variety of states, both Christian and

Moslem, became, for centuries, a great campaigning ground, where the

art of war seemed to be the principal business of man, and was carried

to the highest pitch of romantic chivalry. The original ground of

hostility, a difference of faith, gradually lost its rancor.

Neighboring states, of opposite creeds, were occasionally linked

together in alliances, offensive and defensive, so that the cross

and crescent were to be seen side by side, fighting against some

common enemy. In times of peace, too, the noble youth of either

faith resorted to the same cities, Christian or Moslem, to school

themselves in military science. Even in the temporary truces of

sanguinary wars, the warriors who had recently striven together in the

deadly conflicts of the field, laid aside their animosity, met at

tournaments, jousts, and other military festivities, and exchanged the

courtesies of gentle and generous spirits.

  Thus the opposite races became frequently mingled together in

peaceful intercourse, or if any rivalry took place, it was in those

high courtesies and nobler acts, which bespeak the accomplished

cavalier. Warriors, of opposite creeds, became ambitious of

transcending each other in magnanimity as well as valor. Indeed, the

chivalric virtues were refined upon to a degree sometimes fastidious

and constrained; but at other times, inexpressibly noble and

affecting. The annals of the times teem with illustrious instances

of high-wrought courtesy, romantic generosity, lofty

disinterestedness, and punctilious honor, that warm the very soul to

read them. These have furnished themes for national plays and poems,

or have been celebrated in those all-pervading ballads, which are as

the life-breath of the people, and thus have continued to exercise

an influence on the national character, which centuries of vicissitude

and decline have not been able to destroy; so that, with all their

faults, and they are many, the Spaniards, even at the present day,

are, on many points, the most high-minded and proud-spirited people of

Europe. It is true, the romance of feeling derived from the sources

I have mentioned, has, like all other romance, its affectations and

extremes. It renders the Spaniard at times pompous and

grandiloquent, prone to carry the pundonor, or point of honor,

beyond the bounds of sober sense and sound morality, disposed, in

the midst of poverty, to affect the grande caballero, and to look down

with sovereign disdain upon "arts mechanical," and all the gainful

pursuits of plebeian life; but this very inflation of spirit, while it

fills his brain with vapors, lifts him above a thousand meannesses,

and though it often keeps him in indigence, ever protects him from

vulgarity.

  In the present day, when popular literature is running into the

low levels of life, and luxuriating on the vices and follies of

mankind; and when the universal pursuit of gain is trampling down

the early growth of poetic feeling, and wearing out the verdure of the

soul, I question whether it would not be of service for the reader

occasionally to turn to these records of prouder times and loftier

modes of thinking; and to steep himself to the very lips in old

Spanish romance.

  With these preliminary suggestions, the fruit of a morning's reading

and rumination, in the old Jesuits' Library of the University, I

will give him a legend in point, drawn forth from one of the venerable

chronicles alluded to.

