




           Legend of Don Munio Sancho de Hinojosa.



  IN THE cloisters of the ancient Benedictine convent of San

Domingo, at Silos, in Castile, are the mouldering yet magnificent

monuments of the once powerful and chivalrous family of Hinojosa.

Among these reclines the marble figure of a knight, in complete armor,

with the hands pressed together, as if in prayer. On one side of his

tomb is sculptured in relief a band of Christian cavaliers,

capturing a cavalcade of male and female Moors; on the other side, the

same cavaliers are represented kneeling before an altar. The tomb,

like most of the neighboring monuments, is almost in ruins, and the

sculpture is nearly unintelligible, excepting to the keen eye of the

antiquary. The story connected with the sepulchre, however, is still

preserved in the old Spanish chronicles, and is to the following

purport:



  IN old times, several hundred years ago, there was a noble Castilian

cavalier, named Don Munio Sancho de Hinojosa, lord of a border castle,

which had stood the brunt of many a Moorish foray. He had seventy

horsemen as his household troops, all of the ancient Castilian

proof; stark warriors, hard riders, and men of iron; with these he

scoured the Moorish lands, and made his name terrible throughout the

borders. His castle hall was covered with banners, cimeters, and

Moslem helms, the trophies of his prowess. Don Munio was, moreover,

a keen huntsman, and rejoiced in hounds of all kinds, steeds for the

chase, and hawks for the towering sport of falconry. When not

engaged in warfare, his delight was to beat up the neighboring

forests; and scarcely ever did he ride forth, without hound and

horn, a boar-spear in his hand, or a hawk upon his fist, and an

attendant train of huntsmen.

  His wife, Dona Maria Palacin, was of a gentle and timid nature,

little fitted to be the spouse of so hardy and adventurous a knight;

and many a tear did the poor lady shed, when he sallied forth upon his

daring enterprises, and many a prayer did she offer up for his safety.

  As this doughty cavalier was one day hunting, he stationed himself

in a thicket, on the borders of a green glade of the forest, and

dispersed his followers to rouse the game, and drive it toward his

stand. He had not been here long, when a cavalcade of Moors, of both

sexes, came prankling over the forest lawn. They were unarmed, and

magnificently dressed in robes of tissue and embroidery, rich shawls

of India, bracelets and anklets of gold, and jewels that sparkled in

the sun.

  At the head of this gay cavalcade rode a youthful cavalier, superior

to the rest in dignity and loftiness of demeanor, and in splendor of

attire; beside him was a damsel, whose veil, blown aside by the

breeze, displayed a face of surpassing beauty, and eyes cast down in

maiden modesty, yet beaming with tenderness and joy.

  Don Munio thanked his stars for sending him such a prize, and

exulted at the thought of bearing home to his wife the glittering

spoils of these infidels. Putting his hunting horn to his lips, he

gave a blast that rung through the forest. His huntsmen came running

from all quarters, and the astonished Moors were surrounded and made

captives.

  The beautiful Moor wrung her hands in despair, and her female

attendants uttered the most piercing cries. The young Moorish cavalier

alone retained self-possession. He inquired the name of the

Christian knight, who commanded this troop of horsemen. When told that

it was Don Munio Sancho de Hinojosa, his countenance lighted up.

Approaching that cavalier, and kissing his hand, "Don Munio Sancho,"

said he, "I have heard of your fame as a true and valiant knight,

terrible in arms, but schooled in the noble virtues of chivalry.

Such do I trust to find you. In me you behold Abadil, son of a Moorish

alcayde. I am on the way to celebrate my nuptials with this lady;

chance has thrown us in your power, but I confide in your magnanimity.

Take all our treasure and jewels; demand what ransom you think

proper for our persons, but suffer us not to be insulted nor

dishonored."

  When the good knight heard this appeal, and beheld the beauty of the

youthful pair, his heart was touched with tenderness and courtesy.

"God forbid," said he, "that I should disturb such happy nuptials.

My prisoners in troth shall ye be, for fifteen days, and immured

within my castle, where I claim, as conqueror, the right of

celebrating your espousals."

  So saying, he dispatched one of his fleetest horsemen in advance, to

notify Dona Maria Palacin of the coming of this bridal party; while he

and his huntsmen escorted the cavalcade, not as captors, but as a

guard of honor. As they drew near to the castle, the banners were hung

out, and the trumpets sounded from the battlements; and on their

nearer approach, the draw-bridge was lowered, and Dona Maria came

forth to meet them, attended by her ladies and knights, her pages

and her minstrels. She took the young bride, Allifra, in her arms,

kissed her with the tenderness of a sister, and conducted her into the

castle. In the mean time, Don Munio sent forth missives in every

direction, and had viands and dainties of all kinds collected from the

country round; and the wedding of the Moorish lovers was celebrated

with all possible state and festivity. For fifteen days, the castle

was given up to joy and revelry. There were tiltings and jousts at the

ring, and bull-fights, and banquets, and dances to the sound of

minstrelsy. When the fifteen days were at an end, he made the bride

and bridegroom magnificent presents, and conducted them and their

attendants safely beyond the borders. Such, in old times, were the

courtesy and generosity of a Spanish cavalier.

  Several years after this event, the king of Castile summoned his

nobles to assist him in a campaign against the Moors. Don Munio Sancho

was among the first to answer to the call, with seventy horsemen,

all stanch and well-tried warriors. His wife, Dona Maria hung about

his neck. "Alas, my lord!" exclaimed she, "how often wilt thou tempt

thy fate, and when will thy thirst for glory be appeased!"

  "One battle more," replied Don Munio, "one battle more, for the

honor of Castile, and I here make a vow, that when this is over, I

will lay by my sword, and repair with my cavaliers in pilgrimage to

the sepulchre of our Lord at Jerusalem." The cavaliers all joined with

him in the vow, and Dona Maria felt in some degree soothed in

spirit; still, she saw with a heavy heart the departure of her

husband, and watched his banner with wistful eyes, until it

disappeared among the trees of the forest.

  The king of Castile led his army to the plains of Salmanara, where

they encountered the Moorish host, near to Ucles. The battle was

long and bloody; the Christians repeatedly wavered, and were as

often rallied by the energy of their commanders. Don Munio was covered

with wounds, but refused to leave the field. The Christians at

length gave way, and the king was hardly pressed, and in danger of

being captured.

  Don Munio called upon his cavaliers to follow him to the rescue.

"Now is the time," cried he, "to prove your loyalty. Fall to, like

brave men! We fight for the true faith, and if we lose our lives here,

we gain a better life hereafter."

  Rushing with his men between the king and his pursuers, they checked

the latter in their career, and gave time for their monarch to escape;

but they fell victims to their loyalty. They all fought to the last

gasp. Don Munio was singled out by a powerful Moorish knight, but

having been wounded in the right arm, he fought to disadvantage, and

was slain. The battle being over, the Moor paused to possess himself

of the spoils of this redoubtable Christian warrior. When he unlaced

the helmet, however, and beheld the countenance of Don Munio, he

gave a great cry, and smote his breast. "Woe is me!" cried he, "I have

slain my benefactor! The flower of knightly virtue! the most

magnanimous of cavaliers!"

  While the battle had been raging on the plain of Salmanara, Dona

Maria Palacin remained in her castle, a prey to the keenest anxiety.

Her eyes were ever fixed on the road that led from the country of

the Moors, and often she asked the watchman of the tower, "What

seest thou?"

  One evening, at the shadowy hour of twilight, the warden sounded his

horn. "I see," cried he, "a numerous train winding up the valley.

There are mingled Moors and Christians. The banner of my lord is in

the advance. Joyful tidings!" exclaimed the old seneschal: "my lord

returns in triumph, and brings captives!" Then the castle courts

rang with shouts of joy; and the standard was displayed, and the

trumpets were sounded, and the draw-bridge was lowered, and Dona Maria

went forth with her ladies, and her knights, and her pages, and her

minstrels, to welcome her lord from the wars. But as the train drew

nigh, she beheld a sumptuous bier, covered with black velvet, and on

it lay a warrior, as if taking his repose: he lay in his armor, with

his helmet on his head, and his sword in his hand, as one who had

never been conquered, and around the bier were the escutcheons of

the house of Hinojosa.

  A number of Moorish cavaliers attended the bier, with emblems of

mourning, and with dejected countenances; and their leader cast

himself at the feet of Dona Maria, and hid his face in his hands.

She beheld in him the gallant Abadil, whom she had once welcomed

with his bride to her castle; but who now came with the body of her

lord, whom he had unknowingly slain in battle I

  The sepulchre erected in the cloisters of the convent of San

Domingo, was achieved at the expense of the Moor Abadil, as a feeble

testimony of his grief for the death of the good knight Don Munio, and

his reverence for his memory. The tender and faithful Dona Maria

soon followed her lord to the tomb. On one of the stones of a small

arch, beside his sepulchre, is the following simple inscription:

"Hic jacet Maria Palacin, uxor Munonis Sancij De Finojosa": "Here lies

Maria Palacin, wife of Munio Sancho de Hinojosa."

  The legend of Don Munio Sancho does not conclude with his death.

On the same day on which the battle took place on the plain of

Salmanara, a chaplain of the Holy Temple at Jerusalem, while

standing at the outer gate, beheld a train of Christian cavaliers

advancing, as if in pilgrimage. The chaplain was a native of Spain,

and as the pilgrims approached, he knew the foremost to be Don Munio

Sancho de Hinojosa, with whom he had been well acquainted in former

times. Hastening to the patriarch, he told him of the honorable rank

of the pilgrims at the gate. The patriarch, therefore, went forth with

a grand procession of priests and monks, and received the pilgrims

with all due honor. There were seventy cavaliers, beside their leader,

all stark and lofty warriors. They carried their helmets in their

hands, and their faces were deadly pale. They greeted no one, nor

looked either to the right or to the left, but entered the chapel, and

kneeling before the sepulchre of our Saviour, performed their

orisons in silence. When they had concluded, they rose as if to

depart, and the patriarch and his attendants advanced to speak to

them, but they were no more to be seen. Every one marvelled what could

be the meaning of this prodigy. The patriarch carefully noted down the

day, and sent to Castile to learn tidings of Don Munio Sancho de

Hinojosa. He received for reply, that on the very day specified,

that worthy knight, with seventy of his followers, had been slain in

battle. These, therefore, must have been the blessed spirits of

those Christian warriors, come to fulfil their vow of pilgrimage to

the Holy Sepulchre at Jerusalem. Such was Castilian faith, in the

olden time, which kept its word, even beyond the grave.

  If any one should doubt of the miraculous apparition of these

phantom knights, let him consult the History of the Kings of Castile

and Leon, by the learned and pious Fray Prudencio de Sandoval,

bishop of Pamplona, where he will find it recorded in the History of

King Don Alonzo VI, on the hundred and second page. It is too precious

a legend, to be lightly abandoned to the doubter.

              Poets and Poetry of Moslem Andalus.



  DURING the latter part of my sojourn in the Alhambra I was more than

once visited by the Moor of Tetuan, with whom I took great pleasure in

rambling through the halls and courts, and getting him to explain to

me the Arabic inscriptions. He endeavored to do so faithfully; but,

though he succeeded in giving me the thought, he despaired of

imparting an idea of the grace and beauty of the language. The aroma

of the poetry, said he, is all lost in translation. Enough was

imparted, however, to increase the stock of my delightful associations

with this extraordinary pile. Perhaps there never was a monument

more characteristic of an age and people than the Alhambra; a rugged

fortress without, a voluptuous palace within; war frowning from its

battlements; poetry breathing throughout the fairy architecture of its

halls. One is irresistibly transported in imagination to those times

when Moslem Spain was a region of light amid Christian, yet

benighted Europe- externally a warrior power fighting for existence,

internally a realm devoted to literature, science, and the arts, where

philosophy was cultivated with passion, though wrought up into

subtleties and refinements, and where the luxuries of sense were

transcended by those of thought and imagination.

  Arab poetry, we are told, arrived at its highest splendor under

the Ommiades of Spain, who for a long time centred the power and

splendor of the Western Caliphat at Cordova. Most of the sovereigns of

that brilliant line were themselves poets. One of the last of them was

Mahomed ben Abderahman. He led the life of a sybarite in the famous

palace and gardens of Azahara, surrounding himself with all that could

excite the imagination and delight the senses. His palace was the

resort of poets. His vizier, Ibn Zeydun, was called the Horace of

Moslem Spain, from his exquisite verses, which were recited with

enthusiasm even in the saloons of the Eastern Caliphs. The vizier

became passionately enamored of the princess Walada, daughter of

Mahomed. She was the idol of her father's court, a poetess of the

highest order, and renowned for beauty as well as talent. If Ibn

Zeydun was the Horace of Moslem Spain, she was its Sappho. The

princess became the subject of the vizier's most impassioned verses,

especially of a famous risaleh or epistle addressed to her, which

the historian Ash-Shakandi declares has never been equalled for

tenderness and melancholy. Whether the poet was happy in his love, the

authors I have consulted do not say; but one intimates that the

princess was discreet as she was beautiful, and caused many a lover to

sigh in vain. In fact, the reign of love and poetry in the delicious

abode of Zahara, was soon brought to a close by a popular

insurrection. Mahomed with his family took refuge in the fortress of

Ucles, near Toledo, where he was treacherously poisoned by the

Alcayde; and thus perished one of the last of the Ommiades.

  The downfall of that brilliant dynasty, which had concentrated every

thing at Cordova, was favorable to the general literature of Morisco

Spain.

  "After the breaking of the necklace and the scattering of its

pearls," says Ash-Shakandi, "the kings of small states divided among

themselves the patrimony of the Beni Ommiah."

  They vied with each other in filling their capitals with poets and

learned men, and rewarded them with boundless prodigality. Such were

the Moorish kings of Seville of the illustrious line of the Beni

Abbad, "with whom," says the same writer, "resided fruit and

palm-trees and pomegranates; who became the centre of eloquence in

prose and verse; every day of whose reign was a solemn festivity;

whose history abounds in generous actions and heroic deeds, that

will last through surrounding ages and live for ever in the memory

of man!"

  No place, however, profited more in point of civilization and

refinement by the downfall of the Western Caliphat than Granada. It

succeeded to Cordova in splendor, while it surpassed it in romantic

beauty of situation. The amenity of its climate, where the ardent

heats of a southern summer were tempered by breezes from snow-clad

mountains, the voluptuous repose of its valleys and the bosky

luxuriance of its groves and gardens all awakened sensations of

delight, and disposed the mind to love and poetry. Hence the great

number of amatory poets that flourished in Granada. Hence those

amorous canticles breathing of love and war, and wreathing

chivalrous grace round the stern exercise of arms. Those ballads which

still form the pride and delight of Spanish literature are but the

echoes of amatory and chivalric lays which once delighted the Moslem

courts of Andalus, and in which a modern historian of Granada pretends

to find the origin of the rima Castellana and the type of the "gay

science" of the troubadours.

  Poetry was cultivated in Granada by both sexes. "Had Allah," says

Ash-Shakandi, "bestowed no other boon on Granada than that of making

it the birth-place of so many poetesses; that alone would be

sufficient for its glory."

  Among the most famous of these was Hafsah; renowned, says the old

chronicler, for beauty, talents, nobility, and wealth. We have a

mere relic of her poetry in some verses, addressed to her lover,

Ahmed, recalling an evening passed together in the garden of Maumal.

  "Allah has given us a happy night, such as he never vouchsafes to

the wicked and the ignoble. We have beheld the cypresses of Maumal

gently bowing their heads before the mountain breeze- the sweet

perfumed breeze that smelt of gillyflowers: the dove murmured her love

among the trees; the sweet basil inclined its boughs to the limpid

brook."

  The garden of Maumal was famous among the Moors for its rivulets,

its fountains, its flowers, and above all, its cypresses. It had its

name from a vizier of Abdallah, grandson of Aben Habuz, and Sultan

of Granada. Under the administration of this vizier many of the

noblest public works were executed. He constructed an aqueduct by

which water was brought from the mountains of Alfacar to irrigate

the hills and orchards north of the city. He planted a public walk

with cypress-trees, and "made delicious gardens for the solace of

the melancholy Moors." "The name of Maumal," says Alcantara, "ought to

be preserved in Granada in letters of gold." Perhaps it is as well

preserved by being associated with the garden he planted; and by being

mentioned in the verses of Hafsah. How often does a casual word from a

poet confer immortality!

  Perhaps the reader may be curious to learn something of the story of

Hafsah and her lover, thus connected with one of the beautiful

localities of Granada. The following are all the particulars I have

been able to rescue out of the darkness and oblivion which have

settled upon the brightest names and geniuses of Moslem Spain:

  Ahmed and Hafsah flourished in the sixth century of the Hegira,

the twelfth of the Christian Era. Ahmed was the son of the Alcayde

of Alcala la Real. His father designed him for public and military

life and would have made him his lieutenant; but the youth was of a

poetical temperament, and preferred a life of lettered ease in the

delightful abodes of Granada. Here he surrounded himself by objects of

taste in the arts, and by the works of the learned; he divided his

time between study and social enjoyment. He was fond of the sports

of the field, and kept horses, hawks, and hounds. He devoted himself

to literature, became renowned for erudition, and his compositions

in prose and verse were extolled for their beauty, and in the mouths

of every one.

  Of a tender, susceptible heart, and extremely sensible to female

charms, he became the devoted lover of Hafsah. The passion was mutual,

and for once the course of true love appeared to run smooth. The

lovers were both young, equal in merit, fame, rank, and fortune,

enamored of each other's genius as well as person, and inhabiting a

region formed to be a realm of love and poetry. A poetical intercourse

was carried on between them that formed the delight of Granada. They

were continually interchanging verses and epistles, "the poetry of

which," says the Arabian writer, Al Makkari, "was like the language of

doves."

  In the height of their happiness a change took place in the

government of Granada. It was the time when the Almohades, a Berber

tribe of Mount Atlas, had acquired the control of Moslem Spain, and

removed the seat of government from Cordova to Morocco. The Sultan

Abdelmuman governed Spain through his Walis and Alcaydes; and his son,

Sidi Abu Said, was made Wali of Granada. He governed in his father's

name with royal state and splendor, and with despotic sway. Being a

stranger in the country, and a Moor by birth, he sought to

strengthen himself by drawing round him popular persons of the Arab

race; and to this effect made Ahmed, who was then in the zenith of his

fame and popularity, his vizier. Ahmed would have declined the post,

but the Wali was peremptory. Its duties were irksome to him, and he

spurned at its restraint. On a hawking party, with some of his gay

companions, he gave way to his poetic vein, exulting in his breaking

away from the thraldom of a despotic master like a hawk from the

jesses of the falconer, to follow the soaring impulses of his soul.

  His words were repeated to Sidi Abu Said. "Ahmed," said the

informant, "spurns at restraint and scoffs at thy authority." The poet

was instantly dismissed from office. The loss of an irksome post was

no grievance to one of his joyous temperament; but he soon

discovered the real cause of his removal. The Wali was his rival. He

had seen and become enamored of Hafsah. What was worse, Hafsah was

dazzled with the conquest she had made.

  For a time Ahmed treated the matter with ridicule, and appealed to

the prejudice existing between the Arab and Moorish races. Sidi Abu

Said was of a dark olive complexion. "How canst thou endure that black

man?" said he, scornfully. "By Allah, for twenty dinars I can buy thee

a better than he in the slave market."

  The scoff reached the ears of Sidi Abu Said and rankled in his

heart.

  At other times, Ahmed gave way to grief and tenderness, recalling

past scenes of happiness, reproaching Hafsah with her inconstancy, and

warning her in despairing accents that she would be the cause of his

death. His words were unheeded. The idea of having the son of the

Sultan for a lover had captivated the imagination of the poetess.

  Maddened by jealousy and despair, Ahmed joined in a conspiracy

against the ruling dynasty. It was discovered, and the conspirators

fled from Granada. Some escaped to a castle on the mountains, Ahmed

took refuge in Malaga, where he concealed himself, intending to embark

for Valencia. He was discovered, loaded with chains and thrown into

a dungeon, to abide the decision of Sidi Abu Said.

  He was visited in prison by a nephew, who has left on record an

account of the interview. The youth was moved to tears at seeing his

illustrious relative, late so prosperous and honored, fettered like

a malefactor.

  "Why dost thou weep?" said Ahmed. "Are these tears shed for me?

For me, who have enjoyed all that the world could give? Weep not for

me. I have had my share of happiness; banqueted on the daintiest fare;

quaffed out of crystal cups; slept on beds of down; been arrayed in

the richest silks and brocades; ridden the fleetest steeds; enjoyed

the loves of the fairest maidens. Weep not for me. My present

reverse is but the inevitable course of fate. I have committed acts

which render pardon hopeless. I must await my punishment."

  His presentiment was correct. The vengeance of Sidi Abu Said was

only to be satisfied by the blood of his rival, and the unfortunate

Ahmed was beheaded at Malaga, in the month Jumadi, in the year 559

of the Hegira (April, 1164). When the news was brought to the

fickle-hearted Hafsah, she was struck with sorrow and remorse, and put

on mourning; recalling his warning words, and reproaching herself with

being the cause of his death.

  Of the after fortunes of Hafsah I have no further trace than that

she died in Morocco, in 1184, outliving both her lovers, for Sidi

Abu Said died in Morocco of the plague in 1175. A memorial of his

residence in Granada remained in a palace which he built on the

banks of the Xenil. The garden of Maumal, the scene of the early lives

of Ahmed and Hafsah, is no longer in existence. Its site may be

found by the antiquary in poetical research.



  The authorities for the foregoing: Alcantara, Hist. Granada. Al

Makkari, Hist. Mohamed. Dynasties in Spain. Notes and illustrations of

the same by Gayangos. Ibnu Al Kahttib, Biograph. Dic., cited by

Gayangos. Conde, Hist. Dom. Arab.

               An Expedition in Quest of a Diploma.



  ONE OF the most important occurrences in the domestic life of the

Alhambra, was the departure of Manuel, the nephew of Dona Antonia, for

Malaga, to stand examination as a physician. I have already informed

the reader that, on his success in obtaining a degree depended in a

great measure the union and future fortunes of himself and his

cousin Dolores; at least so I was privately informed by Mateo Ximenes,

and various circumstances concurred to corroborate his information.

Their courtship, however, was carried on very quietly and

discreetly, and I scarce think I should have discovered it, if I had

not been put on the alert by the all-observant Mateo.

  In the present instance, Dolores was less on the reserve, and had

busied herself for several days in fitting out honest Manuel for his

expedition. All his clothes had been arranged and packed in the

neatest order, and above all she had worked a smart Andalusian

travelling jacket for him with her own hands. On the morning appointed

for his departure, a stout mule on which he was to perform the journey

was paraded at the portal of the Alhambra, and Tio Polo (Uncle

Polo), an old invalid soldier, attended to caparison him. This veteran

was one of the curiosities of the place. He had a leathern visage,

tanned in the tropics, a long Roman nose, and a black beetle eye. I

had frequently observed him reading, apparently with intense interest,

an old parchment-bound volume; sometimes he would be surrounded by a

group of his brother invalids, some seated on the parapets, some lying

on the grass, listening with fixed attention, while he read slowly and

deliberately out of his favorite work, sometimes pausing to explain or

expound for the benefit of his less enlightened auditors.

  I took occasion one day to inform myself of this ancient book, which

appeared to be his vade mecum, and found it to be an odd volume of the

works of Padre Benito Geronymo Feyjoo, and that one which treats about

the Magic of Spain, the mysterious caves of Salamanca and Toledo,

the Purgatory of San Patricio (St. Patrick), and other mystic subjects

of the kind. From that time I kept my eye upon the veteran.

  On the present occasion, I amused myself with watching him fit out

the steed of Manuel with all the forecast of an old campaigner. First,

he took a considerable time in adjusting to the back of the mule a

cumbrous saddle of antique fashion, high in front and behind, with

Moorish stirrups like shovels, the whole looking like a relic of the

old armory of the Alhambra; then a fleecy sheepskin was accommodated

to the deep seat of the saddle; then a maleta, neatly packed by the

hand of Dolores, was buckled behind; then a manta was thrown over it

to serve either as cloak or couch; then the all-important alforjas,

carefully stocked with provant, were hung in front, together with

the bota, or leathern bottle for either wine or water, and lastly

the trabuco, which the old soldier slung behind, giving it his

benediction. It was like the fitting out in old times of a Moorish

cavalier for a foray or a joust in the Vivarrambla. A number of the

lazzaroni of the fortress had gathered round, with some of the

invalids, all looking on, all offering their aid, and all giving

advice, to the great annoyance of Tio Polo.

  When all was ready Manuel took leave of the household; Tio Polo held

his stirrup while he mounted, adjusted the girths and saddle, and

cheered him off in military style; then turning to Dolores, who

stood admiring her cavalier as he trotted off, "Ah Dolorocita,"

exclaimed he, with a nod and a wink, "es muy guapo Manuelito in su

Xaqueta" ("Ah Dolores, Manuel is mighty fine in his jacket.") The

little damsel blushed and laughed, and ran into the house.

  Days elapsed without tidings from Manuel, though he had promised

to write. The heart of Dolores began to misgive her. Had any thing

happened to him on the road? Had he failed in his examination? A

circumstance occurred in her little household to add to her uneasiness

and fill her mind with foreboding. It was almost equal to the escapado

of her pigeon. Her tortoise-shell cat eloped at night and clambered to

the tiled roof of the Alhambra. In the dead of the night there was a

fearful caterwauling; some grimalkin was uncivil to her; then there

was a scramble, then a clapper-clawing; then both parties rolled off

the roof and tumbled from a great height among the trees on the hill

side. Nothing more was seen or heard of the fugitive, and poor Dolores

considered it but the prelude to greater calamities.

  At the end of ten days, however, Manuel returned in triumph, duly

authorized to kill or cure; and all Dolores' cares were over. There

was a general gathering in the evening, of the humble friends and

hangers-on of Dame Antonio to congratulate her, and to pay their

respects to el Senor Medico, who, peradventure, at some future day,

might have all their lives in his hands. One of the most important

of these guests was old Tio Polo; and I gladly seized the occasion

to prosecute my acquaintance with him. "Oh senor," cried Dolores, "you

who are so eager to learn all the old histories of the Alhambra. Tio

Polo knows more about them than any one else about the place. More

than Mateo Ximenes and his whole family put together. Vaya- vaya-

Tio Polo, tell the senor all those stories you told us one evening,

about enchanted Moors, and the haunted bridge over the Darro, and

the old stone pomegranates, that have been there since the days of

King Chico."

  It was some time before the old invalid could be brought into a

narrative vein. He shook his head- they were all idle tales; not

worthy of being told to a caballero like myself. It was only by

telling some stories of the kind myself I at last got him to open

his budget. It was a whimsical farrago, partly made up of what he

had heard in the Alhambra, partly of what he had read in Padre Feyjoo.

I will endeavor to give the reader the substance of it, but I will not

promise to give it in the very words of Tio Polo.

              The Legend of the Enchanted Soldier.



  EVERYBODY has heard of the Cave of St. Cyprian at Salamanca, where

in old times judicial astronomy, necromancy, chiromancy, and other

dark and damnable arts were secretly taught by an ancient sacristan;

or, as some will have it, by the devil himself, in that disguise.

The cave has long been shut up and the very site of it forgotten,

though, according to tradition, the entrance was somewhere about where

the stone cross stands in the small square of the seminary of

Carvajal; and this tradition appears in some degree corroborated by

the circumstances of the following story.

  There was at one time a student of Salamanca, Don Vicente by name,

of that merry but mendicant class, who set out on the road to learning

without a penny in pouch for the journey, and who, during college

vacations, beg from town to town and village to village to raise funds

to enable them to pursue their studies through the ensuing term. He

was now about to set forth on his wanderings; and being somewhat

musical, slung on his back a guitar with which to amuse the villagers,

and pay for a meal or a night's lodgings.

  As he passed by the stone cross in the seminary square, he pulled

off his hat and made a short invocation to St. Cyprian, for good luck;

when casting his eyes upon the earth, he perceived something glitter

at the foot of the cross. On picking it up, it proved to be a seal

ring of mixed metal, in which gold and silver appeared to be

blended. The seal bore as a device two triangles crossing each

other, so as to form a star. This device is said to be a cabalistic

sign, invented by King Solomon the wise, and of mighty power in all

cases of enchantment; but the honest student, being neither sage nor

conjurer, knew nothing of the matter. He took the ring as a present

from St. Cyprian in reward of his prayer, slipped it on his finger,

made a bow to the cross, and strumming his guitar, set off merrily

on his wandering.

  The life of a mendicant student in Spain is not the most miserable

in the world; especially if he has any talent at making himself

agreeable. He rambles at large from village to village, and city to

city, wherever curiosity or caprice may conduct him. The country

curates, who, for the most part, have been mendicant students in their

time, give him shelter for the night, and a comfortable meal, and

often enrich him with several quartos, or half-pence in the morning.

As he presents himself from door to door in the streets of the cities,

he meets with no harsh rebuff, no chilling contempt, for there is no

disgrace attending his mendicity, many of the most learned men in

Spain having commenced their career in this manner; but if, like the

student in question, he is a good-looking varlet and a merry

companion, and, above all, if he can play the guitar, he is sure of

a hearty welcome among the peasants, and smiles and favors from

their wives and daughters.

  In this way, then, did our ragged and musical son of learning make

his way over half the kingdom, with the fixed determination to visit

the famous city of Granada before his return. Sometimes he was

gathered for the night into the fold of some village pastor; sometimes

he was sheltered under the humble but hospitable roof of the

peasant. Seated at the cottage door with his guitar, he delighted

the simple folk with his ditties, or striking up a fandango or bolero,

set the brown country lads and lasses dancing in the mellow

twilight. In the morning he departed with kind words from host and

hostess, and kind looks and, peradventure, a squeeze of the hand

from the daughter.

  At length he arrived at the great object of his musical

vagabondizing, the far-famed city of Granada, and hailed with wonder

and delight its Moorish towers, its lovely Vega and its snowy

mountains glistering through a summer atmosphere. It is needless to

say with what eager curiosity he entered its gates and wandered

through its streets, and gazed upon its oriental monuments. Every

female face peering through a window or beaming from a balcony was

to him a Zorayda or a Zelinda, nor could he meet a stately dame on the

Alameda but he was ready to fancy her a Moorish princess, and to

spread his student's robe beneath her feet.

  His musical talent, his happy humor, his youth and his good looks,

won him a universal welcome in spite of his ragged robes, and for

several days he led a gay life in the old Moorish capital and its

environs. One of his occasional haunts was the fountain of

Avellanos, in the valley of the Darro. It is one of the popular

resorts of Granada, and has been so since the days of the Moors; and

here the student had an opportunity of pursuing his studies of

female beauty, a branch of study to which he was a little prone.

  Here he would take his seat with his guitar, improvise

love-ditties to admiring groups of majos and majas, or prompt with his

music the ever ready dance. He was thus engaged one evening, when he

beheld a padre of the church advancing at whose approach every one

touched the hat. He was evidently a man of consequence; he certainly

was a mirror of good if not of holy living- robust and rosy-faced, and

breathing at every pore, with the warmth of the weather and the

exercise of the walk. As he passed along he would every now and then

draw a maravedi out of his pocket and bestow it on a beggar, with an

air of signal beneficence. "Ah, the blessed father!" would be the cry;

"long life to him, and may he soon be a bishop!"

  To aid his steps in ascending the hill he leaned gently now and then

on the arm of a handmaid, evidently the pet-lamb of this kindest of

pastors. Ah, such a damsel! Andalus from head to foot: from the rose

in her hair to the fairy shoe and lacework stocking- Andalus in

every movement; in every undulation of the body- ripe, melting

Andalus! But then so modest!- so shy!- ever, with downcast eyes,

listening to the words of the padre; or, if by chance she let flash

a side glance, it was suddenly checked and her eyes once more cast

to the ground.

  The good padre looked benignantly on the company about the fountain,

and took his seat with some emphasis on a stone bench, while the

handmaid hastened to bring him a glass of sparkling water. He sipped

it deliberately and with a relish, tempering it with one of those

spongy pieces of frosted eggs and sugar so dear to Spanish epicures,

and on returning the glass to the hand of the damsel pinched her cheek

with infinite loving-kindness.

  "Ah, the good pastor!" whispered the student to himself; "what a

happiness would it be to be gathered into his fold with such a

pet-lamb for a companion!"

  But no such good fare was likely to befall him. In vain he essayed

those powers of pleasing which he had found so irresistible with

country curates and country lasses. Never had he touched his guitar

with such skill; never had he poured forth more soul-moving ditties,

but he had no longer a country curate or country lass to deal with.

The worthy priest evidently did not relish music, and the modest

damsel never raised her eyes from the ground. They remained but a

short time at the fountain; the good padre hastened their return to

Granada. The damsel gave the student one shy glance in retiring, but

it plucked the heart out of his bosom!

  He inquired about them after they had gone. Padre Tomas was one of

the saints of Granada, a model of regularity, punctual in his hour

of rising, his hour of taking a paseo for an appetite, his hours of

eating, his hour of taking his siesta; his hour of playing his game of

tresillo, of an evening, with some of the dames of the Cathedral

circle; his hour of supping, and his hour of retiring to rest, to

gather fresh strength for another day's round of similar duties. He

had an easy sleek mule for his riding, a matronly housekeeper

skilled in preparing tit-bits for his table, and the pet lamb, to

smooth his pillow at night and bring him his chocolate in the morning.

  Adieu now to the gay, thoughtless life of the student; the side

glance of a bright eye had been the undoing of him. Day and night he

could not get the image of this most modest damsel out of his mind. He

sought the mansion of the padre. Alas! it was above the class of

houses accessible to a strolling student like himself. The worthy

padre had no sympathy with him; he had never been Estudiante

sopista, obliged to sing for his supper. He blockaded the house by

day, catching a glance of the damsel now and then as she appeared at a

casement; but these glances only fed his flame without encouraging his

hope. He serenaded her balcony at night, and at one time was flattered

by the appearance of something white at a window. Alas, it was only

the nightcap of the padre.

  Never was lover more devoted, never damsel more shy: the poor

student was reduced to despair. At length arrived the eve of St. John,

when the lower classes of Granada swarm into the country, dance away

the afternoon, and pass midsummer's night on the banks of the Darro

and the Xenil. Happy are they who on this eventful night can wash

their faces in those waters just as the Cathedral bell tells midnight;

for at that precise moment they have a beautifying power. The student,

having nothing to do, suffered himself to be carried away by the

holiday-seeking throng until he found himself in the narrow valley

of the Darro, below the lofty hill and ruddy towers of the Alhambra.

The dry bed of the river, the rocks which border it, the terraced

gardens which overhang it were alive with variegated groups, dancing

under the vines and fig-trees to the sound of the guitar and

castanets.

  The student remained for some time in doleful dumps, leaning against

one of the huge misshapen stone pomegranates which adorn the ends of

the little bridge over the Darro. He cast a wistful glance upon the

merry scene, where every cavalier had his dame, or, to speak more

appropriately, every Jack his Jill; sighed at his own solitary

state, a victim to the black eye of the most unapproachable of

damsels, and repined at his ragged garb, which seemed to shut the gate

of hope against him.

  By degrees his attention was attracted to a neighbor equally

solitary with himself This was a tall soldier, of a stern aspect and

grizzled beard, who seemed posted as a sentry at the opposite

pomegranate. His face was bronzed by time; he was arrayed in ancient

Spanish armor, with buckler and lance, and stood immovable as a

statue. What surprised the student was, that though thus strangely

equipped, he was totally unnoticed by the passing throng, albeit

that many almost brushed against him.

  "This is a city of old-time peculiarities," thought the student,

"and doubtless this is one of them with which the inhabitants are

too familiar to be surprised." His own curiosity, however, was

awakened, and being of a social disposition, he accosted the soldier.

  "A rare old suit of armor that which you wear, comrade. May I ask

what corps you belong to?"

  The soldier gasped out a reply from a pair of jaws which seemed to

have rusted on their hinges.

  "The royal guard of Ferdinand and Isabella."

  "Santa Maria! Why, it is three centuries since that corps was in

service."

  "And for three centuries have I been mounting guard. Now I trust

my tour of duty draws to a close. Dost thou desire fortune?"

  The student held up his tattered cloak in reply.

  "I understand thee. If thou hast faith and courage, follow me, and

thy fortune is made."

  "Softly, comrade, to follow thee would require small courage in

one who has nothing to lose but life and an old guitar, neither of

much value; but my faith is of a different matter, and not to be put

in temptation. If it be any criminal act by which I am to mend my

fortune, think not my ragged cloak will make me undertake it."

  The soldier turned on him a look of high displeasure. "My sword,"

said he, "has never been drawn but in the cause of the faith and the

throne. I am a Cristiano viejo, trust in me and fear no evil."

  The student followed him wondering. He observed that no one heeded

their conversation, and that the soldier made his way through the

various groups of idlers unnoticed, as if invisible.

  Crossing the bridge, the soldier led the way by a narrow and steep

path past a Moorish mill and aqueduct, and up the ravine which

separates the domains of the Generalife from those of the Alhambra.

The last ray of the sun shone upon the red battlements of the

latter, which beetled far above; and the convent bells were

proclaiming the festival of the ensuing day. The ravine was

overshadowed by fig-trees, vines, and myrtles, and the outer towers

and walls of the fortress. It was dark and lonely, and the

twilight-loving bats began to flit about. At length the soldier halted

at a remote and ruined tower, apparently intended to guard a Moorish

aqueduct. He struck the foundation with the but-end of his spear. A

rumbling sound was heard, and the solid stones yawned apart, leaving

an opening as wide as a door.

  "Enter in the name of the Holy Trinity," said the soldier, "and fear

nothing." The student's heart quaked, but he made the sign of the

cross, muttered his Ave Maria, and followed his mysterious guide

into a deep vault cut out of the solid rock under the tower, and

covered with Arabic inscriptions. The soldier pointed to a stone

seat hewn along one side of the vault. "Behold," said he, "my couch

for three hundred years." The bewildered student tried to force a

joke. "By the blessed St. Anthony," said he, "but you must have

slept soundly, considering the hardness of your couch."

  "On the contrary, sleep has been a stranger to these eyes; incessant

watchfulness has been my doom. Listen to my lot. I was one of the

royal guards of Ferdinand and Isabella; but was taken prisoner by

the Moors in one of their sorties, and confined a captive in this

tower. When preparations were made to surrender the fortress to the

Christian sovereigns, I was prevailed upon by Alfaqui, a Moorish

priest, to aid him in secreting some of the treasures of Boabdil in

this vault. I was justly punished for my fault. The Alfaqui was an

African necromancer, and by his infernal arts cast a spell upon me- to

guard his treasures. Something must have happened to him, for he never

returned, and here have I remained ever since, buried alive. Years and

years have rolled away; earthquakes have shaken this hill; I have

heard stone by stone of the tower above tumbling to the ground, in the

natural operation of time; but the spell-bound walls of this vault set

both time and earthquakes at defiance.

  "Once every hundred years, on the festival of St. John, the

enchantment ceases to have thorough sway; I am permitted to go forth

and post myself upon the bridge of the Darro, where you met me,

waiting until some one shall arrive who may have power to break this

magic spell. I have hitherto mounted guard there in vain. I walk as in

a cloud, concealed from mortal sight. You are the first to accost me

for now three hundred years. I behold the reason. I see on your finger

the seal-ring of Solomon the wise, which is proof against all

enchantment. With you it remains to deliver me from this awful

dungeon, or to leave me to keep guard here for another hundred years."

  The student listened to this tale in mute wonderment. He had heard

many tales of treasure shut up under strong enchantment in the

vaults of the Alhambra, but had treated them as fables. He now felt

the value of the seal-ring, which had, in a manner, been given to

him by St. Cyprian. Still, though armed by so potent a talisman, it

was an awful thing to find himself tete-a-tete in such a place with an

enchanted soldier, who, according to the laws of nature, ought to have

been quietly in his grave for nearly three centuries.

  A personage of this kind, however, was quite out of the ordinary

run, and not to be trifled with, and he assured him he might rely upon

his friendship and good will to do every thing in his power for his

deliverance.

  "I trust to a motive more powerful than friendship," said the

soldier.

  He pointed to a ponderous iron coffer, secured by locks inscribed

with Arabic characters. "That coffer," said he, "contains countless

treasure in gold and jewels, and precious stones. Break the magic

spell by which I am enthralled, and one half of this treasure shall be

thine."

  "But how am I to do it?"

  "The aid of a Christian priest, and a Christian maid is necessary.

The priest to exorcise the powers of darkness; the damsel to touch

this chest with the seal of Solomon. This must be done at night. But

have a care. This is solemn work, and not to be effected by the

carnal-minded. The priest must be a Cristiano viejo, a model of

sanctity, and must mortify the flesh before he comes here, by a

rigorous fast of four-and-twenty hours; and as to the maiden, she must

be above reproach, and proof against temptation. Linger not in finding

aid. In three days my furlough is at an end; if not delivered before

midnight of the third, I shall have to mount guard for another

century."

  "Fear not," said the student, "I have in my eye the very priest

and damsel you describe; but how am I to regain admission to this

tower?"

  "The seal of Solomon will open the way for thee."

  The student issued forth from the tower much more gayly than he

had entered. The wall closed behind him, and remained solid as before.

  The next morning he repaired boldly to the mansion of the priest, no

longer a poor strolling student, thrumming his way with a guitar;

but an ambassador from the shadowy world, with enchanted treasures

to bestow. No particulars are told of his negotiation, excepting

that the zeal of the worthy priest was easily kindled at the idea of

rescuing an old soldier of the faith and a strong-box of King Chico

from the very clutches of Satan; and then what alms might be

dispensed, what churches built, and how many poor relatives enriched

with the Moorish treasure!

  As to the immaculate handmaid, she was ready to lend her hand, which

was all that was required, to the pious work; and if a shy glance

now and then might be believed, the ambassador began to find favor

in her modest eyes.

  The greatest difficulty, however, was the fast to which the good

Padre had to subject himself. Twice he attempted it, and twice the

flesh was too strong for the spirit. It was only on the third day that

he was enabled to withstand the temptations of the cupboard; but it

was still a question whether he would hold out until the spell was

broken.

  At a late hour of the night the party groped their way up the ravine

by the light of a lantern, and bearing a basket with provisions for

exorcising the demon of hunger so soon as the other demons should be

laid in the Red Sea.

  The seal of Solomon opened their way into the tower. They found

the soldier seated on the enchanted strong-box, awaiting their

arrival. The exorcism was performed in due style. The damsel

advanced and touched the locks of the coffer with the seal of Solomon.

The lid flew open, and such treasures of gold and jewels and

precious stones as flashed upon the eye!

  "Here's cut and come again!" cried the student, exultingly, as he

proceeded to cram his pockets.

  "Fairly and softly," exclaimed the soldier. "Let us get the coffer

out entire, and then divide."

  They accordingly went to work with might and main, but it was a

difficult task; the chest was enormously heavy, and had been

imbedded there for centuries. While they were thus employed the good

dominie drew on one side and made a vigorous onslaught on the

basket, by way of exorcising the demon of hunger which was raging in

his entrails. In a little while a fat capon was devoured, and washed

down by a deep potation of Val de Penas; and, by way of grace after

meat, he gave a kind-hearted kiss to the pet lamb who waited on him.

It was quietly done in a corner, but the tell-tale walls babbled it

forth as if in triumph. Never was chaste salute more awful in its

effects. At the sound the soldier gave a great cry of despair; the

coffer, which was half raised, fell back in its place and was locked

once more. Priest, student, and damsel, found themselves outside of

the tower, the wall of which closed with a thundering jar. Alas! the

good Padre had broken his fast too soon!

  When recovered from his surprise, the student would have

re-entered the tower, but learnt to his dismay that the damsel, in her

fright, had let fall the seal of Solomon; it remained within the

vault.

  In a word, the cathedral bell tolled midnight; the spell was

renewed; the soldier was doomed to mount guard for another hundred

years, and there he and the treasure remain to this day- and all

because the kind-hearted Padre kissed his handmaid. "Ah father!

father!" said the student, shaking his head ruefully, as they returned

down the ravine, "I fear there was less of the saint than the sinner

in that kiss!"



  Thus ends the legend as far as it has been authenticated. There is a

tradition, however, that the student had brought off treasure enough

in his pocket to set him up in the world; that he prospered in his

affairs, that the worthy Padre gave him the pet lamb in marriage, by

way of amends for the blunder in the vault; that the immaculate damsel

proved a pattern for wives as she had been for handmaids, and bore her

husband a numerous progeny; that the first was a wonder; it was born

seven months after her marriage, and though a seven months boy, was

the sturdiest of the flock. The rest were all born in the ordinary

course of time.

  The story of the enchanted soldier remains one of the popular

traditions of Granada, though told in a variety of ways; the common

people affirm that he still mounts guard on midsummer eve beside the

gigantic stone pomegranate on the Bridge of the Darro, but remains

invisible excepting to such lucky mortal as may possess the seal of

Solomon.



             Notes to "The Enchanted Soldier".



  Among the ancient superstitions of Spain, were those of the

existence of profound caverns in which the magic arts were taught,

either by the devil in person, or some sage devoted to his service.

One of the most famous of these caves, was at Salamanca. Don Francisco

de Torreblanca makes mention of it in the first book of his work on

Magic. The devil was said to play the part of Oracle there, giving

replies to those who repaired thither to propound fateful questions,

as in the celebrated cave of Trophonius. Don Francisco, though he

records this story, does not put faith in it; he gives it however as

certain, that a Sacristan, named Clement Potosi, taught secretly the

magic arts in that cave. Padre Feyjoo, who inquired into the matter,

reports it as a vulgar belief that the devil himself taught those arts

there, admitting only seven disciples at a time, one of whom, to be

determined by lot, was to be devoted to him body and soul for ever.

Among one of these sets of students, was a young man, son of the

Marquis de Villena, on whom, after having accomplished his studies,

the lot fell. He succeeded, however, in cheating the devil, leaving

him his shadow instead of his body.

  Don Juan de Dios, Professor of Humanities in the University in the

early part of the last century, gives the following version of the

story, extracted, as he says, from an ancient manuscript. It will be

perceived he has marred the supernatural part of the tale, and ejected

the devil from it altogether.

  As to the fable of the Cave of San Cyprian, says he, all that we

have been able to verify is, that where the stone cross stands, in the

small square or place called by the name of the Seminary of

Carvajal, there was the parochial church of San Cyprian. A descent

of twenty steps led down to a subterranean Sacristy, spacious and

vaulted like a cave. Here a Sacristan once taught magic, judicial

astrology, geomancy, hydromancy, pyromancy, acromancy, chiromancy,

necromancy, &c.

  The extract goes on to state that seven students engaged at a time

with the Sacristan, at a fixed stipend. Lots were cast among them

which one of their number should pay for the whole, with the

understanding that he on whom the lot fell, if he did not pay

promptly, should be detained in a chamber of the Sacristy, until the

funds were forthcoming. This became thenceforth the usual practice.

  On one occasion the lot fell on Henry de Villena, son of the marquis

of the same name. He having perceived that there had been trick and

shuffling in the casting of the lot, and suspecting the Sacristan to

be cognizant thereof, refused to pay. He was forthwith left in

limbo. It so happened that in a dark corner of the Sacristy was a huge

jar or earthen reservoir for water, which was cracked and empty. In

this the youth contrived to conceal himself. The Sacristan returned at

night with a servant, bringing lights and a supper. Unlocking the

door, they found no one in the vault, and a book of magic lying open

on the table. They retreated in dismay, leaving the door open, by

which Villena made his escape. The story went about that through magic

he had made himself invisible.

  The reader has now both versions of the story, and may make his

choice. I will only observe that the sages of the Alhambra incline

to the diabolical one.

  This Henry de Villena flourished in the time of Juan II, King of

Castile, of whom he was uncle. He became famous for his knowledge of

the Natural Sciences, and hence, in that ignorant age was

stigmatized as a necromancer. Fernan Perez de Guzman, in his account

of distinguished men, gives him credit for great learning, but says he

devoted himself to the arts of divination, the interpretation of

dreams, of signs, and portents.

  At the death of Villena, his library fell into the hands of the

King, who was warned that it contained books treating of magic, and

not proper to be read. King Juan ordered that they should be

transported in carts to the residence of a reverend prelate to be

examined. The prelate was less learned than devout. Some of the

books treated of mathematics, others of astronomy, with figures and

diagrams, and planetary signs; others of chemistry or alchemy, with

foreign and mystic words. All these were necromancy in the eyes of the

pious prelate, and the books were consigned to the flames, like the

library of Don Quixote.



  THE SEAL OF SOLOMON. The device consists of two equilateral

triangles, interlaced so as to form a star, and surrounded by a

circle. According to Arab tradition, when the Most High gave Solomon

the choice of blessings, and he chose wisdom, there came from heaven a

ring, on which this device was engraven. This mystic talisman was

the arcanum of his wisdom, felicity, and grandeur; by this he governed

and prospered. In consequence of a temporary lapse from virtue, he

lost the ring in the sea, and was at once reduced to the level of

ordinary men. By penitence and prayer he made his peace with the

Deity, was permitted to find his ring again in the belly of a fish,

and thus recovered his celestial gifts. That he might not utterly lose

them again, he communicated to others the secret of the marvellous

ring.

  This symbolical seal we are told was sacrilegiously used by the

Mahometan infidels, and before them by the Arabian idolaters, and

before them by the Hebrews, for "diabolical enterprises and abominable

superstitions." Those who wish to be more thoroughly informed on the

subject, will do well to consult the learned Father Athanasius

Kirker's treatise on the Cabala Sarracenica.



  A word more to the curious reader. There are many persons in these

skeptical times who affect to deride every thing connected with the

occult sciences, or black art; who have no faith in the efficacy of

conjurations, incantations or divinations; and who stoutly contend

that such things never had existence. To such determined unbelievers

the testimony of past ages is as nothing; they require the evidence of

their own senses, and deny that such arts and practices have prevailed

in days of yore, simply because they meet with no instance of them

in the present day. They cannot perceive that, as the world became

versed in the natural sciences, the supernatural became superfluous

and fell into disuse, and that the hardy inventions of art

superseded the mysteries of magic. Still, say the enlightened few,

those mystic powers exist, though in a latent state, and untasked by

the ingenuity of man. A talisman is still a talisman, possessing all

its indwelling and awful properties, though it may have lain dormant

for ages at the bottom of the sea, or in the dusty cabinet of the

antiquary.

  The signet of Solomon the Wise, for instance, is well known to

have held potent control over genii, demons, and enchantments; now who

will positively assert that the same mystic signet, wherever it may

exist, does not at the present moment possess the same marvellous

virtues which distinguished it in the olden time? Let those who

doubt repair to Salamanca, delve into the cave of San Cyprian, explore

its hidden secrets, and decide. As to those who will not be at the

pains of such investigation, let them substitute faith for

incredulity, and receive with honest credence the foregoing legend.

                The Author's Farewell to Granada.



  MY SERENE and happy reign in the Alhambra was suddenly brought to

a close by letters which reached me, while indulging in Oriental

luxury in the cool hall of the baths, summoning me away from my Moslem

elysium to mingle once more in the bustle and business of the dusty

world. How was I to encounter its toils and turmoils, after such a

life of repose and reverie! How was I to endure its common-place,

after the poetry of the Alhambra!

  But little preparation was necessary for my departure. A two-wheeled

vehicle, called a tartana, very much resembling a covered cart, was to

be the travelling equipage of a young Englishman and myself through

Murcia, to Alicante and Valencia, on our way to France; and a

long-limbed varlet, who had been a contrabandista, and, for aught I

knew, a robber, was to be our guide and guard. The preparations were

soon made, but the departure was the difficulty. Day after day was

it postponed; day after day was spent in lingering about my favorite

haunts, and day after day they appeared more delightful in my eyes.

  The social and domestic little world also, in which I had been

moving, had become singularly endeared to me; and the concern

evinced by them at my intended departure convinced me that my kind

feelings were reciprocated. Indeed, when at length the day arrived,

I did not dare venture upon a leave-taking at the good dame Antonia's;

I saw the soft heart of little Dolores, at least, was brim full and

ready for an overflow. So I bade a silent adieu to the palace and

its inmates, and descended into the city, as if intending to return.

There, however, the tartana and the guide were ready; so, after taking

a noonday's repast with my fellow traveller at the posada, I set out

with him on our journey.

  Humble was the cortege and melancholy the departure of El Rey Chico

the second! Manuel, the nephew of Tia Antonia, Mateo, my officious

but now disconsolate squire, and two or three old invalids of the

Alhambra with whom I had grown into gossiping companionship, had come

down to see me off; for it is one of the good old customs of Spain, to

sally forth several miles to meet a coming friend, and to accompany

him as far on his departure. Thus then we set out, ourlong-legged

guard striding ahead, with his escopeta on his shoulder, Manuel and

Mateo on each side of the tartana, and the old invalids behind.

  At some little distance to the north of Granada, the road

gradually ascends the hills; here I alighted and walked up slowly with

Manuel, who took this occasion to confide to me the secret of his

heart and of all those tender concerns between himself and Dolores,

with which I had been already informed by the all knowing and all

revealing Mateo Ximenes. His doctor's diploma had prepared the way for

their union, and nothing more was wanting but the dispensation of

the Pope, on account of their consanguinity. Then, if he could get the

post of Medico of the fortress, his happiness would be complete! I

congratulated him on the judgment and good taste he had shown in his

choice of a helpmate, invoked all possible felicity on their union,

and trusted that the abundant affections of the kind-hearted little

Dolores would in time have more stable objects to occupy them than

recreant cats and truant pigeons.


  It was indeed a sorrowful parting when I took leave of these good

people and saw them slowly descend the hills, now and then turning

round to wave me a last adieu. Manuel, it is true, had cheerful

prospects to console him, but poor Mateo seemed perfectly cast down.

It was to him a grievous fall from the station of prime minister and

historiographer, to his old brown cloak and his starveling mystery

of ribbon-weaving; and the poor devil, notwithstanding his

occasional officiousness, had, somehow or other, acquired a stronger

hold on my sympathies than I was aware of. It would have really been a

consolation in parting, could I have anticipated the good fortune in

store for him, and to which I had contributed; for the importance I

had appeared to give to his tales and gossip and local knowledge,

and the frequent companionship in which I had indulged him in the

course of my strolls, had elevated his idea of his own

qualifications and opened a new career to him; and the son of the

Alhambra has since become its regular and well-paid cicerone, insomuch

that I am told he has never been obliged to resume the ragged old

brown cloak in which I first found him.

  Towards sunset I came to where the road wound into the mountains,

and here I paused to take a last look at Granada. The hill on which

I stood commanded a glorious view of the city, the Vega, and the

surrounding mountains. It was at an opposite point of the compass from

La cuesta de las lagrimas (the hill of tears) noted for the "last sigh

of the Moor." I now could realize something of the feelings of poor

Boabdil when he bade adieu to the paradise he was leaving behind,

and beheld before him a rugged and sterile road conducting him to

exile.

  The setting sun as usual shed a melancholy effulgence on the ruddy

towers of the Alhambra. I could faintly discern the balconied window

of the Tower of Comares, where I had indulged in so many delightful

reveries. The bosky groves and gardens about the city were richly

gilded with the sunshine, the purple haze of a summer evening was

gathering over the Vega; every thing was lovely, but tenderly and

sadly so, to my parting gaze.

  "I will hasten from this prospect," thought I, "before the sun is

set. I will carry away a recollection of it clothed in all its

beauty."

  With these thoughts I pursued my way among the mountains. A little

further and Granada, the Vega, and the Alhambra, were shut from my

view; and thus ended one of the pleasantest dreams of a life, which

the reader perhaps may think has been but too much made up of dreams.



                        THE END

