




                 Inhabitants of the Alhambra.



  I HAVE often observed that the more proudly a mansion has been

tenanted in the day of its prosperity, the humbler are its inhabitants

in the day of its decline, and that the palace of a king commonly ends

in being the nestling-place of the beggar.

  The Alhambra is in a rapid state of similar transition. Whenever a

tower falls to decay, it is seized upon by some tatterdemalion family,

who become joint-tenants, with the bats and owls, of its gilded halls,

and hang their rags, those standards of poverty, out of its windows

and loopholes.

  I have amused myself with remarking some of the motley characters

that have thus usurped the ancient abode of royalty, and who seem as

if placed here to give a farcical termination to the drama of human

pride. One of these even bears the mockery of a regal title. It is a

little old woman named Maria Antonia Sabonea, but who goes by the

appellation of la Reyna Coquina, or the Cockle-queen. She is small

enough to be a fairy, and a fairy she may be for aught I can find out,

for no one seems to know her origin. Her habitation is in a kind of

closet under the outer staircase of the palace, and she sits in the

cool stone corridor, plying her needle and singing from morning till

night, with a ready joke for every one that passes; for though one

of the poorest, she is one of the merriest little women breathing. Her

great merit is a gift for story-telling, having, I verily believe,

as many stories at her command, as the inexhaustible Scheherezade of

the thousand and one nights. Some of these I have heard her relate

in the evening tertulias of Dame Antonia, at which she is occasionally

a humble attendant.

  That there must be some fairy gift about this mysterious little

old woman, would appear from her extraordinary luck, since,

notwithstanding her being very little, very ugly, and very poor, she

has had, according to her own account, five husbands and a half,

reckoning as a half one a young dragoon, who died during courtship.

A rival personage to this little fairy queen is a portly old fellow

with a bottle-nose, who goes about in a rusty garb with a cocked hat

of oil-skin and a red cockade. He is one of the legitimate sons of the

Alhambra, and has lived here all his life, filling various offices,

such as deputy alguazil, sexton of the parochial church, and marker of

a fives-court established at the foot of one of the towers. He is as

poor as a rat, but as proud as he is ragged, boasting of his descent

from the illustrious house of Aguilar, from which sprang Gonzalvo of

Cordova, the grand captain. Nay, he actually bears the name of

Alonzo de Aguilar, so renowned in the history of the conquest;

though the graceless wags of the fortress have given him the title

of el padre santo, or the holy father, the usual appellation of the

Pope, which I had thought too sacred in the eyes of true Catholics

to be thus ludicrously applied. It is a whimsical caprice of fortune

to present, in the grotesque person of this tatterdemalion, a namesake

and descendant of the proud Alonzo de Aguilar, the mirror of

Andalusian chivalry, leading an almost mendicant existence about

this once haughty fortress, which his ancestor aided to reduce; yet,

such might have been the lot of the descendants of Agamemnon and

Achilles, had they lingered about the ruins of Troy!

  Of this motley community, I find the family of my gossiping

squire, Mateo Ximenes, to form, from their numbers at least, a very

important part. His boast of being a son of the Alhambra, is not

unfounded. His family has inhabited the fortress ever since the time

of the conquest, handing down an hereditary poverty from father to

son; not one of them having ever been known to be worth a maravedi.

His father, by trade a ribbon-weaver, and who succeeded the historical

tailor as the head of the family, is now near seventy years of age,

and lives in a hovel of reeds and plaster, built by his own hands,

just above the iron gate. The furniture consists of a crazy bed, a

table, and two or three chairs; a wooden chest, containing, besides

his scanty clothing, the "archives of the family." These are nothing

more nor less than the papers of various lawsuits sustained by

different generations; by which it would seem that, with all their

apparent carelessness and good humor, they are a litigious brood. Most

of the suits have been brought against gossiping neighbors for

questioning the purity of their blood, and denying their being

Cristianos viejos, i. e. old Christians, without Jewish or Moorish

taint. In fact, I doubt whether this jealousy about their blood has

not kept them so poor in purse: spending all their earnings on

escribanos and alguazils. The pride of the hovel is an escutcheon

suspended against the wall, in which are emblazoned quarterings of the

arms of the Marquis of Caiesedo, and of various other noble houses,

with which this poverty-stricken brood claim affinity.

  As to Mateo himself, who is now about thirty-five years of age, he

has done his utmost to perpetuate his line and continue the poverty of

the family, having a wife and a numerous progeny, who inhabit an

almost dismantled hovel in the hamlet. How they manage to subsist,

he only who sees into all mysteries can tell; the subsistence of a

Spanish family of the kind, is always a riddle to me; yet they do

subsist, and what is more, appear to enjoy their existence. The wife

takes her holiday stroll on the Paseo of Granada, with a child in

her arms and half a dozen at her heels; and the eldest daughter, now

verging into womanhood, dresses her hair with flowers, and dances

gayly to the castanets.

  There are two classes of people to whom life seems one long holiday,

the very rich, and the very poor; one because they need do nothing,

the other because they have nothing to do; but there are none who

understand the art of doing nothing and living upon nothing, better

than the poor classes of Spain. Climate does one half, and temperament

the rest. Give a Spaniard the shade in summer, and the sun in

winter; a little bread, garlic, oil, and garbances, an old brown cloak

and a guitar, and let the world roll on as it pleases. Talk of

poverty! with him it has no disgrace. It sits upon him with a

grandiose style, like his ragged cloak. He is a hidalgo, even when

in rags.

  The "sons of the Alhambra" are an eminent illustration of this

practical philosophy. As the Moors imagined that the celestial

paradise hung over this favored spot, so I am inclined at times to

fancy, that a gleam of the golden age still lingers about this

ragged community. They possess nothing, they do nothing, they care for

nothing. Yet, though apparently idle all the week, they are as

observant of all holy days and saints' days as the most laborious

artisan. They attend all fetes and dancings in Granada and its

vicinity, light bonfires on the hills on St. John's eve, and dance

away the moonlight nights on the harvest-home of a small field

within the precincts of the fortress, which yields a few bushels of

wheat.

  Before concluding these remarks, I must mention one of the

amusements of the place which has particularly struck me. I had

repeatedly observed a long lean fellow perched on the top of one of

the towers, manoeuvring two or three fishing-rods, as though he were

angling for the stars. I was for some time perplexed by the evolutions

of this aerial fisherman, and my perplexity increased on observing

others employed in like manner on different parts of the battlements

and bastions; it was not until I consulted Mateo Ximenes, that I

solved the mystery.

  It seems that the pure and airy situation of this fortress has

rendered it, like the castle of Macbeth, a prolific breeding-place for

swallows and martlets, who sport about its towers in myriads, with the

holiday glee of urchins just let loose from school. To entrap these

birds in their giddy circlings, with hooks baited with flies, is one

of the favorite amusements of the ragged "sons of the Alhambra,"

who, with the good-for-nothing ingenuity of arrant idlers, have thus

invented the art of angling in the sky.

                 The Hall of Ambassadors.



  IN ONE of my visits to the old Moorish chamber, where the good Tia

Antonia cooks her dinner and receives her company, I observed a

mysterious door in one corner, leading apparently into the ancient

part of the edifice. My curiosity being aroused, I opened it, and

found myself in a narrow, blind corridor, groping along which I came

to the head of a dark winding staircase, leading down an angle of

the Tower of Comares. Down this staircase I descended darkling,

guiding myself by the wall until I came to a small door at the bottom,

throwing which open, I was suddenly dazzled by emerging into the

brilliant antechamber of the Hall of Ambassadors; with the fountain of

the Court of the Alberca sparkling before me. The antechamber is

separated from the court by an elegant gallery, supported by slender

columns with spandrels of open work in the Morisco style. At each

end of the antechamber are alcoves, and its ceiling is richly stuccoed

and painted. Passing through a magnificent portal I found myself in

the far-famed Hall of Ambassadors, the audience chamber of the

Moslem monarchs. It is said to be thirty-seven feet square, and

sixty feet high; occupies the whole interior of the Tower of

Comares; and still bears the traces of past magnificence. The walls

are beautifully stuccoed and decorated with Morisco fancifulness;

the lofty ceiling was originally of the same favorite material, with

the usual frostwork and pensile ornaments or stalactites; which,

with the embellishments of vivid coloring and gilding, must have

been gorgeous in the extreme. Unfortunately it gave way during an

earthquake, and brought down with it an immense arch which traversed

the hall. It was replaced by the present vault or dome of larch or

cedar, with intersecting ribs, the whole curiously wrought and

richly colored; still Oriental in its character, reminding one of

"those ceilings of cedar and vermilion that we read of in the prophets

and the Arabian Nights."*



  * Urquhart's Pillars of Hercules.



  From the great height of the vault above the windows the upper

part of the hall is almost lost in obscurity; yet there is a

magnificence as well as solemnity in the gloom, as through it we

have gleams of rich gilding and the brilliant tints of the Moorish

pencil.

  The royal throne was placed opposite the entrance in a recess, which

still bears an inscription intimating that Yusef I (the monarch who

completed the Alhambra) made this the throne of his empire. Every

thing in this noble hall seems to have been calculated to surround the

throne with impressive dignity and splendor; there was none of the

elegant voluptuousness which reigns in other parts of the palace.

The tower is of massive strength, domineering over the whole edifice

and overhanging the steep hillside. On three sides of the Hall of

Ambassadors are windows cut through the immense thickness of the

walls, and commanding extensive prospects. The balcony of the

central window especially looks down upon the verdant valley of the

Darro, with its walks, its groves, and gardens. To the left it

enjoys a distant prospect of the Vega, while directly in front rises

the rival height of the Albaycin, with its medley of streets, and

terraces, and gardens, and once crowned by a fortress that vied in

power with the Alhambra. "Ill fated the man who lost all this!"

exclaimed Charles V, as he looked forth from this window upon the

enchanting scenery it commands.

  The balcony of the window where this royal exclamation was made, has

of late become one of my favorite resorts. I have just been seated

there, enjoying the close of a long brilliant day. The sun, as he sank

behind the purple mountains of Alhama, sent a stream of effulgence

up the valley of the Darro, that spread a melancholy pomp over the

ruddy towers of the Alhambra; while the Vega, covered with a slight

sultry vapor that caught the setting ray, seemed spread out in the

distance like a golden sea. Not a breath of air disturbed the

stillness of the hour, and though the faint sound of music and

merriment now and then rose from the gardens of the Darro, it but

rendered more impressive the monumental silence of the pile which

overshadowed me. It was one of those hours and scenes in which

memory asserts an almost magical power; and, like the evening sun

beaming on these mouldering towers, sends back her retrospective

rays to light up the glories of the past.

  As I sat watching the effect of the declining daylight upon this

Moorish pile, I was led into a consideration of the light, elegant,

and voluptuous character, prevalent throughout its internal

architecture; and to contrast it with the grand but gloomy solemnity

of the Gothic edifices reared by the Spanish conquerors. The very

architecture thus bespeaks the opposite and irreconcilable natures

of the two warlike people who so long battled here for the mastery

of the peninsula. By degrees, I fell into a course of musing upon

the singular fortunes of the Arabian or Morisco-Spaniards, whose whole

existence is as a tale that is told, and certainly forms one of the

most anomalous yet splendid episodes in history. Potent and durable as

was their dominion, we scarcely know how to call them. They were a

nation without a legitimate country or name. A remote wave of the

great Arabian inundation, cast upon the shores of Europe, they seem to

have all the impetus of the first rush of the torrent. Their career of

conquest, from the rock of Gibraltar to the cliffs of the Pyrenees,

was as rapid and brilliant as the Moslem victories of Syria and Egypt.

Nay, had they not been checked on the plains of Tours, all France, all

Europe, might have been overrun with the same facility as the

empires of the East, and the crescent at this day have glittered on

the fanes of Paris and London.

  Repelled within the limits of the Pyrenees, the mixed hordes of Asia

and Africa, that formed this great irruption, gave up the Moslem

principle of conquest, and sought to establish in Spain a peaceful and

permanent dominion. As conquerors, their heroism was only equalled

by their moderation; and in both, for a time, they excelled the

nations with whom they contended. Severed from their native homes,

they loved the land given them as they supposed by Allah, and strove

to embellish it with every thing that could administer to the

happiness of man. Laying the foundations of their power in a system of

wise and equitable laws, diligently cultivating the arts and sciences,

and promoting agriculture, manufactures, and commerce; they

gradually formed an empire unrivalled for its prosperity by any of the

empires of Christendom; and diligently drawing round them the graces

and refinements which marked the Arabian empire in the East, at the

time of its greatest civilization, they diffused the light of Oriental

knowledge, through the Western regions of benighted Europe.

  The cities of Arabian Spain became the resort of Christian artisans,

to instruct themselves in the useful arts. The universities of Toledo,

Cordova, Seville, and Granada, were sought by the pale student from

other lands to acquaint himself with the sciences of the Arabs, and

the treasured lore of antiquity; the lovers of the gay science,

resorted to Cordova and Granada, to imbibe the poetry and music of the

East; and the steel-clad warriors of the North hastened thither to

accomplish themselves in the graceful exercises and courteous usages

of chivalry.

  If the Moslem monuments in Spain, if the Mosque of Cordova, the

Alcazar of Seville, and the Alhambra of Granada, still bear

inscriptions fondly boasting of the power and permanency of their

dominion; can the boast be derided as arrogant and vain? Generation

after generation, century after century, passed away, and still they

maintained possession of the land. A period elapsed longer than that

which has passed since England was subjugated by the Norman Conqueror,

and the descendants of Musa and Taric might as little anticipate being

driven into exile across the same straits, traversed by their

triumphant ancestors, as the descendants of Rollo and William, and

their veteran peers, may dream of being driven back to the shores of

Normandy.

  With all this, however, the Moslem empire in Spain was but a

brilliant exotic, that took no permanent root in the soil it

embellished. Severed from all their neighbors in the West, by

impassable barriers of faith and manners, and separated by seas and

deserts from their kindred of the East, the Morisco-spaniards were

an isolated people. Their whole existence was a prolonged, though

gallant and chivalric struggle, for a foothold in a usurped land.

  They were the outposts and frontiers of Islamism. The peninsula

was the great battle-ground where the Gothic conquerors of the North

and the Moslem conquerors of the East, met and strove for mastery; and

the fiery courage of the Arab was at length subdued by the obstinate

and persevering valor of the Goth.

  Never was the annihilation of a people more complete than that of

the Morisco-Spaniards. Where are they? Ask the shores of Barbary and

its desert places. The exiled remnant of their once powerful empire

disappeared among the barbarians of Africa, and ceased to be a nation.

They have not even left a distinct name behind them, though for nearly

eight centuries they were a distinct people. The home of their

adoption, and of their occupation for ages, refuses to acknowledge

them, except as invaders and usurpers. A few broken monuments are

all that remain to bear witness to their power and dominion, as

solitary rocks, left far in the interior, bear testimony to the extent

of some vast inundation. Such is the Alhambra. A Moslem pile in the

midst of a Christian land; an Oriental palace amidst the Gothic

edifices of the West; an elegant memento of a brave, intelligent,

and graceful people, who conquered, ruled, flourished, and passed

away.

                   The Jesuits' Library.



  SINCE indulging in the foregoing reverie, my curiosity has been

aroused to know something of the princes, who left behind them this

monument of Oriental taste and magnificence; and whose names still

appear among the inscriptions on its walls. To gratify this curiosity,

I have descended from this region of fancy and fable, where every

thing is liable to take an imaginary tint, and have carried my

researches among the dusty tomes of the old Jesuits' Library, in the

University. This once boasted repository of erudition is now a mere

shadow of its former self, having been stripped of its manuscripts and

rarest works by the French, when masters of Granada; still it contains

among many ponderous tomes of the Jesuit fathers, which the French

were careful to leave behind, several curious tracts of Spanish

literature; and above all, a number of those antiquated

parchment-bound chronicles for which I have a particular veneration.

  In this old library, I have passed many delightful hours of quiet,

undisturbed, literary foraging; for the keys of the doors and

bookcases were kindly intrusted to me, and I was left alone, to

rummage at my pleasure- a rare indulgence in these sanctuaries of

learning, which too often tantalize the thirsty student with the sight

of sealed fountains of knowledge.

  In the course of these visits I gleaned a variety of facts

concerning historical characters connected with the Alhambra, some

of which I here subjoin, trusting they may prove acceptable to the

reader.

ALHAMAR

                          Alhamar.

                 The Founder of the Alhambra.



  THE Moors of Granada regarded the Alhambra as a miracle of art,

and had a tradition that the king who founded it dealt in magic, or at

least in alchemy, by means whereof he procured the immense sums of

gold expended in its erection. A brief view of his reign will show the

secret of his wealth. He is known in Arabian history as Muhamed

Ibn-l-Ahmar; but his name in general is written simply Alhamar, and

was given to him, we are told, on account of his ruddy complexion.*



  * Et porque era muy rubio llamaban lo los Moros Abenalhamar, que

quiere decir bermejo... et porque los Moros lo llamaban Benalhamar que

quiere decir bermejo tomo los senales bermejos, segun que los

ovieron desputes los Reyes de Granada.- BLEDA, Cronica de Alfonso XI.

  [And because his complexion was very ruddy the Moors called him

Abenalhamar, which means "vermilion"... and because the Moors called

him Benalhamar, which means vermilion, he took bright red for his

insignia, just as the Kings of Granada have done ever since.]



  He was of the noble and opulent line of the Beni Nasar, or tribe

of Nasar, and was born in Arjona, in the year of the Hegira 592 (A. D.

1195). At his birth the astrologers, we are told, cast his horoscope

according to Oriental custom, and pronounced it highly auspicious; and

a santon predicted for him a glorious career. No expense was spared in

fitting him for the high destinies prognosticated. Before he

attained the full years of manhood, the famous battle of the Navas (or

plains) of Tolosa shattered the Moorish empire, and eventually severed

the Moslems of Spain from the Moslems of Africa. Factions soon arose

among the former, headed by warlike chiefs, ambitious of grasping

the sovereignty of the Peninsula. Alhamar became engaged in these

wars; he was the general and leader of the Beni Nasar, and, as such,

he opposed and thwarted the ambition of Aben Hud, who had raised his

standard among the warlike mountains of the Alpuxarras, and been

proclaimed king of Murcia and Granada. Many conflicts took place

between these warring chieftains; Alhamar dispossessed his rival of

several important places, and was proclaimed king of Jaen by his

soldiery; but he aspired to the sovereignty of the whole of Andalusia,

for he was of a sanguine spirit and lofty ambition. His valor and

generosity went hand in hand; what he gained by the one he secured

by the other; and at the death of Aben Hud (A. D. 1238), he became

sovereign of all the territories which owned allegiance to that

powerful chief He made his formal entry into Granada in the same year,

amid the enthusiastic shouts of the multitude, who hailed him as the

only one capable of uniting the various factions which prevailed,

and which threatened to lay the empire at the mercy of the Christian

princes.

  Alhamar established his court in Granada; he was the first of the

illustrious line of Nasar that sat upon a throne. He took immediate

measures to put his little kingdom in a posture of defence against the

assaults to be expected from his Christian neighbors, repairing and

strengthening the frontier posts and fortifying the capital. Not

content with the provisions of the Moslem law, by which every man is

made a soldier, he raised a regular army to garrison his strong-holds,

allowing every soldier stationed on the frontier a portion of land for

the support of himself, his horse, and his family; thus interesting

him in the defence of the soil in which he had a property. These

wise precautions were justified by events. The Christians, profiting

by the dismemberment of the Moslem power, were rapidly regaining their

ancient territories. James the Conqueror had subjected all Valencia,

and Ferdinand the Saint sat down in person before Jaen, the bulwark of

Granada. Alhamar ventured to oppose him in open field, but met with

a signal defeat, and retired discomfited to his capital. Jaen still

held out, and kept the enemy at bay during an entire winter, but

Ferdinand swore not to raise his camp until he had gained possession

of the place. Alhamar found it impossible to throw reinforcements into

the besieged city; he saw that its fall must be followed by the

investment of his capital, and was conscious of the insufficiency of

his means to cope with the potent sovereign of Castile. Taking a

sudden resolution, therefore, he repaired privately to the Christian

camp, made his unexpected appearance in the presence of King

Ferdinand, and frankly announced himself as the king of Granada. "I

come," said he, "confiding in your good faith, to put myself under

your protection. Take all I possess and receive me as your vassal"; so

saying, he knelt and kissed the king's hand in token of allegiance.

  Ferdinand was won by this instance of confiding faith, and

determined not to be outdone in generosity. He raised his late enemy

from the earth, embraced him as a friend, and, refusing the wealth

he offered, left him sovereign of his dominions, under the feudal

tenure of a yearly tribute, attendance at the Cortes as one of the

nobles of the empire, and service in war with a certain number of

horsemen. He moreover conferred on him the honor of knighthood, and

armed him with his own hands.

  It was not long after this that Alhamar was called upon, for his

military services, to aid King Ferdinand in his famous siege of

Seville. The Moorish king sallied forth with five hundred chosen

horsemen of Granada, than whom none in the world knew better how to

manage the steed or wield the lance. It was a humiliating service,

however, for they had to draw the sword against their brethren of

the faith.

  Alhamar gained a melancholy distinction by his prowess in this

renowned conquest, but more true honor by the humanity which he

prevailed upon Ferdinand to introduce into the usages of war. When

in 1248 the famous city of Seville surrendered to the Castilian

monarch, Alhamar returned sad and full of care to his dominions. He

saw the gathering ills that menaced the Moslem cause; and uttered an

ejaculation often used by him in moments of anxiety and trouble-

"How straitened and wretched would be our life, if our hope were not

so spacious and extensive." "Que angosta y miserable seria nuestra

vida, sino fuera tan dilatada y espaciosa nuestra esperanza!"

  As he approached Granada on his return he beheld arches of triumph

which had been erected in honor of his martial exploits. The people

thronged forth to see him with impatient joy, for his benignant rule

had won all hearts. Wherever he passed he was hailed with acclamations

as "El Ghalib!" (the conqueror). Alhamar gave a melancholy shake of

the head on hearing the appellation. "Wa le ghalib il Allah!"

("There is no conqueror but God!"), exclaimed he. From that time

forward this exclamation became his motto, and the motto of his

descendants, and appears to this day emblazoned on his escutcheons

in the halls of the Alhambra.

  Alhamar had purchased peace by submission to the Christian yoke; but

he was conscious that, with elements so discordant and motives for

hostility so deep and ancient, it could not be permanent. Acting,

therefore, upon the old maxim, "arm thyself in peace and clothe

thyself in summer," he improved the present interval of tranquillity

by fortifying his dominions, replenishing his arsenals, and

promoting those useful arts which give wealth and real power. He

confided the command of his various cities to such as had

distinguished themselves by valor and prudence, and who seemed most

acceptable to the people. He organized a vigilant police, and

established rigid rules for the administration of justice. The poor

and the distressed always found ready admission to his presence, and

he attended personally to their assistance and redress. He erected

hospitals for the blind, the aged, and infirm, and all those incapable

of labor, and visited them frequently; not on set days with pomp and

form, so as to give time for every thing to be put in order, and every

abuse concealed; but suddenly, and unexpectedly, informing himself, by

actual observation and close inquiry, of the treatment of the sick,

and the conduct of those appointed to administer to their relief. He

founded schools and colleges, which he visited in the same manner,

inspecting personally the instruction of the youth. He established

butcheries and public ovens, that the people might be furnished with

wholesome provisions at just and regular prices. He introduced

abundant streams of water into the city, erecting baths and fountains,

and constructing aqueducts and canals to irrigate and fertilize the

Vega. By these means prosperity and abundance prevailed in this

beautiful city, its gates were thronged with commerce, and its

warehouses filled with luxuries and merchandise of every clime and

country.

  He moreover gave premiums and privileges to the best artisans;

improved the breed of horses and other domestic animals; encouraged

husbandry; and increased the natural fertility of the soil twofold

by his protection, making the lovely valleys of his kingdom to bloom

like gardens. He fostered also the growth and fabrication of silk,

until the looms of Granada surpassed even those of Syria in the

fineness and beauty of their productions. He moreover caused the mines

of gold and silver and other metals, found in the mountainous

regions of his dominions, to be diligently worked, and was the first

king of Granada who struck money of gold and silver with his name,

taking great care that the coins should be skilfully executed.

  It was towards the middle of the thirteenth century, and just

after his return from the siege of Seville, that he commenced the

splendid palace of the Alhambra; superintending the building of it

in person; mingling frequently among the artists and workmen, and

directing their labors.

  Though thus magnificent in his works and great in his enterprises,

he was simple in his person and moderate in his enjoyments. His

dress was not merely void of splendor, but so plain as not to

distinguish him from his subjects. His harem boasted but few beauties,

and these he visited but seldom, though they were entertained with

great magnificence. His wives were daughters of the principal

nobles, and were treated by him as friends and rational companions.

What is more, he managed to make them live in friendship with one

another. He passed much of his time in his gardens; especially in

those of the Alhambra, which he had stored with the rarest plants

and the most beautiful and aromatic flowers. Here he delighted himself

in reading histories, or in causing them to be read and related to

him, and sometimes, in intervals of leisure, employed himself in the

instruction of his three sons, for whom he had provided the most

learned and virtuous masters.

  As he had frankly and voluntarily offered himself a tributary vassal

to Ferdinand, so he always remained loyal to his word, giving him

repeated proofs of fidelity and attachment. When that renowned monarch

died in Seville in 1254, Alhamar sent ambassadors to condole with

his successor, Alonzo X, and with them a gallant train of a hundred

Moorish cavaliers of distinguished rank, who were to attend round

the royal bier during the funeral ceremonies, each bearing a lighted

taper. This grand testimonial of respect was repeated by the Moslem

monarch during the remainder of his life on each anniversary of the

death of King Ferdinand el Santo, when the hundred Moorish knights

repaired from Granada to Seville, and took their stations with lighted

tapers in the centre of the sumptuous cathedral round the cenotaph

of the illustrious deceased.

  Alhamar retained his faculties and vigor to an advanced age. In

his seventy-ninth year (A. D. 1272) he took the field on horseback,

accompanied by the flower of his chivalry, to resist an invasion of

his territories. As the army sallied forth from Granada, one of the

principal adalides, or guides, who rode in the advance, accidentally

broke his lance against the arch of the gate. The councillors of the

king, alarmed by this circumstance, which was considered an evil omen,

entreated him to return. Their supplications were in vain. The king

persisted, and at noontide the omen, say the Moorish chroniclers,

was fatally fulfilled. Alhamar was suddenly struck with illness, and

had nearly fallen from his horse. He was placed on a litter, and borne

back towards Granada but his illness increased to such a degree that

they were obliged to pitch his tent in the Vega. His physicians were

filled with consternation, not knowing what remedy to prescribe. In

a few hours he died, vomiting blood and in violent convulsions. The

Castilian prince, Don Philip, brother of Alonzo X, was by his side

when he expired. His body was embalmed, enclosed in a silver coffin,

and buried in the Alhambra in a sepulchre of precious marble, amidst

the unfeigned lamentations of his subjects, who bewailed him as a

parent.

  I have said that he was the first of the illustrious line of Nasar

that sat upon a throne. I may add that he was the founder of a

brilliant kingdom, which will ever be famous in history and romance,

as the last rallying place, of Moslem power and splendor in the

peninsula. Though his undertakings were vast, and his expenditures

immense, yet his treasury was always full; and this seeming

contradiction gave rise to the story that he was versed in magic

art, and possessed of the secret for transmuting baser metals into

gold. Those who have attended to his domestic policy, as here set

forth, will easily understand the natural magic and simple alchemy

which made his ample treasury to overflow.

                      Yusef Abul Hagig.

                The Finisher of the Alhambra.



  TO THE foregoing particulars, concerning the Moslem princes who once

reigned in these halls, I shall add a brief notice of the monarch

who completed and embellished the Alhambra. Yusef Abul Hagig (or as it

is sometimes written, Haxis) was another prince of the noble line of

Nasar. He ascended the throne of Granada in the year of grace 1333,

and is described by Moslem writers as having a noble presence, great

bodily strength, and a fair complexion, and the majesty of his

countenance increased, say they, by suffering his beard to grow to a

dignified length and dying it black. His manners were gentle, affable,

and urbane; he carried the benignity of his nature into warfare,

prohibiting all wanton cruelty, and enjoining mercy and protection

towards women and children, the aged and infirm, and all friars and

other persons of holy and recluse life. But though he possessed the

courage common to generous spirits, the bent of his genius was more

for peace than war, and though repeatedly obliged by circumstances

to take up arms, he was generally unfortunate.

  Among other ill-starred enterprises, he undertook a great

campaign, in conjunction with the king of Morocco, against the kings

of Castile and Portugal, but was defeated in the memorable battle of

Salado, which had nearly proved a death-blow to the Moslem power in

Spain.

  Yusef obtained a long truce after this defeat, and now his character

shone forth in its true lustre. He had an excellent memory, and had

stored his mind with science and erudition; his taste was altogether

elegant and refined, and he was accounted the best poet of his time.

Devoting himself to the instruction of his people and the

improvement of their morals and manners, he established schools in all

the villages, with simple and uniform systems of education; he obliged

every hamlet of more than twelve houses to have a mosque, and purified

the ceremonies of religion, and the festivals and popular

amusements, from various abuses and indecorums which had crept into

them. He attended vigilantly to the police of the city, establishing

nocturnal guards and patrols, and superintending all municipal

concerns. His attention was also directed towards finishing the

great architectural works commenced by his predecessors, and

erecting others on his own plans. The Alhambra, which had been founded


by the good Alhamar, was now completed. Yusef constructed the

beautiful Gate of Justice, forming the grand entrance to the fortress,

which he finished in 1348. He likewise adorned many of the courts

and halls of the palace, as may be seen by the inscriptions on the

walls, in which his name repeatedly occurs. He built also the noble

Alcazar or citadel of Malaga, now unfortunately a mere mass of

crumbling ruins, but which most probably exhibited in its interior,

similar elegance and magnificence with the Alhambra.

  The genius of a sovereign stamps a character upon his time. The

nobles of Granada, imitating the elegant and graceful taste of

Yusef, soon filled the city of Granada with magnificent palaces; the

halls of which were paved with mosaic, the walls and ceilings

wrought in fretwork, and delicately gilded and painted with azure,

vermilion, and other brilliant colors, or minutely inlaid with cedar

and other precious woods; specimens of which have survived, in all

their lustre, the lapse of several centuries. Many of the houses had

fountains, which threw up jets of water to refresh and cool the air.

They had lofty towers also, of wood or stone, curiously carved and

ornamented, and covered with plates of metal that glittered in the

sun. Such was the refined and delicate taste in architecture that

prevailed among this elegant people; insomuch that to use the

beautiful simile of an Arabian writer, "Granada, in the days of Yusef,

was as a silver vase filled with emeralds and jacinths."

  One anecdote will be sufficient to show the magnanimity of this

generous prince. The long truce which had succeeded the battle of

Salado was at an end, and every effort of Yusef to renew it was in

vain. His deadly foe, Alfonzo XI of Castile, took the field with great

force, and laid siege to Gibraltar. Yusef reluctantly took up arms,

and sent troops to the relief of the place. In the midst of his

anxiety, he received tidings that his dreaded foe had suddenly

fallen a victim to the plague. Instead of manifesting exultation on

the occasion, Yusef called to mind the great qualities of the

deceased, and was touched with a noble sorrow. "Alas!" cried he,

"the world has lost one of its most excellent princes; a sovereign who

knew how to honor merit, whether in friend or foe!"

  The Spanish chroniclers themselves bear witness to this magnanimity.

According to their accounts, the Moorish cavaliers partook of the

sentiment of their king, and put on mourning for the death of Alfonzo.

Even those of Gibraltar, who had been so closely invested, when they

knew that the hostile monarch lay dead in his camp, determined among

themselves that no hostile movement should be made against the

Christians. The day on which the camp was broken up, and the army

departed bearing the corpse of Alfonzo, the Moors issued in multitudes

from Gibraltar, and stood mute and melancholy, watching the mournful

pageant. The same reverence for the deceased was observed by all the

Moorish commanders on the frontiers, who suffered the funeral train to

pass in safety, bearing the corpse of the Christian sovereign from

Gibraltar to Seville.*



  * Y los moros que estaban en la villa y Castillo de Gibraltar

despues que sopieron que el Rey Don Alonzo era muerto, ordenaron

entresi que ninguno non fuesse osado de fazer ningun movimiento contra

los Christianos, ni mover pelear contra ellos, estovieron todos quedos

y dezian entre ellos qui aquel dia muriera un noble rey y Gran

principe del mundo.

  [And the Moors that were in the city and Castle of Gibraltar,

after they knew that King Don Alonzo was dead, ordered among

themselves that no one should dare to make any move against the

Christians, nor to start fighting against them, and they all

remained quiet and told each other that on that day had died a noble

king and a great prince of the world.]



  Yusef did not long survive the enemy he had so generously

deplored. In the year 1354, as he was one day praying in the royal

mosque of the Alhambra, a maniac rushed suddenly from behind and

plunged a dagger in his side. The cries of the king brought his guards

and courtiers to his assistance. They found him weltering in his

blood. He made some signs as if to speak, but his words were

unintelligible. They bore him senseless to the royal apartments, where

he expired almost immediately. The murderer was cut to pieces, and his

limbs burnt in public to gratify the fury of the populace.

  The body of the king was interred in a superb sepulchre of white

marble; a long epitaph, in letters of gold upon an azure ground,

recorded his virtues. "Here lies a king and martyr, of an

illustrious line, gentle, learned, and virtuous; renowned for the

graces of his person and his manners; whose clemency, piety and

benevolence, were extolled throughout the kingdom of Granada. He was a

great prince; an illustrious captain; a sharp sword of the Moslems;

a valiant standard-bearer among the most potent monarchs," &c.

  The mosque still exists which once resounded with the dying cries of

Yusef, but the monument which recorded his virtues has long since

disappeared. His name, however, remains inscribed among the delicate

and graceful ornaments of the Alhambra, and will be perpetuated in

connection with this renowned pile, which it was his pride and delight

to beautify.

                   The Mysterious Chambers.



  AS I WAS rambling one day about the Moorish halls, my attention was,

for the first time, attracted to a door in a remote gallery,

communicating apparently with some part of the Alhambra which I had

not yet explored. I attempted to open it, but it was locked. I

knocked, but no one answered, and the sound seemed to reverberate

through empty chambers. Here then was a mystery. Here was the

haunted wing of the castle. How was I to get at the dark secrets

here shut up from the public eye? Should I come privately at night

with lamp and sword, according to the prying custom of heroes of

romance; or should I endeavor to draw the secret from Pepe the

stuttering gardener; or the ingenuous Dolores, or the loquacious

Mateo? Or should I go frankly and openly to Dame Antonia the

chatelaine, and ask her all about it? I chose the latter course, as

being the simplest though the least romantic; and found, somewhat to

my disappointment, that there was no mystery in the case. I was

welcome to explore the apartment, and there was the key.

  Thus provided, I returned forthwith to the door. It opened, as I had

surmised, to a range of vacant chambers; but they were quite different

from the rest of the palace. The architecture, though rich and

antiquated, was European. There was nothing Moorish about it. The

first two rooms were lofty; the ceilings, broken in many places,

were of cedar, deeply panelled and skilfully carved with fruits and

flowers, intermingled with grotesque masks or faces.

  The walls had evidently in ancient times been hung with damask;

but now were naked, and scrawled over by that class of aspiring

travellers who defile noble monuments with their worthless names.

The windows, dismantled and open to wind and weather, looked out

into a charming little secluded garden, where an alabaster fountain

sparkled among roses and myrtles, and was surrounded by orange and

citron trees, some of which flung their branches into the chambers.

Beyond these rooms were two saloons, longer but less lofty, looking

also into the garden. In the compartments of the panelled ceilings

were baskets of fruit and garlands of flowers, painted by no mean

hand, and in tolerable preservation. The walls also had been painted

in fresco in the Italian style, but the paintings were nearly

obliterated; the windows were in the same shattered state with those

of the other chambers. This fanciful suite of rooms terminated in an

open gallery with balustrades, running at right angles along another

side of the garden. The whole apartment, so delicate and elegant in

its decorations, so choice and sequestered in its situation along this

retired little garden, and so different in architecture from the

neighboring halls, awakened an interest in its history. I found on

inquiry that it was an apartment fitted up by Italian artists in the

early part of the last century, at the time when Philip V and his

second wife, the beautiful Elizabetta of Farnese, daughter of the Duke

of Parma, were expected at the Alhambra. It was destined for the queen

and the ladies of her train. One of the loftiest chambers had been her

sleeping room. A narrow staircase, now walled up, led up to a

delightful belvidere, originally a mirador of the Moorish sultanas,

communicating with the harem; but which was fitted up as a boudoir for

the fair Elizabetta, and still retains the name of el tocador de la

Reyna, or the queen's toilette.

  One window of the royal sleeping-room commanded a prospect of the

Generalife and its embowered terraces, another looked out into the

little secluded garden I have mentioned, which was decidedly Moorish

in its character, and also had its history. It was in fact the

garden of Lindaraxa, so often mentioned in descriptions of the

Alhambra; but who this Lindaraxa was I have never heard explained. A

little research gave me the few particulars known about her. She was a

Moorish beauty who flourished in the court of Muhamed the Left-handed,

and was the daughter of his loyal adherent, the alcayde of Malaga, who

sheltered him in his city when driven from the throne. On regaining

his crown, the alcayde was rewarded for his fidelity. His daughter had

her apartment in the Alhambra, and was given by the king in marriage

to Nasar, a young Cetimerien prince descended from Aben Hud the

Just. Their espousals were doubtless celebrated in the royal palace,

and their honeymoon may have passed among these very bowers.*



  * Una de las cosas en que tienen precisa intervencion los Reyes

Moros es en el matrimonio de sus grandes: de aqui nace que todos los

senores llegadas a la persona real si casan en palacio, y siempre huvo

su quarto destinado para esta ceremonia.

  One of the things in which the Moorish kings interfered was in the

marriage of their nobles: hence it came that all the senores

attached to the royal person were married in the palace; and there was

always a chamber destined for the ceremony.- Paseos por Granada.



  Four centuries had elapsed since the fair Lindaraxa passed away, yet

how much of the fragile beauty of the scenes she inhabited remained!

The garden still bloomed in which she delighted; the fountain still

presented the crystal mirror in which her charms may once have been

reflected; the alabaster, it is true, had lost its whiteness; the

basin beneath, overrun with weeds, had become the lurking-place of the

lizard, but there was something in the very decay that enhanced the

interest of the scene, speaking as it did of that mutability, the

irrevocable lot of man and all his works.

  The desolation too of these chambers, once the abode of the proud

and elegant Elizabetta, had a more touching charm for me than if I had

beheld them in their pristine splendor, glittering with the

pageantry of a court.

  When I returned to my quarters, in the governor's apartment, every

thing seemed tame and common-place after the poetic region I had left.

The thought suggested itself: Why could I not change my quarters to

these vacant chambers? that would indeed be living in the Alhambra,

surrounded by its gardens and fountains, as in the time of the Moorish

sovereigns. I proposed the change to Dame Antonia and her family,

and it occasioned vast surprise. They could not conceive any

rational inducement for the choice of an apartment so forlorn,

remote and solitary. Dolores exclaimed at its frightful loneliness;

nothing but bats and owls flitting about- and then a fox and wild-cat,

kept in the vaults of the neighboring baths, roamed about at night.

The good Tia had more reasonable objections. The neighborhood was

infested by vagrants; gipsies swarmed in the caverns of the adjacent

hills; the palace was ruinous and easy to be entered in many places;

the rumor of a stranger quartered alone in one of the remote and

ruined apartments, out of the hearing of the rest of the

inhabitants, might tempt unwelcome visitors in the night, especially

as foreigners were always supposed to be well stocked with money. I

was not to be diverted from my humor, however, and my will was law

with these good people. So, calling in the assistance of a

carpenter, and the ever officious Mateo Ximenes, the doors and windows

were soon placed in a state of tolerable security, and the

sleeping-room of the stately Elizabetta prepared for my reception.

Mateo kindly volunteered as a body-guard to sleep in my antechamber;

but I did not think it worth while to put his valor to the proof.

  With all the hardihood I had assumed and all the precautions I had

taken, I must confess the first night passed in these quarters was

inexpressibly dreary. I do not think it was so much the apprehension

of dangers from without that affected me, as the character of the

place itself, with all its strange associations: the deeds of violence

committed there; the tragical ends of many of those who had once

reigned there in splendor. As I passed beneath the fated halls of

the Tower of Comares on the way to my chamber, I called to mind a

quotation, that used to thrill me in the days of boyhood:



         Fate sits on these dark battlements and frowns;

         And, as the portal opens to receive me,

         A voice in sullen echoes through the courts

         Tells of a nameless deed!



  The whole family escorted me to my chamber, and took leave of me

as of one engaged on a perilous enterprise; and when I heard their

retreating steps die away along the waste antechambers and echoing

galleries; and turned the key of my door, I was reminded of those

hobgoblin stories, where the hero is left to accomplish the

adventure of an enchanted house.

  Even the thoughts of the fair Elizabetta and the beauties of her

court, who had once graced these chambers, now, by a perversion of

fancy, added to the gloom. Here was the scene of their transient

gayety and loveliness; here were the very traces of their elegance and

enjoyment; but what and where were they?- Dust and ashes! tenants of

the tomb! phantoms of the memory!

  A vague and indescribable awe was creeping over me. I would fain

have ascribed it to the thoughts of robbers awakened by the

evening's conversation, but I felt it was something more unreal and

absurd. The long-buried superstitions of the nursery were reviving,

and asserting their power over my imagination. Every thing began to be

affected by the working of my mind. The whispering of the wind,

among the citron-trees beneath my window, had something sinister. I

cast my eyes into the garden of Lindaraxa; the groves presented a gulf

of shadows; the thickets, indistinct and ghastly shapes. I was glad to

close the window, but my chamber itself became infected. There was a

slight rustling noise overhead; a bat suddenly emerged from a broken

panel of the ceiling, flitting about the room and athwart my

solitary lamp; and as the fateful bird almost flouted my face with his

noiseless wing, the grotesque faces carved in high relief in the cedar

ceiling, whence he had emerged, seemed to mope and mow at me.

  Rousing myself, and half smiling at this temporary weakness, I

resolved to brave it out in the true spirit of the hero of the

enchanted house; so, taking lamp in hand, I sallied forth to make a

tour of the palace. Notwithstanding every mental exertion the task was

a severe one. I had to traverse waste halls and mysterious

galleries, where the rays of the lamp extended but a short distance

around me. I walked, as it were, in a mere halo of light, walled in by

impenetrable darkness. The vaulted corridors were as caverns; the

ceilings of the halls were lost in gloom. I recalled all that had been

said of the danger from interlopers in these remote and ruined

apartments. Might not some vagrant foe be lurking before or behind me,

in the outer darkness? My own shadow, cast upon the wall, began to

disturb me. The echoes of my own footsteps along the corridors made me

pause and look round. I was traversing scenes fraught with dismal

recollections. One dark passage led down to the mosque where Yusef,

the Moorish monarch, the finisher of the Alhambra, had been basely

murdered. In another place, I trod the gallery where another monarch

had been struck down by the poniard of a relative whom he had thwarted

in his love.

  A low murmuring sound, as of stifled voices and clanking chains, now

reached me. It seemed to come from the Hall of the Abencerrages. I

knew it to be the rush of water through subterranean channels, but

it sounded strangely in the night, and reminded me of the dismal

stories to which it had given rise.

  Soon, however, my ear was assailed by sounds too fearfully real to

be the work of fancy. As I was crossing the Hall of Ambassadors, low

moans and broken ejaculations rose, as it were, from beneath my

feet. I paused and listened. They then appeared to be outside of the

tower- then again within. Then broke forth howlings as of an animal-

then stifled shrieks and inarticulate ravings. Heard in that dead hour

and singular place, the effect was thrilling. I had no desire for

further perambulation; but returned to my chamber with infinitely more

alacrity than I had sallied forth, and drew my breath more freely when

once more within its walls and the door bolted behind me. When I awoke

in the morning, with the sun shining in at my window and lighting up

every part of the building with his cheerful and truth-telling

beams, I could scarcely recall the shadows and fancies conjured up

by the gloom of the preceding night; or believe that the scenes around

me, so naked and apparent, could have been clothed with such imaginary

horrors.

  Still, the dismal howlings and ejaculations I had heard were not

ideal; they were soon accounted for, however, by my handmaid

Dolores: being the ravings of a poor maniac, a brother of her aunt,

who was subject to violent paroxysms, during which he was confined

in a vaulted room beneath the Hall of Ambassadors.

  In the course of a few evenings a thorough change took place in

the scene and its associations. The moon, which when I took possession

of my new apartments was invisible, gradually gained each evening upon

the darkness of the night, and at length rolled in full splendor above

the towers, pouring a flood of tempered light into every court and

hall. The garden beneath my window, before wrapped in gloom, was

gently lighted up, the orange and citron trees were tipped with

silver; the fountain sparkled in the moonbeams, and even the blush

of the rose was faintly visible.

  I now felt the poetic merit of the Arabic inscription on the

walls: "How beauteous is this garden, where the flowers of the earth

vie with the stars of the heaven! What can compare with the vase of

yon alabaster fountain filled with crystal water? Nothing but the moon

in her fulness, shining in the midst of an unclouded sky!"

  On such heavenly nights I would sit for hours at my window

inhaling the sweetness of the garden, and musing on the checkered

fortunes of those whose history was dimly shadowed out in the

elegant memorials around. Sometimes, when all was quiet, and the clock

from the distant cathedral of Granada struck the midnight hour, I have

sallied out on another tour and wandered over the whole building;

but how different from my first tour! No longer dark and mysterious;

no longer peopled with shadowy foes; no longer recalling scenes of

violence and murder; all was open, spacious, beautiful; every thing

called up pleasing and romantic fancies; Lindaraxa once more walked in

her garden; the gay chivalry of Moslem Granada once more glittered

about the Court of Lions! Who can do justice to a moonlight night in

such a climate and such a place? The temperature of a summer

midnight in Andalusia is perfectly ethereal. We seem lifted up into

a purer atmosphere; we feel a serenity of soul, a buoyancy of spirits,

an elasticity of frame, which render mere existence happiness. But

when moonlight is added to all this, the effect is like enchantment.

Under its plastic sway the Alhambra seems to regain its pristine

glories. Every rent and chasm of time; every mouldering tint and

weather-stain is gone; the marble resumes its original whiteness;

the long colonnades brighten in the moonbeams; the halls are

illuminated with a softened radiance- we tread the enchanted palace of

an Arabian tale!

  What a delight, at such a time, to ascend to the little airy

pavilion of the queen's toilet (el tocador de la Reyna), which, like a

bird-cage, overhangs the valley of the Darro, and gaze from its

light arcades upon the moonlight prospect! To the right, the

swelling mountains of the Sierra Nevada, robbed of their ruggedness

and softened into a fairy land, with their snowy summits gleaming like

silver clouds against the deep blue sky. And then to lean over the

parapet of the Tocador and gaze down upon Granada and the Albaycin

spread out like a map below; all buried in deep repose; the white

palaces and convents sleeping in the moonshine, and beyond all these

the vapory Vega fading away like a dream-land in the distance.

  Sometimes the faint click of castanets rises from the Alameda, where

some gay Andalusians are dancing away the summer night. Sometimes

the dubious tones of a guitar and the notes of an amorous voice,

tell perchance the whereabout of some moon-struck lover serenading his

lady's window.

  Such is a faint picture of the moonlight nights I have passed

loitering about the courts and halls and balconies of this most

suggestive pile, "feeding my fancy with sugared suppositions," and

enjoying that mixture of reverie and sensation which steal away

existence in a southern climate; so that it has been almost morning

before I have retired to bed, and been lulled to sleep by the

falling waters of the fountain of Lindaraxa.
