




                   Mementos of Boabdil.



  WHILE my mind was still warm with the subject of the unfortunate

Boabdil, I set forth to trace the mementos of him still existing in

this scene of his sovereignty and misfortunes. In the Tower of

Comares, immediately under the Hall of Ambassadors, are two vaulted

rooms, separated by a narrow passage; these are said to have been

the prisons of himself and his mother, the virtuous Ayxa la Horra;

indeed, no other part of the tower would have served for the

purpose. The external walls of these chambers are of prodigious

thickness, pierced with small windows secured by iron bars. A narrow

stone gallery, with a low parapet, extends along three sides of the

tower just below the windows, but at a considerable height from the

ground. From this gallery, it is presumed, the queen lowered her son

with the scarfs of herself and her female attendants during the

darkness of the night to the hillside, where some of his faithful

adherents waited with fleet steeds to bear him to the mountains.

  Between three and four hundred years have elapsed, yet this scene of

the drama remains almost unchanged. As I paced the gallery, my

imagination pictured the anxious queen leaning over the parapet;

listening, with the throbbings of a mother's heart, to the last echoes

of the horses' hoofs as her son scoured along the narrow valley of the

Darro.

  I next sought the gate by which Boabdil made his last exit from

the Alhambra, when about to surrender his capital and kingdom. With

the melancholy caprice of a broken spirit, or perhaps with some

superstitious feeling, he requested of the Catholic monarchs that no

one afterwards might be permitted to pass through it. His prayer,

according to ancient chronicles, was complied with, through the

sympathy of isabella, and the gate was walled up.*



  * Ay una puerta en la Alhambra por la qual salio Chico Rey de los

Moros, quando si rindio prisionero al Rey de Espana D. Fernando, y

le entrego la ciudad con el castillo. Pidio esta principe como por

merced, y en memoria de tan importante conquista, al que quedasse

siempre cerrada esta puerta. Consintio en allo el Rey Fernando, y

des de aquel tiempo no solamente no se abrio la puerta sino tambien se

construyo junto a ella fuerte bastion.- MORERI'S Historical

Dictionary.

  [There was a gate in the Alhambra by which Chico the King of the

Moors went out when he gave himself up as a prisoner to the King of

Spain, Don Ferdinand, and surrendered to him the city and the

castle. This prince asked as a favor, and in memory of such an

important conquest, that this portal always remain closed. King

Ferdinand consented to this, and from that time not only was the

gate not opened but also a strong bastion was constructed around it.]



  I inquired for some time in vain for such a portal; at length my

humble attendant, Mateo Ximenes, said it must be one closed up with

stones, which, according to what he had heard from his father and

grandfather, was the gateway by which King Chico had left the

fortress. There was a mystery about it, and it had never been opened

within the memory of the oldest inhabitant.

  He conducted me to the spot. The gateway is in the centre of what

was once an immense pile, called the Tower of the Seven Floors (la

Torre de los Siete Suelos). It is famous in the neighborhood as the

scene of strange apparitions and Moorish enchantments. According to

Swinburne the traveller, it was originally the great gate of entrance.

The antiquaries of Granada pronounce it the entrance to that quarter

of the royal residence where the king's bodyguards were stationed.

It therefore might well form an immediate entrance and exit to the

palace; while the grand Gate of Justice served as the entrance of

state to the fortress. When Boabdil sallied by this gate to descend to

the Vega, where he was to surrender the keys of the city to the

Spanish sovereigns, he left his vizier Aben Comixa to receive, at

the Gate of Justice, the detachment from the Christian army and the

officers to whom the fortress was to be given up.*



  * The minor details of the surrender of Granada have been stated

in different ways even by eye-witnesses. The author, in his revised

edition of the Conquest, has endeavored to adjust them according to

the latest and apparently best authorities.



  The once redoubtable Tower of the Seven Floors is now a mere

wreck, having been blown up with gunpowder by the French, when they

abandoned the fortress. Great masses of the wall lie scattered

about, buried in luxuriant herbage, or overshadowed by vines and

fig-trees. The arch of the gateway, though rent by the shock, still

remains; but the last wish of poor Boabdil has again, though

unintentionally, been fulfilled, for the portal has been closed up

by loose stones gathered from the ruins, and remains impassable.

  Mounting my horse, I followed up the route of the Moslem monarch

from this place of his exit. Crossing the hill of Los Martyros, and

keeping along the garden wall of a convent bearing the same name, I

descended a rugged ravine beset by thickets of aloes and Indian

figs, and lined with caves and hovels swarming with gipsies. The

descent was so steep and broken that I was fain to alight and lead

my horse. By this via dolorosa poor Boabdil took his sad departure

to avoid passing through the city; partly, perhaps, through

unwillingness that its inhabitants should behold his humiliation;

but chiefly, in all probability, lest it might cause some popular

agitation. For the last reason, undoubtedly, the detachment sent to

take possession of the fortress ascended by the same route.

  Emerging from this rough ravine, so full of melancholy associations,

and passing by the puerta de los molinos (the gate of the mills), I

issued forth upon the public promenade called the Prado, and

pursuing the course of the Xenil, arrived at a small chapel, once a

mosque, now the Hermitage of San Sebastian. Here, according to

tradition, Boabdil surrendered the keys of Granada to King

Ferdinand. I rode slowly thence across the Vega to a village where the

family and household of the unhappy king awaited him, for he had

sent them forward on the preceding night from the Alhambra, that his

mother and wife might not participate in his personal humiliation,

or be exposed to the gaze of the conquerors. Following on in the route

of the melancholy band of royal exiles, I arrived at the foot of a

chain of barren and dreary heights, forming the skirt of the Alpuxarra

mountains. From the summit of one of these the unfortunate Boabdil

took his last look at Granada; it bears a name expressive of his

sorrows, la Cuesta de las Lagrimas (the Hill of Tears). Beyond it, a

sandy road winds across a rugged cheerless waste, doubly dismal to the

unhappy monarch, as it led to exile.

  I spurred my horse to the summit of a rock, where Boabdil uttered

his last sorrowful exclamation, as he turned his eyes from taking

their farewell gaze; it is still denominated el ultimo suspiro del

Moro (the last sigh of the Moor). Who can wonder at his anguish at

being expelled from such a kingdom and such an abode? With the

Alhambra he seemed to be yielding up all the honors of his line, and

all the glories and delights of life.

  It was here, too, that his affliction was embittered by the reproach

of his mother, Ayxa, who had so often assisted him in times of

peril, and had vainly sought to instil into him her own resolute

spirit. "You do well," said she, "to weep as a woman over what you

could not defend as a man"; a speech savoring more of the pride of the

princess than the tenderness of the mother.

  When this anecdote was related to Charles V by Bishop Guevara, the

emperor joined in the expression of scorn at the weakness of the

wavering Boabdil. "Had I been he, or he been I," said the haughty

potentate, "I would rather have made this Alhambra my sepulchre than

have lived without a kingdom in the Alpuxarra." How easy it is for

those in power and prosperity to preach heroism to the vanquished! how

little can they understand that life itself may rise in value with the

unfortunate, when nought but life remains I

  Slowly descending the "Hill of Tears," I let my horse take his own

loitering gait back to Granada, while I turned the story of the

unfortunate Boabdil over in my mind. In summing up the particulars I

found the balance inclining in his favor. Throughout the whole of

his brief, turbulent, and disastrous reign, he gives evidence of a

mild and amiable character. He, in the first instance, won the

hearts of his people by his affable and gracious manners; he was

always placable, and never inflicted any severity of punishment upon

those who occasionally rebelled against him. He was personally

brave; but wanted moral courage; and, in times of difficulty and

perplexity, was wavering and irresolute. This feebleness of spirit

hastened his downfall, while it deprived him of that heroic grace

which would have given grandeur and dignity to his fate, and

rendered him worthy of closing the splendid drama of the Moslem

domination in Spain.

                   Public Fetes of Granada.



  MY DEVOTED squire and whilom ragged cicerone Mateo Ximenes, had a

poor-devil passion for fates and holidays, and was never so eloquent

as when detailing the civil and religious festivals of Granada. During

the preparations for the annual Catholic fete of Corpus Christi, he

was in a state of incessant transition between the Alhambra and the

subjacent city, bringing me daily accounts of the magnificent

arrangements that were in progress, and endeavoring, but in vain, to

lure me down from my cool and airy retreat to witness them. At length,

on the eve of the eventful day I yielded to his solicitations and

descended from the regal halls of the Alhambra under his escort, as

did of yore the adventure-seeking Haroun Alraschid, under that of

his Grand Vizier Giaffar. Though it was yet scarce sunset, the city

gates were already thronged with the picturesque villagers of the

mountains, and the brown peasantry of the Vega. Granada has ever

been the rallying place of a great mountainous region, studded with

towns and villages. Hither, during the Moorish domination, the

chivalry of this region repaired, to join in the splendid and

semi-warlike fetes of the Vivarrambla, and hither the elite of its

population still resort to join in the pompous ceremonials of the

church. Indeed, many of the mountaineers from the Alpuxarras and the

Sierra de Ronda, who now bow to the cross as zealous Catholics, bear

the stamp of their Moorish origin, and are indubitable descendants

of the fickle subjects of Boabdil.

  Under the guidance of Mateo, I made my way through streets already

teeming with a holiday population, to the square of the Vivarrambla,

that great place for tilts and tourneys, so often sung in the

Moorish ballads of love and chivalry. A gallery or arcade of wood

had been erected along the sides of the square, for the grand

religious procession of the following day. This was brilliantly

illuminated for the evening as a promenade; and bands of music were

stationed on balconies on each of the four facades of the square.

All the fashion and beauty of Granada, all of its population of either

sex that had good looks or fine clothes to display, thronged this

arcade, promenading round and round the Vivarrambla. Here, too, were

the majos and majas, the rural beaux and belles, with fine forms,

flashing eyes, and gay Andalusian costumes; some of them from Ronda

itself, that strong-hold of the mountains, famous for contrabandistas,

bull-fighters, and beautiful women.

  While this gay but motley throng kept up a constant circulation in

the gallery, the centre of the square was occupied by the peasantry

from the surrounding country; who made no pretensions to display,

but came for simple, hearty enjoyment. The whole square was covered

with them; forming separate groups of families and neighborhoods, like

gipsy encampments, some were listening to the traditional ballad

drawled out to the tinkling of the guitar, some were engaged in gay

conversation, some were dancing to the click of the castanet. As I

threaded my way through this teeming region with Mateo at my heels,

I passed occasionally some rustic party, seated on the ground,

making a merry though frugal repast. If they caught my eye as I

loitered by, they almost invariably invited me to partake of their

simple fare. This hospitable usage, inherited from their Moslem

invaders, and originating in the tent of the Arab, is universal

throughout the land, and observed by the poorest Spaniard.

  As the night advanced, the gayety gradually died away in the

arcades; the bands of music ceased to play, and the brilliant crowd

dispersed to their homes. The centre of the square still remained well

peopled, and Mateo assured me that the greater part of the

peasantry, men, women, and children, would pass the night there,

sleeping on the bare earth beneath the open canopy of heaven.

Indeed, a summer night requires no shelter in this favored climate;

and a bed is a superfluity, which many of the hardy peasantry of Spain

never enjoy, and which some of them affect to despise. The common

Spaniard wraps himself in his brown cloak, stretches himself on his

manta or mule-cloth, and sleeps soundly, luxuriously accommodated if

he can have a saddle for a pillow. In a little while the words of

Mateo were made good; the peasant multitude nestled down on the ground

to their night's repose, and by midnight, the scene on the Vivarrambla

resembled the bivouac of an army.

  The next morning, accompanied by Mateo, I revisited the square at

sunrise. It was still strewed with groups of sleepers: some were

reposing from the dance and revel of the evening; others, who had left

their villages after work on the preceding day, having trudged on foot

the greater part of the night, were taking a sound sleep to freshen

themselves for the festivities of the day. Numbers from the mountains,

and the remote villages of the plain, who had set out in the night,

continued to arrive with their wives and children. All were in high

spirits; greeting each other and exchanging jokes and pleasantries.

The gay tumult thickened as the day advanced. Now came pouring in at

the city gates, and parading through the streets, the deputations from

the various villages, destined to swell the grand procession. These

village deputations were headed by their priests, bearing their

respective crosses and banners, and images of the blessed Virgin and

of patron saints; all which were matters of great rivalship and

jealousy among the peasantry. It was like the chivalrous gatherings of

ancient days, when each town and village sent its chiefs, and

warriors, and standards, to defend the capital, or grace its

festivities.

  At length all these various detachments congregated into one grand

pageant, which slowly paraded round the Vivarrambla, and through the

principal streets, where every window and balcony was hung with

tapestry. In this procession were all the religious orders, the

civil and military authorities, and the chief people of the parishes

and villages: every church and convent had contributed its banners,

its images, its relics, and poured forth its wealth for the

occasion. In the centre of the procession walked the archbishop, under

a damask canopy, and surrounded by inferior dignitaries and their

dependants. The whole moved to the swell and cadence of numerous bands

of music, and, passing through the midst of a countless yet silent

multitude, proceeded onward to the cathedral.

  I could not but be struck with the changes of times and customs,

as I saw this monkish pageant passing through the Vivarrambla, the

ancient seat of Moslem pomp and chivalry. The contrast was indeed

forced upon the mind by the decorations of the square. The whole front

of the wooden gallery erected for the procession, extending several

hundred feet, was faced with canvas, on which some humble though

patriotic artist had painted, by contract, a series of the principal

scenes and exploits of the Conquest, as recorded in chronicle and

romance. It is thus the romantic legends of Granada mingle

themselves with every thing, and are kept fresh in the public mind.

  As we wended our way back to the Alhambra, Mateo was in high glee

and garrulous vein. "Ah, senor," exclaimed he, "there is no place in

all the world like Granada for grand ceremonies (funciones grandes); a

man need spend nothing on pleasure here, it is all furnished him

gratis. Pero, el dia de la Toma! ah, senor! el dia de la Toma!" "But

the day of the Taking! ah, senor, the day of the Taking"- that was the

great day which crowned Mateo's notions of perfect felicity. The Dia

de la Toma, I found, was the anniversary of the capture or taking

possession of Granada, by the army of Ferdinand and Isabella.

  On that day, according to Mateo, the whole city is abandoned to

revelry. The great alarm bell on the watchtower of the Alhambra (la

Torre de la vela), sends forth its clanging peals from morn till

night; the sound pervades the whole Vega, and echoes along the

mountains, summoning the peasantry from far and near to the

festivities of the metropolis. "Happy the damsel," says Mateo, "who

can get a chance to ring that bell; it is a charm to insure a

husband within the year."

  Throughout the day the Alhambra is thrown open to the public. Its

halls and courts, where the Moorish monarchs once held sway, resound

with the guitar and castanet, and gay groups, in the fanciful

dresses of Andalusia, perform their traditional dances inherited

from the Moors.

  A grand procession, emblematic of the taking possession of the city,

moves through the principal streets. The banner of Ferdinand and

Isabella, that previous relic of the Conquest, is brought forth from

its depository, and borne in triumph by the Alferez mayor, or grand

standard-bearer. The portable camp-altar, carried about with the

sovereigns in all their campaigns, is transported into the chapel

royal of the cathedral, and placed before their sepulchre, where their

effigies lie in monumental marble. High mass is then performed in

memory of the Conquest; and at a certain part of the ceremony the

Alferez mayor puts on his hat, and waves the standard above the tomb

of the conquerors.

  A more whimsical memorial of the Conquest is exhibited in the

evening at the theatre. A popular drama is performed, entitled AVE

MARIA, turning on a famous achievement of Hernando del Pulgar,

surnamed "el de las Hazanas" (he of the exploits), a madcap warrior,

the favorite hero of the populace of Granada. During the time of the

siege, the young Moorish and Spanish cavaliers vied with each other in

extravagant bravadoes. On one occasion this Hernando del Pulgar, at

the head of a handful of followers, made a dash into Granada in the

dead of the night, nailed the inscription of AVE MARIA with his dagger

to the gate of the principal mosque, a token of having consecrated

it to the Virgin, and effected his retreat in safety.

  While the Moorish cavaliers admired this daring exploit, they felt

bound to resent it. On the following day, therefore, Tarfe, one of the

stoutest among them, paraded in front of the Christian army,

dragging the tablet bearing the sacred inscription AVE MARIA, at his

horse's tail. The cause of the Virgin was eagerly vindicated by

Garcilaso de la Vega, who slew the Moor in single combat, and elevated

the tablet in devotion and triumph at the end of his lance.

  The drama founded on this exploit is prodigiously popular with the

common people. Although it has been acted time out of mind, it never

fails to draw crowds, who become completely lost in the delusions of

the scene. When their favorite Pulgar strides about with many a mouthy

speech, in the very midst of the Moorish capital, he is cheered with

enthusiastic bravos; and when he nails the tablet to the door of the

mosque, the theatre absolutely shakes with the thunders of applause.

On the other hand, the unlucky actors who figure in the part of the

Moors, have to bear the brunt of popular indignation, which at times

equals that of the Hero of La Mancha, at the puppet-show of Gines de

Passamonte; for, when the infidel Tarfe plucks down the tablet to

tie it to his horse's tail, some of the audience rise in fury, and are

ready to jump upon the stage to revenge this insult to the Virgin.

  By the way, the actual lineal descendant of Hernando del Pulgar

was the Marquis de Salar. As the legitimate representative of that

madcap hero, and in commemoration and reward of this hero's exploit,

above mentioned, he inherited the right to enter the cathedral on

certain occasions, on horseback; to sit within the choir, and to put

on his hat at the elevation of the host, though these privileges

were often and obstinately contested by the clergy. I met him

occasionally in society; he was young, of agreeable appearance and

manners, with bright black eyes, in which appeared to lurk some of the

fire of his ancestors. Among the paintings in the Vivarrambla, on

the fete of Corpus Christi, were some depicting, in vivid style, the

exploits of the family hero. An old gray-headed servant of the Pulgars

shed tears on beholding them, and hurried home to inform the

marquis. The eager zeal and enthusiasm of the old domestic only

provoked a light laugh from his young master; whereupon, turning to

the brother of the marquis, with that freedom allowed in Spain to

old family servants, "Come, senor," cried he, "you are more

considerate than your brother; come and see your ancestor in all his

glory!"

  In emulation of this great Dia de la Toma of Granada, almost every

village and petty town of the mountains has its own anniversary,

commemorating, with rustic pomp and uncouth ceremonial, its

deliverance from the Moorish yoke. On these occasions, according to

Mateo, a kind of resurrection takes place of ancient armor and

weapons; great two-handed swords, ponderous arquebuses with

matchlocks, and other warlike relics, treasured up from generation

to generation, since the time of the Conquest; and happy the community

that possesses some old piece of ordnance, peradventure one of the

identical lombards used by the conquerors; it is kept thundering along

the mountains all day long, provided the community can afford

sufficient expenditure of powder.

  In the course of the day, a kind of warlike drama is enacted. Some

of the populace parade the streets, fitted out with the old armor,

as champions of the faith. Others appear dressed up as Moorish

warriors. A tent is pitched in the public square, inclosing an altar

with an image of the Virgin. The Christian warriors approach to

perform their devotions; the infidels surround the tent to prevent

their entrance; a mock fight ensues; the combatants sometimes forget

that they are merely playing a part, and dry blows of grievous

weight are apt to be exchanged. The contest, however, invariably

terminates in favor of the good cause. The Moors are defeated and

taken prisoners. The image of the Virgin, rescued from thraldom, is

elevated in triumph; a grand procession succeeds, in which the

conquerors figure with great applause and vainglory; while their

captives are led in chains, to the evident delight and edification

of the spectators.

  These celebrations are heavy drains on the treasuries of these petty

communities, and have sometimes to be suspended for want of funds;

but, when times grow better, or sufficient money has been hoarded

for the purpose, they are resumed with new zeal and prodigality.

  Mateo informed me that he had occasionally assisted at these fetes

and taken a part in the combats, but always on the side of the true

faith; "Porque senor," added the ragged descendant of the cardinal

Ximenes, tapping his breast with something of an air, "porque senor,

soy Cristiano viejo."

                     Local Traditions.



  THE COMMON people of Spain have an Oriental passion for

story-telling, and are fond of the marvellous. They will gather

round the doors of their cottages in summer evenings, or in the

great cavernous chimney-corners of the ventas in the winter, and

listen with insatiable delight to miraculous legends of saints,

perilous adventures of travellers, and daring exploits of robbers

and contrabandistas. The wild and solitary character of the country,

the imperfect diffusion of knowledge, the scarceness of general topics

of conversation, and the romantic adventurous life that every one

leads in a land where travelling is yet in its primitive state, all

contribute to cherish this love of oral narration, and to produce a

strong infusion of the extravagant and incredible. There is no

theme, however, more prevalent and popular than that of treasures

buried by the Moors; it pervades the whole country. In traversing

the wild sierras, the scenes of ancient foray and exploit, you

cannot see a Moorish atalaya, or watchtower, perched among the cliffs,

or beetling above its rock-built village, but your muleteer, on

being closely questioned, will suspend the smoking of his cigarillo to

tell some tale of Moslem gold buried beneath its foundations; nor is

there a ruined alcazar in a city but has its golden tradition,

handed down from generation to generation among the poor people of the

neighborhood.

  These, like most popular fictions, have sprung from some scanty

groundwork of fact. During the wars between Moor and Christian which

distracted this country for centuries, towns and castles were liable

frequently and suddenly to change owners, and the inhabitants,

during sieges and assaults, were fain to bury their money and jewels

in the earth, or hide them in vaults and wells, as is often done at

the present day in the despotic and belligerent countries of the East.

At the time of the expulsion of the Moors also, many of them concealed

their most precious effects, hoping that their exile would be but

temporary, and that they would be enabled to return and retrieve their

treasures at some future day. It is certain that from time to time

hoards of gold and silver coin have been accidentally digged up, after

a lapse of centuries, from among the ruins of Moorish fortresses and

habitations; and it requires but a few facts of the kind to give birth

to a thousand fictions.

  The stories thus originating have generally something of an Oriental

tinge, and are marked with that mixture of the Arabic and the Gothic

which seems to me to characterize every thing in Spain, and especially

in its southern provinces. The hidden wealth is always laid under

magic spell, and secured by charm and talisman. Sometimes it is

guarded by uncouth monsters or fiery dragons, sometimes by enchanted

Moors, who sit by it in armor, with drawn swords, but motionless as

statues, maintaining a sleepless watch for ages.

  The Alhambra of course, from the peculiar circumstances of its

history, is a strong-hold for popular fictions of the kind; and

various relics, digged up from time to time, have contributed to

strengthen them. At one time an earthen vessel was found containing

Moorish coins and the skeleton of a cock, which, according to the

opinion of certain shrewd inspectors, must have been buried alive.

At another time a vessel was dug up containing a great scarabaeus or

beetle of baked clay, covered with Arabic inscriptions, which was

pronounced a prodigious amulet of occult virtues. In this way the wits

of the ragged brood who inhabit the Alhambra have been set

wool-gathering, until there is not a hall, nor tower, nor vault, of

the old fortress, that has not been made the scene of some

marvellous tradition. Having, I trust, in the preceding papers made

the reader in some degree familiar with the localities of the

Alhambra, I shall now launch out more largely into the wonderful

legends connected with it, and which I have diligently wrought into

shape and form, from various legendary scraps and hints picked up in

the course of my perambulations; in the same manner, that an antiquary

works out a regular historical document from a few scattered letters

of an almost defaced inscription.

  If any thing in these legends should shock the faith of the

over-scrupulous reader, he must remember the nature of the place,

and make due allowances. He must not expect here the same laws of

probability that govern commonplace scenes and everyday life; he

must remember that he treads the halls of an enchanted palace, and

that all is "haunted ground."

                 The House of the Weathercock.



  ON THE brow of the lofty hill of the Albaycin, the highest part of

Granada, and which rises from the narrow valley of the Darro, directly

opposite to the Alhambra, stands all that is left of what was once a

royal palace of the Moors. it has, in fact, fallen into such

obscurity, that it cost me much trouble to find it; though aided in my

researches, by the sagacious and all-knowing Mateo Ximenes. This

edifice has borne for centuries the name of "The House of the

Weathercock" (La Casa del Gallo de Viento), from a bronze figure on

one of its turrets, in ancient times, of a warrior on horseback, and

turning with every breeze. This weathercock was considered by the

Moslems of Granada a portentous talisman. According to some

traditions, it bore the following Arabic inscription:



                 Calet et Bedici Aben Habuz,

                 Quidat ehahet Lindabuz.



Which has been rendered into Spanish:



               Dice el sabio Aben Habuz,

               Que asi se defiende el Andaluz.



And into English:



               In this way, says, Aben Habuz the wise,

               Andaluz guards against surprise.



  This Aben Habuz, according to some of the old Moorish chronicles,

was a captain in the invading army of Taric, one of the conquerors

of Spain, who left him as Alcayde of Granada. He is supposed to have

intended this effigy as a perpetual warning to the Moslems of Andaluz,

that, surrounded by foes, their safety depended upon their being

always on their guard and ready for the field.

  Others, among whom is the Christian historian Marmol, affirms "Badis

Aben Habus" to have been a Moorish sultan of Granada, and that the

weathercock was intended as a perpetual admonition of the

instability of Moslem power, bearing the following words in Arabic:

  "Thus Ibn Habus al Badise predicts Andalus shall one day vanish

and pass away."

  Another version of this portentous inscription is given by a

Moslem historian, on the authority of Sidi Hasan, a faquir who

flourished about the time of Ferdinand and Isabella, and who was

present at the taking down of the weathercock, when the old Kassaba

was undergoing repairs.

  "I saw it," says the venerable faquir, "with my own eyes; it was

of a heptagonal shape, and had the following inscription in verse:



       The palace at fair Granada presents a talisman.

       The horseman, though a solid body, turns with every wind.



This to a wise man reveals a mystery: In a little while comes a

calamity to ruin both the palace and its owner."

  In effect it was not long after this meddling with the portentous

weathercock that the following event occurred. As old Muley Abul

Hassan, the king of Granada, was seated under a sumptuous pavilion,

reviewing his troops who paraded before him in armor of polished

steel, and gorgeous silken robes, mounted on fleet steeds, and

equipped with swords, spears and shields, embossed with gold and

silver; suddenly a tempest was seen hurrying from the south-west. In a

little while, black clouds overshadowed the heavens and burst forth

with a deluge of rain. Torrents came roaring down from the

mountains, bringing with them rocks and trees; the Darro overflowed

its banks; mills were swept away; bridges destroyed, gardens laid

waste; the inundation rushed into the city, undermining houses,

drowning their inhabitants, and overflowing even the square of the

Great Mosque. The people rushed in affright to the mosques to

implore the mercy of Allah, regarding this uproar of the elements as

the harbinger of dreadful calamities; and, indeed, according to the

Arabian historian, Al Makkari, it was but a type and prelude of the

direful war which ended in the downfall of the Moslem kingdom of

Granada.

  I have thus given historic authorities, sufficient to show the

portentous mysteries connected with the House of the Weathercock,

and its talismanic horseman.

  I now proceed to relate still more surprising things about Aben

Habuz and his palace; for the truth of which, should any doubt be

entertained, I refer the dubious reader to Mateo Ximenes and his

fellow-historiographers of the Alhambra.

             Legend of the Arabian Astrologer.



  IN OLD times, many hundred years ago, there was a Moorish king named

Aben Habuz, who reigned over the kingdom of Granada. He was a

retired conqueror, that is to say, one who having in his more youthful

days led a life of constant foray and depredation, now that he was

grown feeble and superannuated, "languished for repose," and desired

nothing more than to live at peace with all the world, to husband

his laurels, and to enjoy in quiet the possessions he had wrested from

his neighbors.

  It so happened, however, that this most reasonable and pacific old

monarch had young rivals to deal with; princes full of his early

passion for fame and fighting, and who were disposed to call him to

account for the scores he had run up with their fathers. Certain

distant districts of his own territories, also, which during the

days of his vigor he had treated with a high hand, were prone, now

that he languished for repose, to rise in rebellion and threaten to

invest him in his capital. Thus he had foes on every side; and as

Granada is surrounded by wild and craggy mountains, which hide the

approach of an enemy, the unfortunate Aben Habuz was kept in a

constant state of vigilance and alarm, not knowing in what quarter

hostilities might break out.

  It was in vain that he built watchtowers on the mountains, and

stationed guards at every pass with orders to make fires by night

and smoke by day, on the approach of an enemy. His alert foes,

baffling every precaution, would break out of some unthought-of

defile, ravage his lands beneath his very nose, and then make off with

prisoners and booty to the mountains. Was ever peaceable and retired

conqueror in a more uncomfortable predicament?

  While Aben Habuz was harassed by these perplexities and

molestations, an ancient Arabian physician arrived at his court. His

gray beard descended to his girdle, and he had every mark of extreme

age, yet he had travelled almost the whole way from Egypt on foot,

with no other aid than a staff, marked with hieroglyphics. His fame

had preceded him. His name was Ibrahim Ebn Abu Ayub, he was said to

have lived ever since the days of Mahomet, and to be son of Abu

Ayub, the last of the companions of the Prophet. He had, when a child,

followed the conquering army of Amru into Egypt, where he had remained

many years studying the dark sciences, and particularly magic, among

the Egyptian priests.

  It was, moreover, said that he had found out the secret of

prolonging life, by means of which he had arrived to the great age

of upwards of two centuries, though, as he did not discover the secret

until well stricken in years, he could only perpetuate his gray

hairs and wrinkles.

  This wonderful old man was honorably entertained by the king, who,

like most superannuated monarchs, began to take physicians into

great favor. He would have assigned him an apartment in his palace,

but the astrologer preferred a cave in the side of the hill which

rises above the city of Granada, being the same on which the

Alhambra has since been built. He caused the cave to be enlarged so as

to form a spacious and lofty hall, with a circular hole at the top,

through which, as through a well, he could see the heavens and

behold the stars even at mid-day. The walls of this hall were

covered with Egyptian hieroglyphics, with cabalistic symbols, and with

the figures of the stars in their signs. This hall he furnished with

many implements, fabricated under his directions by cunning artificers

of Granada, but the occult properties of which were known only to

himself.

  In a little while the sage Ibrahim became the bosom counsellor of

the king, who applied to him for advice in every emergency. Aben Habuz

was once inveighing against the injustice of his neighbors, and

bewailing the restless vigilance he had to observe to guard himself

against their invasions; when he had finished, the astrologer remained

silent for a moment, and then replied, "Know, O King, that when I

was in Egypt I beheld a great marvel devised by a pagan priestess of

old. On a mountain, above the city of Borsa, and overlooking the great

valley of the Nile, was a figure of a ram, and above it a figure of

a cock, both of molten brass, and turning upon a pivot. Whenever the

country was threatened with invasion, the ram would turn in the

direction of the enemy, and the cock would crow; upon this the

inhabitants of the city knew of the danger, and of the quarter from

which it was approaching, and could take timely means to guard against

it."

  "God is great!" exclaimed the pacific Aben Habuz, "what a treasure

would be such a ram to keep an eye upon these mountains around me; and

then such a cock, to crow in time of danger! Allah Akbar! how securely

I might sleep in my palace with such sentinels on the top!"

  The astrologer waited until the ecstasies of the king had

subsided, and then proceeded:

  "After the victorious Amru (may he rest in peace!) had finished

his conquest of Egypt, I remained among the priests of the land,

studying the rites and ceremonies of their idolatrous faith, and

seeking to make myself master of the hidden knowledge for which they

are renowned. I was one day seated on the banks of the Nile,

conversing with an ancient priest, when he pointed to the mighty

pyramids which rose like mountains out of the neighboring desert. 'All

that we can teach thee,' said he, 'is nothing to the knowledge

locked up in those mighty piles. In the centre of the central

pyramid is a sepulchral chamber, in which is inclosed the mummy of the

high-priest, who aided in rearing that stupendous pile; and with him

is buried a wondrous book of knowledge containing all the secrets of

magic and art. This book was given to Adam after his fall, and was

handed down from generation to generation to King Solomon the wise,

and by its aid he built the temple of Jerusalem. How it came into

the possession of the builder of the pyramids, is known to him alone

who knows all things.'

  "When I heard these words of the Egyptian priest, my heart burned to

get possession of that book. I could command the services of many of

the soldiers of our conquering army, and of a number of the native

Egyptians: with these I set to work, and pierced the solid mass of the

pyramid, until, after great toil, I came upon one of its interior

and hidden passages. Following this up, and threading a fearful

labyrinth, I penetrated into the very heart of the pyramid, even to

the sepulchral chamber, where the mummy of the high-priest had lain

for ages. I broke through the outer cases of the mummy, unfolded its

many wrappers and bandages, and at length found the precious volume on

its bosom. I seized it with a trembling hand, and groped my way out of

the pyramid, leaving the mummy in its dark and silent sepulchre, there

to await the final day of resurrection and judgment."

  "Son of Abu Ayub," exclaimed Aben Habuz, "thou hast been a great

traveller, and seen marvellous things; but of what avail to me is

the secret of the pyramid, and the volume of knowledge of the wise

Solomon?"

  "This it is, O king! By the study of that book I am instructed in

all magic arts, and can command the assistance of genii to

accomplish my plans. The mystery of the Talisman of Borsa is therefore

familiar to me, and such a talisman can I make; nay, one of greater

virtues."

  "O wise son of Abu Ayub," cried Aben Habuz, "better were such a

talisman, than all the watchtowers on the hills, and sentinels upon

the borders. Give me a safeguard, and the riches of my treasury are at

thy command."

  The astrologer immediately set to work to gratify the wishes of

the monarch. He caused a great tower to be erected upon the top of the

royal palace, which stood on the brow of the hill of the Albaycin. The

tower was built of stones brought from Egypt, and taken, it is said,

from one of the pyramids. In the upper part of the tower was a

circular hall, with windows looking towards every point of the

compass, and before each window was a table, on which was arranged, as

on a chess-board, a mimic army of horse and foot, with the effigy of

the potentate that ruled in that direction, all carved of wood. To

each of these tables there was a small lance, no bigger than a bodkin,

on which were engraved certain Chaldaic characters. This hall was kept

constantly closed, by a gate of brass, with a great lock of steel, the

key of which was in possession of the king.

  On the top of the tower was a bronze figure of a Moorish horseman,

fixed on a pivot, with a shield on one arm, and his lance elevated

perpendicularly. The face of this horseman was towards the city, as if

keeping guard over it; but if any foe were at hand, the figure would

turn in that direction, and would level the lance as if for action.

  When this talisman was finished, Aben Habuz was all impatient to try

its virtues; and longed as ardently for an invasion as he had ever

sighed after repose. His desire was soon gratified. Tidings were

brought, early one morning, by the sentinel appointed to watch the

tower, that the face of the bronze horseman was turned towards the

mountains of Elvira, and that his lance pointed directly against the

Pass of Lope.

  "Let the drums and trumpets sound to arms, and all Granada be put on

the alert," said Aben Habuz.

  "O king," said the astrologer, "Let not your city be disquieted, nor

your warriors called to arms; we need no aid of force to deliver you

from your enemies. Dismiss your attendants, and let us proceed alone

to the secret hall of the tower."

  The ancient Aben Habuz mounted the staircase of the tower, leaning

on the arm of the still more ancient Ibrahim Ebn Abu Ayub. They

unlocked the brazen door and entered. The window that looked towards

the Pass of Lope was open. "In this direction," said the astrologer,

"lies the danger; approach, O king, and behold the mystery of the

table."

  King Aben Habuz approached the seeming chess-board, on which were

arranged the small wooden effigies, when, to his surprise, he

perceived that they were all in motion. The horses pranced and

curveted, the warriors brandished their weapons, and there was a faint

sound of drums and trumpets, and the clang of arms, and neighing of

steeds; but all no louder, nor more distinct, than the hum of the bee,

or the summer-fly, in the drowsy ear of him who lies at noontide in

the shade.

  "Behold, O king," said the astrologer, "a proof that thy enemies are

even now in the field. They must be advancing through yonder

mountains, by the Pass of Lope. Would you produce a panic and

confusion amongst them, and cause them to retreat without loss of

life, strike these effigies with the but-end of this magic lance;

would you cause bloody feud and carnage, strike with the point."

  A livid streak passed across the countenance of Aben Habuz; he

seized the lance with trembling eagerness; his gray beard wagged

with exultation as he tottered toward the table: "Son of Abu Ayub,"

exclaimed he, in chuckling tone, "I think we will have a little

blood!"

  So saying, he thrust the magic lance into some of the pigmy

effigies, and belabored others with the but-end, upon which the former

fell as dead upon the board, and the rest turning upon each other

began, pell-mell, a chance-medley fight.

  It was with difficulty the astrologer could stay the hand of the

most pacific of monarchs, and prevent him from absolutely

exterminating his foes; at length he prevailed upon him to leave the

tower, and to send out scouts to the mountains by the Pass of Lope.

  They returned with the intelligence, that a Christian army had

advanced through the heart of the Sierra, almost within sight of

Granada, where a dissension had broken out among them; they had turned

their weapons against each other, and after much slaughter had

retreated over the border.

  Aben Habuz was transported with joy on thus proving the efficacy

of the talisman. "At length," said he, "I shall lead a life of

tranquillity, and have all my enemies in my power. O wise son of Abu

Ayub, what can I bestow on thee in reward for such a blessing?"

  "The wants of an old man and a philosopher, O king, are few and

simple; grant me but the means of fitting up my cave as a suitable

hermitage, and I am content."

  "How noble is the moderation of the truly wise!" exclaimed Aben

Habuz, secretly pleased at the cheapness of the recompense. He

summoned his treasurer, and bade him dispense whatever sums might be

required by Ibrahim to complete and furnish his hermitage.

  The astrologer now gave orders to have various chambers hewn out

of the solid rock, so as to form ranges of apartments connected with

his astrological hall; these he caused to be furnished with

luxurious ottomans and divans, and the walls to be hung with the

richest silks of Damascus. "I am an old man," said he, "and can no

longer rest my bones on stone couches, and these damp walls require

covering."

  He had baths too constructed, and provided with all kinds of

perfumes and aromatic oils: "For a bath," said he, "is necessary to

counteract the rigidity of age, and to restore freshness and

suppleness to the frame withered by study."

  He caused the apartments to be hung with innumerable silver and

crystal lamps, which he filled with a fragrant oil, prepared according

to a receipt discovered by him in the tombs of Egypt. This oil was

perpetual in its nature, and diffused a soft radiance like the

tempered light of day. "The light of the sun," said he, "is too garish

and violent for the eyes of an old man, and the light of the lamp is

more congenial to the studies of a philosopher."

  The treasurer of King Aben Habuz groaned at the sums daily

demanded to fit up this hermitage, and he carried his complaints to

the king. The royal word, however, had been given; Aben Habuz shrugged

his shoulders: "We must have patience," said he, "this old man has

taken his idea of a philosophic retreat from the interior of the

pyramids, and of the vast ruins of Egypt; but all things have an

end, and so will the furnishing of his cavern."

  The king was in the right; the hermitage was at length complete, and

formed a sumptuous subterranean palace. The astrologer expressed

himself perfectly content, and, shutting himself up, remained for

three whole days buried in study. At the end of that time he

appeared again before the treasurer. "One thing more is necessary,"

said he, "one trifling solace for the intervals of mental labor."

  "O wise Ibrahim, I am bound to furnish every thing necessary for thy

solitude; what more dost thou require?"

  "I would fain have a few dancing women."

  "Dancing women!" echoed the treasurer, with surprise.

  "Dancing women," replied the sage, gravely; "and let them be young

and fair to look upon; for the sight of youth and beauty is

refreshing. A few will suffice, for I am a philosopher of simple

habits and easily satisfied."

  While the philosophic Ibrahim Ebn Abu Ayub passed his time thus

sagely in his hermitage, the pacific Aben Habuz carried on furious

campaigns in effigy in his tower. It was a glorious thing for an old

man, like himself, of quiet habits, to have war made easy, and to be

enabled to amuse himself in his chamber by brushing away whole

armies like so many swarms of flies.

  For a time he rioted in the indulgence of his humors, and even

taunted and insulted his neighbors, to induce them to make incursions;

but by degrees they grew wary from repeated disasters, until no one

ventured to invade his territories. For many months the bronze

horseman remained on the peace establishment with his lance elevated

in the air, and the worthy old monarch began to repine at the want

of his accustomed sport, and to grow peevish at his monotonous

tranquillity.

  At length, one day, the talismanic horseman veered suddenly round,

and lowering his lance, made a dead point towards the mountains of

Guadix. Aben Habuz hastened to his tower, but the magic table in

that direction remained quiet; not a single warrior was in motion.

Perplexed at the circumstance, he sent forth a troop of horse to scour

the mountains and reconnoitre. They returned after three days'

absence.

  "We have searched every mountain pass," said they, "but not a helm

nor spear was stirring. All that we have found in the course of our

foray, was a Christian damsel of surpassing beauty, sleeping at

noontide beside a fountain, whom we have brought away captive."

  "A damsel of surpassing beauty!" exclaimed Aben Habuz, his eyes

gleaming with animation; "let her be conducted into my presence."

  The beautiful damsel was accordingly conducted into his presence.

She was arrayed with all the luxury of ornament that had prevailed

among the Gothic Spaniards at the time of the Arabian conquest. Pearls

of dazzling whiteness were entwined with her raven tresses; and jewels

sparkled on her forehead, rivalling the lustre of her eyes. Around her

neck was a golden chain, to which was suspended a silver lyre, which

hung by her side.

  The flashes of her dark refulgent eye were like sparks of fire on

the withered, yet combustible, heart of Aben Habuz; the swimming

voluptuousness of her gait made his senses reel. "Fairest of women,"

cried he, with rapture, "who and what art thou?"

  "The daughter of one of the Gothic princes, who but lately ruled

over this land. The armies of my father have been destroyed, as if

by magic, among these mountains; he has been driven into exile, and

his daughter is a captive."

  "Beware, O king!" whispered Ibrahim Ebn Abu Ayub, "this may be one

of these northern sorceresses of whom we have heard, who assume the

most seductive forms to beguile the unwary. Methinks I read witchcraft

in her eye, and sorcery in every movement. Doubtless this is the enemy

pointed out by the talisman."

  "Son of Abu Ayub," replied the king, "thou art a wise man, I

grant, a conjuror for aught I know; but thou art little versed in

the ways of woman. In that knowledge will I yield to no man; no, not

to the wise Solomon himself, notwithstanding the number of his wives

and concubines. As to this damsel, I see no harm in her; she is fair

to look upon, and finds favor in my eyes."

  "Hearken, O king!" replied the astrologer. "I have given thee many

victories by means of my talisman, but have never shared any of the

spoil. Give me then this stray captive, to solace me in my solitude

with her silver lyre. If she be indeed a sorceress, I have counter

spells that set her charms at defiance."

  "What! more women!" cried Aben Habuz. "Hast thou not already dancing

women enough to solace thee?"

  "Dancing women have I, it is true, but no singing women. I would

fain have a little minstrelsy to refresh my mind when weary with the

toils of study."

  "A truce with thy hermit cravings," said the king, impatiently.

"This damsel have I marked for my own. I see much comfort in her; even

such comfort as David, the father of Solomon the wise, found in the

society of Abishag the Shunammite."

  Further solicitations and remonstrances of the astrologer only

provoked a more peremptory reply from the monarch, and they parted

in high displeasure. The sage shut himself up in his hermitage to

brood over his disappointment; ere he departed, however, he gave the

king one more warning to beware of his dangerous captive. But where is

the old man in love that will listen to council? Aben Habuz resigned

himself to the full sway of his passion. His only study was how to

render himself amiable in the eyes of the Gothic beauty. He had not

youth to recommend him, it is true, but then he had riches; and when a

lover is old, he is generally generous. The Zacatin of Granada was

ransacked for the most precious merchandise of the East; silks,

jewels, precious gems, exquisite perfumes, all that Asia and Africa

yielded of rich and rare, were lavished upon the princess. All kinds

of spectacles and festivities were devised for her entertainment;

minstrelsy, dancing, tournaments, bull-fights- Granada for a time

was a scene of perpetual pageant.

  The Gothic princess regarded all this splendor with the air of one

accustomed to magnificence. She received every thing as a homage due

to her rank, or rather to her beauty; for beauty is more lofty in

its exactions even than rank. Nay, she seemed to take a secret

pleasure in exciting the monarch to expenses that made his treasury

shrink; and then treating his extravagant generosity as a mere

matter of course. With all his assiduity and munificence, also, the

venerable lover could not flatter himself that he had made any

impression on her heart. She never frowned on him, it is true, but

then she never smiled. Whenever he began to plead his passion, she

struck her silver lyre. There was a mystic charm in the sound. In an

instant the monarch began to nod; a drowsiness stole over him, and

he gradually sank into a sleep, from which he awoke wonderfully

refreshed, but perfectly cooled for the time of his passion. This

was very baffling to his suit; but then these slumbers were

accompanied by agreeable dreams, which completely inthralled the

senses of the drowsy lover, so he continued to dream on, while all

Granada scoffed at his infatuation, and groaned at the treasures

lavished for a song.

  At length a danger burst on the head of Aben Habuz, against which

his talisman yielded him no warning. An insurrection broke out in

his very capital: his palace was surrounded by an armed rabble, who

menaced his life and the life of his Christian paramour. A spark of

his ancient warlike spirit was awakened in the breast of the

monarch. At the head of a handful of his guards he sallied forth,

put the rebels to flight, and crushed the insurrection in the bud.

  When quiet was again restored, he sought the astrologer, who still

remained shut up in his hermitage, chewing the bitter cud of

resentment.

  Aben Habuz approached him with a conciliatory tone. "O wise son of

Abu Ayub," said he, "well didst thou predict dangers to me from this

captive beauty: tell me then, thou who art so quick at foreseeing

peril, what I should do to avert it."

  "Put from thee the infidel damsel who is the cause."

  "Sooner would I part with my kingdom," cried Aben Habuz.

  "Thou art in danger of losing both," replied the astrologer.

  "Be not harsh and angry, O most profound of philosophers; consider

the double distress of a monarch and a lover, and devise some means of

protecting me from the evils by which I am menaced. I care not for

grandeur, I care not for power, I languish only for repose; would that

I had some quiet retreat where I might take refuge from the world, and

all its cares, and pomps, and troubles, and devote the remainder of my

days to tranquillity and love."

  The astrologer regarded him for a moment, from under his bushy

eyebrows.

  "And what wouldst thou give, if I could provide thee such a

retreat?"

  "Thou shouldst name thy own reward, and whatever it might be, if

within the scope of my power, as my soul liveth, it should be thine."

  "Thou hast heard, O king, of the garden of Irem, one of the

prodigies of Arabia the happy."

  "I have heard of that garden; it is recorded in the Koran, even in

the chapter entitled 'The Dawn of Day.' I have, moreover, heard

marvellous things related of it by pilgrims who had been to Mecca; but

I considered them wild fables, such as travellers are wont to tell who

have visited remote countries."

  "Discredit not, O king, the tales of travellers," rejoined the

astrologer, gravely, "for they contain precious rarities of

knowledge brought from the ends of the earth. As to the palace and

garden of Irem, what is generally told of them is true; I have seen

them with mine own eyes- listen to my adventure; for it has a

bearing upon the object of your request.

  "In my younger days, when a mere Arab of the desert, I tended my

father's camels. In traversing the desert of Aden, one of them strayed

from the rest, and was lost. I searched after it for several days, but

in vain, until, wearied and faint, I laid myself down at noontide, and

slept under a palm-tree by the side of a scanty well. When I awoke,

I found myself at the gate of a city. I entered, and beheld noble

streets, and squares, and market-places; but all were silent and

without an inhabitant. I wandered on until I came to a sumptuous

palace with a garden adorned with fountains and fishponds, and

groves and flowers, and orchards laden with delicious fruit; but still

no one was to be seen. Upon which, appalled at this loneliness, I

hastened to depart; and, after issuing forth at the gate of the

city, I turned to look upon the place, but it was no longer to be

seen; nothing but the silent desert extended before my eyes.

  "In the neighborhood I met with an aged dervise, learned in the

traditions and secrets of the land, and related to him what had

befallen me. 'This,' said he, 'is the far-famed garden of Irem, one of

the wonders of the desert. It only appears at times to some wanderer

like thyself, gladdening him with the sight of towers and palaces

and garden walls overhung with richly-laden fruit-trees, and then

vanishes, leaving nothing but a lonely desert. And this is the story

of it. In old times, when this country was inhabited by the Addites,

King Sheddad, the son of Ad, the great grandson of Noah, founded

here a splendid city. When it was finished, and he saw its grandeur,

his heart was puffed up with pride and arrogance, and he determined to

build a royal palace, with gardens which should rival all related in

the Koran of the celestial paradise. But the curse of heaven fell upon

him for his presumption. He and his subjects were swept from the

earth, and his splendid city, and palace, and gardens, were laid under

a perpetual spell, which hides them from human sight, excepting that

they are seen at intervals, by way of keeping his sin in perpetual

remembrance.'

  "This story, O king, and the wonders I had seen, ever dwelt in my

mind; and in after years, when I had been in Egypt, and was

possessed of the book of knowledge of Solomon the wise, I determined

to return and revisit the garden of Irem. I did so, and found it

revealed to my instructed sight. I took possession of the palace of

Sheddad, and passed several days in his mock paradise. The genii who

watch over the place, were obedient to my magic power, and revealed to

me the spells by which the whole garden had been, as it were, conjured

into existence, and by which it was rendered invisible. Such a

palace and garden, O king, can I make for thee, even here, on the

mountain above thy city. Do I not know all the secret spells? and am I

not in possession of the book of knowledge of Solomon the wise?"

  "O wise son of Abu Ayub!" exclaimed Aben Habuz, trembling with

eagerness, "thou art a traveller indeed, and hast seen and learned

marvellous things! Contrive me such a paradise, and ask any reward,

even to the half of my kingdom."

  "Alas!" replied the other, "thou knowest I am an old man, and a

philosopher, and easily satisfied; all the reward I ask is the first

beast of burden, with its load, which shall enter the magic portal

of the palace."

  The monarch gladly agreed to so moderate a stipulation, and the

astrologer began his work. On the summit of the hill, immediately

above his subterranean hermitage, he caused a great gateway or

barbican to be erected, opening through the centre of a strong tower.

  There was an outer vestibule or porch, with a lofty arch, and within

it a portal secured by massive gates. On the key-stone of the portal

the astrologer, with his own hand, wrought the figure of a huge key;

and on the key-stone of the outer arch of the vestibule, which was

loftier than that of the portal, he carved a gigantic hand. These were

potent talismans, over which he repeated many sentences in an

unknown tongue.

  When this gateway was finished he shut himself up for two days in

his astrological hall, engaged in secret incantations; on the third he

ascended the hill, and passed the whole day on its summit. At a late

hour of the night he came down, and presented himself before Aben

Habuz.

  "At length, O king," said he, "my labor is accomplished. On the

summit of the hill stands one of the most delectable palaces that ever

the head of man devised, or the heart of man desired. It contains

sumptuous halls and galleries, delicious gardens, cool fountains,

and fragrant baths; in a word, the whole mountain is converted into

a paradise. Like the garden of Irem, it is protected by a mighty

charm, which hides it from the view and search of mortals, excepting

such as possess the secret of its talismans."

  "Enough!" cried Aben Habuz, joyfully, "to-morrow morning with the

first light we will ascend and take possession."

  The happy monarch slept but little that night. Scarcely had the rays

of the sun begun to play about the snowy summit of the Sierra

Nevada, when he mounted his steed, and, accompanied only by a few

chosen attendants, ascended a steep and narrow road leading up the

hill. Beside him, on a white palfrey, rode the Gothic princess, her

whole dress sparkling with jewels, while round her neck was

suspended her silver lyre. The astrologer walked on the other side

of the king, assisting his steps with his hieroglyphic staff, for he

never mounted steed of any kind.

  Aben Habuz looked to see the towers of the palace brightening

above him, and the imbowered terraces of its gardens stretching

along the heights; but as yet nothing of the kind was to be

descried. "That is the mystery and safeguard of the place," said the

astrologer, "nothing can be discerned until you have passed the

spell-bound gateway, and been put in possession of the place."

  As they approached the gateway, the astrologer paused, and pointed

out to the king the mystic hand and key carved upon the portal of

the arch. "These," said he, "are the talismans which guard the

entrance to this paradise. Until yonder hand shall reach down and

seize that key, neither mortal power nor magic artifice can prevail

against the lord of this mountain."

  While Aben Habuz was gazing, with open mouth and silent wonder, at

these mystic talismans, the palfrey of the princess proceeded, and

bore her in at the portal, to the very centre of the barbican.

  "Behold," cried the astrologer, "my promised reward; the first

animal with its burden which should enter the magic gateway."

  Aben Habuz smiled at what he considered a pleasantry of the

ancient man; but when he found him to be in earnest, his gray beard

trembled with indignation.

  "Son of Abu Ayub," said he, sternly, "what equivocation is this?

Thou knowest the meaning of my promise: the first beast of burden,

with its load, that should enter this portal. Take the strongest

mule in my stables, load it with the most precious things of my

treasury, and it is thine; but dare not raise thy thoughts to her

who is the delight of my heart."

  "What need I of wealth," cried the astrologer, scornfully; "have I

not the book of knowledge of Solomon the wise, and through it the

command of the secret treasures of the earth? The princess is mine

by right; thy royal word is pledged: I claim her as my own."

  The princess looked down haughtily from her palfrey, and a light

smile of scorn curled her rosy lip at this dispute between two

gray-beards, for the possession of youth and beauty. The wrath of

the monarch got the better of his discretion. "Base son of the

desert," cried he, "thou may'st be master of many arts, but know me

for thy master, and presume not to juggle with thy king."

  "My master! my king!" echoed the astrologer. "The monarch of a

molehill to claim sway over him who possesses the talismans of

Solomon! Farewell, Aben Habuz; reign over thy petty kingdom, and revel

in thy paradise of fools; for me, I will laugh at thee in my

philosophic retirement."

  So saying he seized the bridle of the palfrey, smote the earth

with his staff, and sank with the Gothic princess through the centre

of the barbican. The earth closed over them, and no trace remained

of the opening by which they had descended.

  Aben Habuz was struck dumb for a time with astonishment.

Recovering himself, he ordered a thousand workmen to dig, with pickaxe

and spade, into the ground where the astrologer had disappeared.

They digged and digged, but in vain; the flinty bosom of the hill

resisted their implements; or if they did penetrate a little way,

the earth filled in again as fast as they threw it out. Aben Habuz

sought the mouth of the cavern at the foot of the hill, leading to the

subterranean palace of the astrologer; but it was nowhere to be found.

Where once had been an entrance, was now a solid surface of primeval

rock. With the disappearance of Ibrahim Ebn Abu Ayub ceased the

benefit of his talismans. The bronze horseman remained fixed, with his

face turned toward the hill, and his spear pointed to the spot where

the astrologer had descended, as if there still lurked the deadliest

foe of Aben Habuz.

  From time to time the sound of music, and the tones of a female

voice, could be faintly heard from the bosom of the hill; and a

peasant one day brought word to the king, that in the preceding

night he had found a fissure in the rock, by which he had crept in,

until he looked down into a subterranean hall, in which sat the

astrologer, on a magnificent divan, slumbering and nodding to the

silver lyre of the princess, which seemed to hold a magic sway over

his senses.

  Aben Habuz sought the fissure in the rock, but it was again

closed. He renewed the attempt to unearth his rival, but all in

vain. The spell of the hand and key was too potent to be

counteracted by human power. As to the summit of the mountain, the

site of the promised palace and garden, it remained a naked waste;

either the boasted elysium was hidden from sight by enchantment, or

was a mere fable of the astrologer. The world charitably supposed

the latter, and some used to call the place "The King's Folly,"

while others named it "The Fool's Paradise."

  To add to the chagrin of Aben Habuz, the neighbors whom he had

defied and taunted, and cut up at his leisure while master of the

talismanic horseman, finding him no longer protected by magic spell,

made inroads into his territories from all sides, and the remainder of

the life of the most pacific of monarchs was a tissue of turmoils.

  At length Aben Habuz died, and was buried. Ages have since rolled

away. The Alhambra has been built on the eventful mountain, and in

some measure realizes the fabled delights of the garden of Irem. The

spell-bound gateway still exists entire, protected no doubt by the

mystic hand and key, and now forms the Gate of Justice, the grand

entrance to the fortress. Under that gateway, it is said, the old

astrologer remains in his subterranean hall, nodding on his divan,

lulled by the silver lyre of the princess.

  The old invalid sentinels who mount guard at the gate hear the

strains occasionally in the summer nights; and, yielding to their

soporific power, doze quietly at their posts. Nay, so drowsy an

influence pervades the place, that even those who watch by day may

generally be seen nodding on the stone benches of the barbican, or

sleeping under the neighboring trees, so that in fact it is the

drowsiest military post in all Christendom. All this, say the

ancient legends, will endure from age to age. The princess will remain

captive to the astrologer; and the astrologer, bound up in magic

slumber by the princess, until the last day, unless the mystic hand

shall grasp the fated key, and dispel the whole charm of this

enchanted mountain.

