




             Note to "The Arabian Astrologer"



  Al Makkari, in his history of the Mahommedan dynasties in Spain,

cites from another Arabian writer an account of a talismanic effigy

somewhat similar to the one in the foregoing legend.

  In Cadiz, says he, there formerly stood a square tower upwards of

one hundred cubits high, built of huge blocks of stone, fastened

together with clamps of brass. On the top was the figure of a man,

holding a staff in his right hand, his face turned to the Atlantic,

and pointing with the forefinger of his left hand to the Straits of

Gibraltar. It was said to have been set up in ancient times by the

Gothic kings of Andalus, as a beacon or guide to navigators. The

Moslems of Barbary and Andalus considered it a talisman which

exercised a spell over the seas. Under its guidance, swarms of

piratical people of a nation, called Majus, appeared on the coast in

large vessels with a square sail in the bow, and another in the stern.

They came every six or seven years; captured every thing they met with

on the sea; guided by the statue, they passed through the Straits into

the Mediterranean, landed on the coasts of Andalus, laid every thing

waste with fire and sword; and sometimes carried their depredations on

the opposite coasts even as far as Syria.

  At length, it came to pass in the time of the civil wars, a Moslem

Admiral who had taken possession of Cadiz, hearing that the statue

on top of the tower was of pure gold, had it lowered to the ground and

broken to pieces; when it proved to be of gilded brass. With the

destruction of the idol, the spell over the sea was at an end. From

that time forward, nothing more was seen of the piratical people of

the ocean, excepting that two of their barks were wrecked on the

coast, one at Marsu-l-Majus (the port of the Majus), the other close

to the promontory of Al-Aghan.

  The maritime invaders mentioned by Al Makkari must have been the

Northmen.

                 Visitors to the Alhambra.



  FOR NEARLY three months had I enjoyed undisturbed my dream of

sovereignty in the Alhambra: a longer term of quiet than had been

the lot of many of my predecessors. During this lapse of time the

progress of the season had wrought the usual change. On my arrival I

had found every thing in the freshness of May; the foliage of the

trees was still tender and transparent; the pomegranate had not yet

shed its brilliant crimson blossoms; the orchards of the Xenil and the

Darro were in full bloom; the rocks were hung with wild flowers, and

Granada seemed completely surrounded by a wilderness of roses; among

which innumerable nightingales sang, not merely in the night, but

all day long.

  Now the advance of summer had withered the rose and silenced the

nightingale, and the distant country began to look parched and

sunburnt; though a perennial verdure reigned immediately round the

city and in the deep narrow valleys at the foot of the snow-capped

mountains.

  The Alhambra possesses retreats graduated to the heat of the

weather, among which the most peculiar is the almost subterranean

apartment of the baths. This still retains its ancient Oriental

character, though stamped with the touching traces of decline. At

the entrance, opening into a small court formerly adorned with

flowers, is a hall, moderate in size, but light and graceful in

architecture. It is overlooked by a small gallery supported by

marble pillars and Morisco arches. An alabaster fountain in the centre

of the pavement still throws up a jet of water to cool the place. On

each side are deep alcoves with raised platforms, where the bathers,

after their ablutions, reclined on cushions, soothed to voluptuous

repose by the fragrance of the perfumed air and the notes of soft

music from the gallery. Beyond this hall are the interior chambers,

still more retired; the sanctum sanctorum of female privacy; for

here the beauties of the Harem indulged in the luxury of the baths.

A soft mysterious light reigns through the place, admitted through

small apertures (lumbreras) in the vaulted ceiling. The traces of

ancient elegance are still to be seen; and the alabaster baths in

which the sultanas once reclined. The prevailing obscurity and silence

have made these vaults a favorite resort of bats, who nestle during

the day in the dark nooks and corners, and on being disturbed, flit

mysteriously about the twilight chambers, heightening, in an

indescribable degree, their air of desertion and decay.

  In this cool and elegant, though dilapidated retreat, which had

the freshness and seclusion of a grotto, I passed the sultry hours

of the day as summer advanced, emerging towards sunset, and bathing,

or rather swimming, at night in the great reservoir of the main court.

In this way I was enabled in a measure to counteract the relaxing

and enervating influence of the climate.

  My dream of absolute sovereignty, however, came at length to an end.

I was roused one morning by the report of fire-arms, which

reverberated among the towers as if the castle had been taken by

surprise. On sallying forth, I found an old cavalier with a number

of domestics, in possession of the Hall of Ambassadors. He was an

ancient count who had come up from his palace in Granada to pass a

short time in the Alhambra for the benefit of purer air, and who,

being a veteran and inveterate sportsman, was endeavoring to get an

appetite for his breakfast by shooting at swallows from the balconies.

It was a harmless amusement; for though, by the alertness of his

attendants in loading his pieces, he was enabled to keep up a brisk

fire, I could not accuse him of the death of a single swallow. Nay,

the birds themselves seemed to enjoy the sport, and to deride his want

of skill, skimming in circles close to the balconies, and twittering

as they darted by.

  The arrival of this old gentleman changed essentially the aspect

of affairs, but caused no jealousy nor collision. We tacitly shared

the empire between us, like the last kings of Granada, excepting

that we maintained a most amicable alliance. He reigned absolute

over the Court of the Lions and its adjacent halls, while I maintained

peaceful possession of the regions of the baths and the little

garden of Lindaraxa. We took our meals together under the arcades of

the court, where the fountains cooled the air, and bubbling rills

ran along the channels of the marble pavement.

  In the evenings a domestic circle would gather about the worthy

old cavalier. The countess, his wife by a second marriage, would

come up from the city accompanied by her step-daughter Carmen, an only

child, a charming little being, still in her girlish years. Then there

were always some of his official dependents, his chaplain, his lawyer,

his secretary, his steward, and other officers and agents of his

extensive possessions, who brought him up the news or gossip of the

city, and formed his evening party of tresillo or ombre. Thus he

held a kind of domestic court, where each one paid him deference,

and sought to contribute to his amusement, without, however, any

appearance of servility, or any sacrifice of self-respect. In fact,

nothing of the kind was exacted by the demeanor of the count; for

whatever may be said of Spanish pride, it rarely chills or

constrains the intercourse of social or domestic life. Among no people

are the relations between kindred more unreserved and cordial, or

between superior and dependent more free from haughtiness on the one

side, and obsequiousness on the other. In these respects there still

remains in Spanish life, especially in the provinces, much of the

vaunted simplicity of the olden time.

  The most interesting member of this family group, in my eyes, was

the daughter of the count, the lovely little Carmen; she was but about

sixteen years of age, and appeared to be considered a mere child,

though the idol of the family, going generally by the child-like,

but endearing appellation of la Nina. Her form had not yet attained

full maturity and development, but possessed already the exquisite

symmetry and pliant grace so prevalent in this country. Her blue eyes,

fair complexion, and light hair, were unusual in Andalusia, and gave a

mildness and gentleness to her demeanor in contrast to the usual

fire of Spanish beauty, but in unison with the guileless and confiding

innocence of her manners. She had at the same time the innate

aptness and versatility of her fascinating countrywomen. Whatever

she undertook to do she did well and apparently without effort. She

sang, played the guitar and other instruments, and danced the

picturesque dances of her country to admiration, but never seemed to

seek admiration. Every thing was spontaneous, prompted by her own

gay spirits and happy temper.

  The presence of this fascinating little being spread a new charm

about the Alhambra, and seemed to be in unison with the place. While

the count and countess, with the chaplain or secretary, were playing

their game of tresillo under the vestibule of the Court of Lions, she,

attended by Dolores, who acted as her maid of honor, would sit by

one of the fountains, and accompanying herself on the guitar, would

sing some of those popular romances which abound in Spain, or, what

was still more to my taste, some traditional ballad about the Moors.

  Never shall I think of the Alhambra without remembering this

lovely little being, sporting in happy and innocent girlhood in its

marble halls, dancing to the sound of the Moorish castanets, or

mingling the silver warbling of her voice with the music of its

fountains.

                   Relics and Genealogies.



  IF I HAD been pleased and interested by the count and his family, as

furnishing a picture of a Spanish domestic life, I was still more so

when apprised of historical circumstances which linked them with the

heroic times of Granada. In fact, in this worthy old cavalier, so

totally unwarlike, or whose deeds in arms extended, at most, to a

war on swallows and martlets, I discovered a lineal descendant and

actual representative of Gonsalvo of Cordova, "the Grand Captain," who

won some of his brightest laurels before the walls of Granada, and was

one of the cavaliers commissioned by Ferdinand and Isabella to

negotiate the terms of surrender; nay, more, the count was entitled,

did he choose it, to claim remote affinity with some of the ancient

Moorish princes, through a scion of his house, Don Pedro Venegas,

surnamed the Tornadizo; and by the same token, his daughter, the

fascinating little Carmen, might claim to be rightful representative

of the princess Cetimerien or the beautiful Lindaraxa.*



  * Lest this should be deemed a mere stretch of fancy, the reader

is referred to the following genealogy, derived by the historian

Alcantara, from an Arabian manuscript, on parchment, in the archives

of the marquis of Corvera. It is a specimen of the curious

affinities between Christians and Moslems, produced by capture and

intermarriages, during the Moorish wars. From Aben Hud, the Moorish

king, the conqueror of the Almohades, was descended in right line

Cid Yahia Abraham Alnagar, prince of Almeria, who married a daughter

of King Bermejo. They had three children, commonly called the

Cetimerian Princes. 1st. Yusef ben Alhamar, who for a time usurped the

throne of Granada. 2d. The Prince Nasar, who married the celebrated

Lindaraxa. 3d. The Princess Cetimerien, who married Don Pedro Venegas,

captured by the Moors in his boyhood, a younger son of the House of

Luque, of which house the old count was the present head.



  Understanding from the count that he had some curious relics of

the Conquest, preserved in his family archives, I accompanied him

early one morning down to his palace in Granada to examine them. The

most important of these relics was the sword of the Grand Captain; a

weapon destitute of all ostentatious ornament, as the weapons of great

generals are apt to be, with a plain hilt of ivory and a broad thin

blade. It might furnish a comment on hereditary honors, to see the

sword of the grand captain legitimately declined into such feeble

hands.

  The other relics of the Conquest were a number of espingardas or

muskets of unwieldy size and ponderous weight, worthy to rank with

those enormous two-edged swords preserved in old armories, which

look like relics from the days of the giants.

  Besides other hereditary honors, I found the old count was Alferez

mayor, or grand standard-bearer, in which capacity he was entitled

to bear the ancient standard of Ferdinand and Isabella, on certain

high and solemn occasions, and to wave it over their tombs. I was

shown also the caparisons of velvet, sumptuously embroidered with gold

and silver, for six horses, with which he appeared in state when a new

sovereign was to be proclaimed in Granada and Seville; the count

mounting one of the horses, and the other five being led by lackeys in

rich liveries.

  I had hoped to find among the relics and antiquities of the

count's palace, some specimens of the armor and weapons of the Moors

of Granada, such as I had heard were preserved as trophies by the

descendants of the Conquerors; but in this I was disappointed. I was

the more curious in this particular, because an erroneous idea has

been entertained by many, as to the costumes of the Moors of Spain;

supposing them to be of the usual oriental type. On the contrary, we

have it on the authority of their own writers, that they adopted in

many respects the fashions of the Christians. The turban,

especially, so identified in idea with the Moslem, was generally

abandoned, except in the western provinces, where it continued in

use among people of rank and wealth, and those holding places under

government. A woollen cap, red or green, was commonly worn as a

substitute; probably the same kind originating in Barbary, and known

by the name of Tunis or Fez, which at the present day is worn

throughout the east; though generally under the turban. The Jews

were obliged to wear them of a yellow color.

  In Murcia, Valencia, and other eastern provinces, men of the highest

rank might be seen in public bareheaded. The warrior king, Aben Hud,

never wore a turban, neither did his rival and competitor Al Hamar,

the founder of the Alhambra. A short cloak called Taylasan similar

to that seen in Spain in the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries,

was worn by all ranks. It had a hood or cape which people of condition

sometimes drew over the head; but the lower class never.

  A Moslem cavalier in the thirteenth century, as described by Ibnu

Said, was equipped for war very much in the Christian style. Over a

complete suit of mail he wore a short scarlet tunic. His helmet was of

polished steel; a shield was slung at his back; he wielded a huge

spear with a broad point, sometimes a double point. His saddle was

cumbrous, projecting very much in front and in rear, and he rode

with a banner fluttering behind him.

  In the time of Al Khattib of Granada, who wrote in the fourteenth

century, the Moslems of Andalus had resumed the Oriental costumes, and

were again clad and armed in Arabic fashion: with light helmet, thin

but well tempered cuirass, long slender lance, commonly of reed,

Arabian saddle and leathern buckler, made of double folds of the

skin of the antelope. A wonderful luxury prevailed at that time in the

arms and equipments of the Granadian cavaliers. Their armor was inlaid

with gold and silver. Their cimeters were of the keenest Damascus

blades, with sheaths richly wrought and enamelled, and belts of golden

filagree studded with gems. Their daggers of Fez had jewelled hilts,

and their lances were set off with gay banderoles. Their horses were

caparisoned in correspondent style, with velvet and embroidery.

  All this minute description, given by a contemporary, and an

author of distinction, verifies those gallant pictures in the old

Morisco Spanish ballads which have sometimes been deemed apocryphal,

and gives a vivid idea of the brilliant appearance of the chivalry

of Granada, when marshalled forth in warlike array, or when

celebrating the chivalrous fetes of the Vivarrambla.

                     The Generalife.



  HIGH ABOVE the Alhambra, on the breast of the mountain, amidst

embowered gardens and stately terraces, rise the lofty towers and

white walls of the Generalife; a fairy palace, full of storied

recollections. Here is still to be seen the famous cypresses of

enormous size which flourished in the time of the Moors, and which

tradition has connected with the fabulous story of Boabdil and his

sultana.

  Here are preserved the portraits of many who figured in the romantic

drama of the Conquest. Ferdinand and Isabella, Ponce de Leon, the

gallant marquis of Cadiz, and Garcilaso de la Vega, who slew in

desperate fight Tarfe the Moor, a champion of Herculean strength. Here

too hangs a portrait which has long passed for that of the unfortunate

Boabdil, but which is said to be that of Aben Hud, the Moorish king

from whom descended the princes of Almeria. From one of these princes,

who joined the standard of Ferdinand and Isabella towards the close of

the Conquest, and was christianized by the name of Don Pedro de

Granada Venegas, was descended the present proprietor of the palace,

the marquis of Campotejar. The proprietor, however, dwells in a

foreign land, and the palace has no longer a princely inhabitant.

  Yet here is every thing to delight a southern voluptuary: fruits,

flowers, fragrance, green arbors and myrtle hedges, delicate air and

gushing waters. Here I had an opportunity of witnessing those scenes

which painters are fond of depicting about southern palaces and

gardens. It was the saint's day of the count's daughter, and she had

brought up several of her youthful companions from Granada, to sport

away a long summer's day among the breezy halls and bowers of the

Moorish palaces. A visit to the Generalife was the morning's

entertainment. Here some of the gay company dispersed itself in groups

about the green walks, the bright fountains, the flights of Italian

steps, the noble terraces and marble balustrades. Others, among whom I

was one, took their seats in an open gallery or colonnade commanding a

vast prospect, with the Alhambra, the city, and the Vega, far below,

and the distant horizon of mountains- a dreamy world, all glimmering

to the eye in summer sunshine. While thus seated, the all-pervading

tinkling of the guitar and click of the castanets came stealing up

from the valley of the Darro, and half way down the mountain we

descried a festive party under the trees enjoying themselves in true

Andalusian style, some lying on the grass, others dancing to the

music.

  All these sights and sounds, together with the princely seclusion of

the place, the sweet quiet which prevailed around, and the delicious

serenity of the weather had a witching effect upon the mind, and

drew from some of the company, versed in local story, several of the

popular fancies and traditions connected with this old Moorish palace;

they were "such stuff as dreams are made of," but out of them I have

shaped the following legend, which I hope may have the good fortune to

prove acceptable to the reader.

             Legend of Prince Ahmed al Kamel

                or, The Pilgrim of Love.



  THERE was once a Moorish king of Granada who had but one son, whom

he named Ahmed, to which his courtiers added the surname of al

Kamel, or the perfect, from the indubitable signs of superexcellence

which they perceived in him in his very infancy. The astrologers

countenanced them in their foresight, predicting every thing in his

favor that could make a perfect prince and a prosperous sovereign. One

cloud only rested upon his destiny, and even that was of a roseate

hue: he would be of an amorous temperament, and run great perils

from the tender passion. If, however, he could be kept from the

allurements of love until of mature age, these dangers would be

averted, and his life thereafter be one uninterrupted course of

felicity.

  To prevent all danger of the kind, the king wisely determined to

rear the prince in a seclusion where he should never see a female

face, nor hear even the name of love. For this purpose he built a

beautiful palace on the brow of the hill above the Alhambra, in the

midst of delightful gardens, but surrounded by lofty walls, being,

in fact, the same palace known at the present day by the name of the

Generalife. In this palace the youthful prince was shut up, and

intrusted to the guardianship and instruction of Eben Bonabben, one of

the wisest and dryest of Arabian sages, who had passed the greatest

part of his life in Egypt, studying hieroglyphics, and making

researches among the tombs and pyramids, and who saw more charms in an

Egyptian mummy than in the most tempting of living beauties. The

sage was ordered to instruct the prince in all kinds of knowledge

but one- he was to be kept utterly ignorant of love.

  "Use every precaution for the purpose you may think proper," said

the king; "but remember, O Eben Bonabben, if my son learns aught of

that forbidden knowledge while under your care, your head shall answer

for it."

  A withered smile came over the dry visage of the wise Bonabben at

the menace. "Let your majesty's heart be as easy about your son, as

mine is about my head: am I a man likely to give lessons in the idle

passion?"

  Under the vigilant care of the philosopher, the prince grew up, in

the seclusion of the palace and its gardens. He had black slaves to

attend upon him- hideous mutes who knew nothing of love, or if they

did, had not words to communicate it. His mental endowments were the

peculiar care of Eben Bonabben, who sought to initiate him into the

abstruse lore of Egypt; but in this the prince made little progress,

and it was soon evident that he had no turn for philosophy.

  He was, however, amazingly ductile for a youthful prince, ready to

follow any advice, and always guided by the last counsellor. He

suppressed his yawns, and listened patiently to the long and learned

discourses of Eben Bonabben, from which he imbibed a smattering of

various kinds of knowledge, and thus happily attained his twentieth

year, a miracle of princely wisdom- but totally ignorant of love.

  About this time, however, a change came over the conduct of the

prince. He completely abandoned his studies, and took to strolling

about the gardens, and musing by the side of the fountains. He had

been taught a little music among his various accomplishments; it now

engrossed a great part of his time, and a turn for poetry became

apparent. The sage Eben Bonabben took the alarm, and endeavored to

work these idle humors out of him by a severe course of algebra; but

the prince turned from it with distaste. "I cannot endure algebra,"

said he; "it is an abomination to me. I want something that speaks

more to the heart."

  The sage Eben Bonabben shook his dry head at the words. "Here is

an end to philosophy," thought he. "The prince has discovered he has a

heart!" He now kept anxious watch upon his pupil, and saw that the

latent tenderness of his nature was in activity, and only wanted an

object. He wandered about the gardens of the Generalife in an

intoxication of feelings of which he knew not the cause. Sometimes

he would sit plunged in a delicious reverie; then he would seize his

lute, and draw from it the most touching notes, and then throw it

aside, and break forth into sighs and ejaculations.

  By degrees this loving disposition began to extend to inanimate

objects; he had his favorite flowers, which he cherished with tender

assiduity; then he became attached to various trees, and there was one

in particular, of a graceful form and drooping foliage, on which he

lavished his amorous devotion, carving his name on its bark, hanging

garlands on its branches, and singing couplets in its praise, to the

accompaniment of his lute.

  Eben Bonabben was alarmed at this excited state of his pupil. He saw

him on the very brink of forbidden knowledge- the least hint might

reveal to him the fatal secret. Trembling for the safety of the prince

and the security of his own head, he hastened to draw him from the

seductions of the garden, and shut him up in the highest tower of

the Generalife. It contained beautiful apartments, and commanded an

almost boundless prospect, but was elevated far above that

atmosphere of sweets and those witching bowers so dangerous to the

feelings of the too susceptible Ahmed.

  What was to be done, however, to reconcile him to this restraint and

to beguile the tedious hours? He had exhausted almost all kinds of

agreeable knowledge; and algebra was not to be mentioned.

Fortunately Eben Bonabben had been instructed, when in Egypt, in the

language of birds, by a Jewish Rabbin, who had received it in lineal

transmission from Solomon the wise, who had been taught it by the

queen of Sheba. At the very mention of such a study, the eyes of the

prince sparkled with animation, and he applied himself to it with such

avidity, that he soon became as great an adept as his master.

  The tower of the Generalife was no longer a solitude; he had

companions at hand with whom he could converse. The first acquaintance

he formed was with a hawk, who built his nest in a crevice of the

lofty battlements, whence he soared far and wide in quest of prey. The

prince, however, found little to like or esteem in him. He was a

mere pirate of the air, swaggering and boastful, whose talk was all

about rapine and carnage, and desperate exploits.

  His next acquaintance was an owl, a mighty wise looking bird, with a

huge head and staring eyes, who sat blinking and goggling all day in a

hole in the wall, but roamed forth at night. He had great

pretensions to wisdom, talked something of astrology and the moon, and

hinted at the dark sciences; he was grievously given to metaphysics,

and the prince found his prosings even more ponderous than those of

the sage Eben Bonabben.

  Then there was a bat, that hung all day by his heels in the dark

corner of a vault, but sallied out in slipshod style at twilight.

He, however, had but twilight ideas on all subjects, derided things of

which he had taken but an imperfect view, and seemed to take delight

in nothing.

  Besides these there was a swallow, with whom the prince was at first

much taken. He was a smart talker, but restless, bustling, and for

ever on the wing; seldom remaining long enough for any continued

conversation. He turned out in the end to be a mere smatterer, who did

but skim over the surface of things, pretending to know every thing,

but knowing nothing thoroughly.

  These were the only feathered associates with whom the prince had

any opportunity of exercising his newly acquired language; the tower

was too high for any other birds to frequent it. He soon grew weary of

his new acquaintances, whose conversation spoke so little to the head,

and nothing to the heart; and gradually relapsed into his

loneliness. A winter passed away, spring opened with all its bloom and

verdure and breathing sweetness, and the happy time arrived for

birds to pair and build their nests. Suddenly, as it were, a universal

burst of song and melody broke forth from the groves and gardens of

the Generalife, and reached the prince in the solitude of his tower.

From every side he heard the same universal theme- love- love- love

chanted forth, and responded to in every variety of note and tone. The

prince listened in silence and perplexity. "What can be this love,"

thought he, "of which the world seems so full, and of which I know

nothing?" He applied for information to his friend the hawk. The

ruffian bird answered in a tone of scorn: "You must apply," said he,

"to the vulgar peaceable birds of earth, who are made for the prey

of us princes of the air. My trade is war, and fighting my delight.

I am a warrior, and know nothing of this thing called love."

  The prince turned from him with disgust, and sought the owl in his

retreat. "This is a bird," said he, "of peaceful habits, and may be

able to solve my question." So he asked the owl to tell him what was

this love about which all the birds in the groves below were singing.

  Upon this, the owl put on a look of offended dignity. "My nights,"

said he, "are taken up in study and research, and my days in

ruminating in my cell upon all that I have learnt. As to these singing

birds of whom you talk, I never listen to them- I despise them and

their themes. Allah be praised, I cannot sing; I am a philosopher, and

know nothing of this thing called love."

  The prince now repaired to the vault, where his friend the bat was

hanging by the heels, and propounded the same question. The bat

wrinkled up his nose into a most snappish expression. "Why do you

disturb me in my morning's nap with such an idle question?" said he,

peevishly. "I only fly by twilight, when all birds are asleep, and

never trouble myself with their concerns. I am neither bird nor beast,

and I thank heaven for it. I have found out the villany of the whole

of them, and hate them one and all. In a word, I am a misanthrope- and

know nothing of this thing called love."

  As a last resort, the prince now sought the swallow, and stopped him

just as he was circling about the summit of the tower. The swallow, as

usual, was in a prodigious hurry, and had scarce time to make a reply.

"Upon my word," said he, "I have so much public business to attend to,

and so many pursuits to follow, that I have had no time to think on

the subject. I have every day a thousand visits to pay; a thousand

affairs of importance to examine into, that leave me not a moment of

leisure for these little sing-song matters. In a word, I am a

citizen of the world- I know nothing of this thing called love." So

saying, the swallow dived into the valley, and was out of sight in a

moment.

  The prince remained disappointed and perplexed, but with his

curiosity still more piqued by the difficulty of gratifying it.

While in this mood, his ancient guardian entered the tower. The prince

advanced eagerly to meet him. "O Eben Bonabben," cried he, "thou

hast revealed to me much of the wisdom of the earth; but there is

one thing of which I remain in utter ignorance, and would fain be

informed."

  "My prince has but to make the inquiry, and every thing within the

limited range of his servant's intellect is at his command."

  "Tell me then, O most profound of sages, what is the nature of

this thing called love?"

  Eben Bonabben was struck as with a thunderbolt. He trembled and

turned pale, and felt as if his head sat but loosely on his shoulders.

  "What could suggest such a question to my prince- where could he

have learnt so idle a word?"

  The prince led him to the window of the tower. "Listen, O Eben

Bonabben," said he. The sage listened. The nightingale sat in a

thicket below the tower, singing to his paramour the rose; from

every blossomed spray and tufted grove rose a strain of melody; and

love- love- love- was still the unvarying strain.

  "Allah Akbar! God is great!" exclaimed the wise Bonabben. "Who shall

pretend to keep this secret from the heart of man, when even the birds

of the air conspire to betray it?"

  Then turning to Ahmed- "O my prince," cried he, "shut thine ears

to these seductive strains. Close thy mind against this dangerous

knowledge. Know that this love is the cause of half the ills of

wretched mortality. It is this which produces bitterness and strife

between brethren and friends; which causes treacherous murder and

desolating war. Care and sorrow, weary days and sleepless nights,

are its attendants. It withers the bloom and blights the joys of

youth, and brings on the ills and griefs of premature old age. Allah

preserve thee, my prince, in total ignorance of this thing called

love!"

  The sage Eben Bonabben hastily retired, leaving the prince plunged

in still deeper perplexity. It was in vain he attempted to dismiss the

subject from his mind; it still continued uppermost in his thoughts,

and teased and exhausted him with vain conjectures. Surely, said he to

himself, as he listened to the tuneful strains of the birds, there

is no sorrow in those notes; every thing seems tenderness and joy.

If love be a cause of such wretchedness and strife, why are not

these birds drooping in solitude, or tearing each other in pieces,

instead of fluttering cheerfully about the groves, or sporting with

each other among flowers?

  He lay one morning on his couch meditating on this inexplicable

matter. The window of his chamber was open to admit the soft morning

breeze, which came laden with the perfume of orange blossoms from

the valley of the Darro. The voice of the nightingale was faintly

heard, still chanting the wonted theme. As the prince was listening

and sighing, there was a sudden rushing noise in the air; a

beautiful dove, pursued by a hawk, darted in at the window, and fell

panting on the floor; while the pursuer, balked of his prey, soared

off to the mountains.

  The prince took up the gasping bird, smoothed its feathers, and

nestled it in his bosom. When he had soothed it by his caresses, he

put it in a golden cage, and offered it, with his own hands, the

whitest and finest of wheat and the purest of water. The bird,

however, refused food, and sat drooping and pining, and uttering

piteous moans.

  "What aileth thee?" said Ahmed. "Hast thou not every thing thy heart

can wish?"

  "Alas, no!" replied the dove; "am I not separated from the partner

of my heart, and that too in the happy spring-time, the very season of

love!"

  "Of love!" echoed Ahmed; "I pray thee, my pretty bird, canst thou

tell me what is love?"

  "Too well can I, my prince. It is the torment of one, the felicity

of two, the strife and enmity of three. It is a charm which draws

two beings together, and unites them by delicious sympathies, making

it happiness to be with each other, but misery to be apart. Is there

no being to whom you are drawn by these ties of tender affection?"

  "I like my old teacher Eben Bonabben better than any other being;

but he is often tedious, and I occasionally feel myself happier

without his society."

  "That is not the sympathy I mean. I speak of love, the great mystery

and principle of life: the intoxicating revel of youth; the sober

delight of age. Look forth, my prince, and behold how at this blest

season all nature is full of love. Every created being has its mate;

the most insignificant bird sings to its paramour; the very beetle

woos its lady-beetle in the dust, and yon butterflies which you see

fluttering high above the tower, and toying in the air, are happy in

each other's loves. Alas, my prince hast thou spent so many of the

precious days of youth without knowing any thing of love? Is there

no gentle being of another sex- no beautiful princess nor lovely

damsel who has ensnared your heart, and filled your bosom with a

soft tumult of pleasing pains and tender wishes?"

  "I begin to understand," said the prince, sighing; "such a tumult

I have more than once experienced, without knowing the cause; and

where should I seek for an object such as you describe, in this dismal

solitude?"

  A little further conversation ensued, and the first amatory lesson

of the prince was complete.

  "Alas!" said he, "if love be indeed such a delight, and its

interruption such a misery, Allah forbid that I should mar the joy

of any of its votaries." He opened the cage, took out the dove, and

having fondly kissed it, carried it to the window. "Go, happy bird,"

said he, "rejoice with the partner of thy heart in the days of youth

and spring-time. Why should I make thee a fellow-prisoner in this

dreary tower, where love can never enter?"

  The dove flapped its wings in rapture, gave one vault into the

air, and then swooped downward on whistling wings to the blooming

bowers of the Darro.

  The prince followed him with his eyes, and then gave way to bitter

repining. The singing of the birds which once delighted him, now added

to his bitterness. Love! love! love! Alas, poor youth! he now

understood the strain.

  His eyes flashed fire when next he beheld the sage Bonabben. "Why

hast thou kept me in this abject ignorance?" cried he. "Why has the

great mystery and principle of life been withheld from me, in which

I find the meanest insect is so learned? Behold all nature is in a

revel of delight. Every created being rejoices with its mate. This-

this is the love about which I have sought instruction. Why am I alone

debarred its enjoyment? Why has so much of my youth been wasted

without a knowledge of its raptures?"

  The sage Bonabben saw that all further reserve was useless; for

the prince had acquired the dangerous and forbidden knowledge. He

revealed to him, therefore, the predictions of the astrologers, and

the precautions that had been taken in his education to avert the

threatened evils. "And now, my prince," added he, "my life is in

your hands. Let the king your father discover that you have learned

the passion of love while under my guardianship, and my head must

answer for it."

  The prince was as reasonable as most young men of his age, and

easily listened to the remonstrances of his tutor, since nothing

pleaded against them. Besides, he really was attached to Eben

Bonabben, and being as yet but theoretically acquainted with the

passion of love, he consented to confine the knowledge of it to his

own bosom, rather than endanger the head of the philosopher.

  His discretion was doomed, however, to be put to still further

proofs. A few mornings afterwards, as he was ruminating on the

battlements of the tower, the dove which had been released by him came

hovering in the air, and alighted fearlessly upon his shoulder.

  The prince fondled it to his heart. "Happy bird," said he, "who

can fly, as it were, with the wings of the morning to the uttermost

parts of the earth. Where hast thou been since we parted?"

  "In a far country, my prince, whence I bring you tidings in reward

for my liberty. In the wild compass of my flight, which extends over

plain and mountain, as I was soaring in the air, I beheld below me a

delightful garden with all kinds of fruits and flowers. It was in a

green meadow, on the banks of a wandering stream; and in the centre of

the garden was a stately palace. I alighted in one of the bowers to

repose after my weary flight. On the green bank below me was a

youthful princess, in the very sweetness and bloom of her years. She

was surrounded by female attendants, young like herself, who decked

her with garlands and coronets of flowers; but no flower of field or

garden could compare with her for loveliness. Here, however, she

bloomed in secret, for the garden was surrounded by high walls, and no

mortal man was permitted to enter. When I beheld this beauteous

maid, thus young and innocent and unspotted by the world, I thought,

here is the being formed by heaven to inspire my prince with love."

  The description was a spark of fire to the combustible heart of

Ahmed; all the latent amorousness of his temperament had at once found

an object, and he conceived an immeasurable passion for the

princess. He wrote a letter, couched in the most impassioned language,

breathing his fervent devotion, but bewailing the unhappy thraldom

of his person, which prevented him from seeking her out and throwing

himself at her feet. He added couplets of the most moving eloquence,

for he was a poet by nature, and inspired by love. He addressed his

letter- "To the unknown beauty, from the captive Prince Ahmed";

then, perfuming it with musk and roses, he gave it to the dove.

  "Away, trustiest of messengers!" said he. "Fly over mountain and

valley, and river, and plain; rest not in bower, nor set foot on

earth, until thou hast given this letter to the mistress of my heart."

  The dove soared high in air, and taking his course darted away in

one undeviating direction. The prince followed him with his eye

until he was a mere speck on a cloud, and gradually disappeared behind

a mountain.

  Day after day he watched for the return of the messenger of love,

but he watched in vain. He began to accuse him of forgetfulness,

when towards sunset one evening the faithful bird fluttered into his

apartment, and falling at his feet expired. The arrow of some wanton

archer had pierced his breast, yet he had struggled with the

lingerings of life to execute his mission. As the prince bent with

grief over this gentle martyr to fidelity, he beheld a chain of pearls

round his neck, attached to which, beneath his wing, was a small

enamelled picture. It represented a lovely princess in the very flower

of her years. It was doubtless the unknown beauty of the garden; but

who and where was she- how had she received his letter, and was this

picture sent as a token of her approval of his passion?

Unfortunately the death of the faithful dove left every thing in

mystery and doubt.

  The prince gazed on the picture till his eyes swam with tears. He

pressed it to his lips and to his heart; he sat for hours

contemplating it almost in an agony of tenderness. "Beautiful

image!" said he, "alas, thou art but an image! Yet thy dewy eyes

beam tenderly upon me; those rosy lips look as though they would speak

encouragement: vain fancies! Have they not looked the same on some

more happy rival? But where in this wide world shall I hope to find

the original? Who knows what mountains, what realms may separate us;

what adverse chances may intervene? Perhaps now, even now, lovers

may be crowding around her, while I sit here a prisoner in a tower,

wasting my time in adoration of a painted shadow."

  The resolution of Prince Ahmed was taken. "I will fly from this

palace," said he, "which has become an odious prison; and, a pilgrim

of love, will seek this unknown princess throughout the world." To

escape from the tower in the day, when every one was awake, might be a

difficult matter; but at night the palace was slightly guarded; for no

one apprehended any attempt of the kind from the prince, who had

always been so passive in his captivity. How was he to guide

himself, however, in his darkling flight, being ignorant of the

country?

  He bethought him of the owl, who was accustomed to roam at night,

and must know every by-lane and secret pass. Seeking him in his

hermitage, he questioned him touching his knowledge of the land.

Upon this the owl put on a mighty self-important look. "You must know,

O prince," said he, "that we owls are of a very ancient and

extensive family, though rather fallen to decay, and possess ruinous

castles and palaces in all parts of Spain. There is scarcely a tower

of the mountains, or a fortress of the plains, or an old citadel of

a city, but has some brother or uncle, or cousin, quartered in it; and

in going the rounds to visit this my numerous kindred, I have pryed

into every nook and corner, and made myself acquainted with every

secret of the land."

  The prince was overjoyed to find the owl so deeply versed in

topography, and now informed him, in confidence, of his tender passion

and his intended elopement, urging him to be his companion and

counsellor.

  "Go to!" said the owl, with a look of displeasure; "am I a bird to

engage in a love affair? I whose whole time is devoted to meditation

and the moon?"

  "Be not offended, most solemn owl," replied the prince; "abstract

thyself for a time from meditation and the moon, and aid me in my

flight, and thou shalt have whatever heart can wish."

  "I have that already," said the owl: "a few mice are sufficient

for my frugal table, and this hole in the wall is spacious enough

for my studies; and what more does a philosopher like myself desire?"

  "Bethink thee, most wise owl, that while moping in thy cell and

gazing at the moon, all thy talents are lost to the world. I shall one

day be a sovereign prince, and may advance thee to some post of

honor and dignity."

  The owl, though a philosopher and above the ordinary wants of

life, was not above ambition; so he was finally prevailed on to

elope with the prince, and be his guide and mentor in his pilgrimage.

  The plans of a lover are promptly executed. The prince collected all

his jewels, and concealed them about his person as travelling funds.

That very night he lowered himself by his scarf from a balcony of

the tower, clambered over the outer walls of the Generalife, and,

guided by the owl, made good his escape before morning to the

mountains.

  He now held a council with his mentor as to his future course.

  "Might I advise," said the owl, "I would recommend you to repair

to Seville. You must know that many years since I was on a visit to an

uncle, an owl of great dignity and power, who lived in a ruined wing

of the Alcazar of that place. In my hoverings at night over the city I

frequently remarked a light burning in a lonely tower. At length I

alighted on the battlements, and found it to proceed from the lamp

of an Arabian magician: he was surrounded by his magic books, and on

his shoulder was perched his familiar, an ancient raven who had come

with him from Egypt. I am acquainted with that raven, and owe to him a

great part of the knowledge I possess. The magician is since dead, but

the raven still inhabits the tower, for these birds are of wonderful

long life. I would advise you, O prince, to seek that raven, for he is

a soothsayer and a conjurer, and deals in the black art, for which all

ravens, and especially those of Egypt, are renowned."

  The prince was struck with the wisdom of this advice, and

accordingly bent his course towards Seville. He travelled only in

the night, to accommodate his companion, and lay by during the day

in some dark cavern or mouldering watchtower, for the owl knew every

hiding hole of the kind, and had a most antiquarian taste for ruins.

  At length one morning at daybreak they reached the city of

Seville, where the owl, who hated the glare and bustle of crowded

streets, halted without the gate, and took up his quarters in a hollow

tree.

  The prince entered the gate, and readily found the magic tower,

which rose above the houses of the city, as a palm-tree rises above

the shrubs of the desert; it was in fact the same tower standing at

the present day, and known as the Giralda, the famous Moorish tower of

Seville.

  The prince ascended by a great winding staircase to the summit of

the tower, where he found the cabalistic raven, an old, mysterious,

gray-headed bird, ragged in feather, with a film over one eye that

gave him the glare of a spectre. He was perched on one leg, with his

head turned on one side, poring with his remaining eye on a diagram

described on the pavement.

  The prince approached him with the awe and reverence naturally

inspired by his venerable appearance and supernatural wisdom.

"Pardon me, most ancient and darkly wise raven," exclaimed he, "if for

a moment I interrupt those studies which are the wonder of the

world. You behold before you a votary of love, who would fain seek

your counsel how to obtain the object of his passion."

  "In other words," said the raven, with a significant look, "you seek

to try my skill in palmistry. Come, show me your hand, and let me

decipher the mysterious lines of fortune."

  "Excuse me," said the prince, "I come not to pry into the decrees of

fate, which are hidden by Allah from the eyes of mortals; I am a

pilgrim of love, and seek but to find a clue to the object of my

pilgrimage."

  "And can you be at any loss for an object in amorous Andalusia?"

said the old raven, leering upon him with his single eye; "above

all, can you be at a loss in wanton Seville, where black-eyed

damsels dance the zambra under every orange grove?"

  The prince blushed, and was somewhat shocked at hearing an old

bird with one foot in the grave talk thus loosely. "Believe me,"

said he, gravely, "I am on none such light and vagrant errand as

thou dost insinuate. The black-eyed damsels of Andalusia who dance

among the orange groves of the Guadalquivir are as naught to me. I

seek one unknown but immaculate beauty, the original of this

picture; and I beseech thee, most potent raven, if it be within the

scope of thy knowledge or the reach of thy art, inform me where she

may be found."

  The gray-headed raven was rebuked by the gravity of the prince.

  "What know I," replied he, dryly, "of youth and beauty? my visits

are to the old and withered, not the fresh and fair: the harbinger

of fate am I; who croak bodings of death from the chimney top, and

flap my wings at the sick man's window. You must seek elsewhere for

tidings of your unknown beauty."

  "And where can I seek if not among the sons of wisdom, versed in the

book of destiny? Know that I am a royal prince, fated by the stars,

and sent on a mysterious enterprise on which may hang the destiny of

empires."

  When the raven heard that it was a matter of vast moment, in which

the stars took interest, he changed his tone and manner, and

listened with profound attention to the story of the prince. When it

was concluded, he replied, "Touching this princess, I can give thee no

information of myself, for my flight is not among gardens, or around

ladies' bowers; but hie thee to Cordova, seek the palm-tree of the

great Abderahman, which stands in the court of the principal mosque:

at the foot of it thou wilt find a great traveller who has visited all

countries and courts, and been a favorite with queens and

princesses. He will give thee tidings of the object of thy search."

  "Many thanks for this precious information," said the prince.

"Farewell, most venerable conjurer."

  "Farewell, pilgrim of love," said the raven, dryly, and again fell

to pondering on the diagram.

  The prince sallied forth from Seville, sought his fellow-traveller

the owl, who was still dozing in the hollow tree, and set off for

Cordova.

  He approached it along hanging gardens, and orange and citron

groves, overlooking the fair valley of the Guadalquivir. When

arrived at its gates the owl flew up to a dark hole in the wall, and

the prince proceeded in quest of the palm-tree planted in days of yore

by the great Abderahman. It stood in the midst of the great court of

the mosque, towering from amidst orange and cypress trees. Dervises

and Faquirs were seated in groups under the cloisters of the court,

and many of the faithful were performing their ablutions at the

fountains before entering the mosque.

  At the foot of the palm-tree was a crowd listening to the words of

one who appeared to be talking with great volubility. "This," said the

prince to himself, "must be the great traveller who is to give me

tidings of the unknown princess." He mingled in the crowd, but was

astonished to perceive that they were all listening to a parrot, who

with his bright green coat, pragmatical eye, and consequential

top-knot, had the air of a bird on excellent terms with himself.

  "How is this," said the prince to one of the bystanders, "that so

many grave persons can be delighted with the garrulity of a chattering

bird?"

  "You know not whom you speak of," said the other; "this parrot is

a descendant of the famous parrot of Persia, renowned for his

story-telling talent. He has all the learning of the East at the tip

of his tongue, and can quote poetry as fast as he can talk. He has

visited various foreign courts, where he has been considered an oracle

of erudition. He has been a universal favorite also with the fair sex,

who have a vast admiration for erudite parrots that can quote poetry."

  "Enough," said the prince, "I will have some private talk with

this distinguished traveller."

  He sought a private interview, and expounded the nature of his

errand. He had scarcely mentioned it when the parrot burst into a

fit of dry rickety laughter that absolutely brought tears in his eyes.

"Excuse my merriment," said he, "but the mere mention of love always

sets me laughing."

  The prince was shocked at this ill-timed mirth. "Is not love,"

said he, "the great mystery of nature, the secret principle of life,

the universal bond of sympathy?"

  "A fig's end!" cried the parrot, interrupting him; "prithee where

hast thou learned this sentimental jargon? trust me, love is quite out

of vogue; one never hears of it in the company of wits and people of

refinement."

  The prince sighed as he recalled the different language of his

friend the dove. But this parrot, thought he, has lived about the

court, he affects the wit and the fine gentleman, he knows nothing

of the thing called love. Unwilling to provoke any more ridicule of

the sentiment which filled his heart, he now directed his inquiries to

the immediate purport of his visit.

  "Tell me," said he, "Most accomplished parrot, thou who hast every

where been admitted to the most secret bowers of beauty, hast thou

in the course of thy travels met with the original of this portrait?"

  The parrot took the picture in his claw, turned his head from side

to side, and examined it curiously with either eye. "Upon my honor,"

said he, "a very pretty face; very pretty: but then one sees so many

pretty women in one's travels that one can hardly- but hold- bless me!

now I look at it again- sure enough this is the princess Aldegonda:

how could I forget one that is so prodigious a favorite with me!"

  "The princess Aldegonda!" echoed the prince; "and where is she to be

found?"

  "Softly, softly," said the parrot, "easier to be found than

gained. She is the only daughter of the Christian king who reigns at

Toledo, and is shut up from the world until her seventeenth birth-day,

on account of some prediction of those meddlesome fellows the

astrologers. You'll not get a sight of her; no mortal man can see her.

I was admitted to her presence to entertain her, and I assure you,

on the word of a parrot, who has seen the world, I have conversed with

much sillier princesses in my time."

  "A word in confidence, my dear parrot," said the prince; "I am

heir to a kingdom, and shall one day sit upon a throne. I see that you

are a bird of parts, and understand the world. Help me to gain

possession of this princess, and I will advance you to some

distinguished place about court."

  "With all my heart," said the parrot; "but let it be a sinecure if

possible, for we wits have a great dislike to labor."

  Arrangements were promptly made; the prince sallied forth from

Cordova through the same gate by which he had entered; called the

owl down from the hole in the wall, introduced him to his new

travelling companion as a brother savant, and away they set off on

their journey.

  They travelled much more slowly than accorded with the impatience of

the prince, but the parrot was accustomed to high life, and did not

like to be disturbed early in the morning. The owl, on the other hand,

was for sleeping at mid-day, and lost a great deal of time by his long

siestas. His antiquarian taste also was in the way; for he insisted on

pausing and inspecting every ruin, and had long legendary tales to

tell about every old tower and castle in the country. The prince had

supposed that he and the parrot, being both birds of learning, would

delight in each other's society, but never had he been more

mistaken. They were eternally bickering. The one was a wit, the

other a philosopher. The parrot quoted poetry, was critical on new

readings and eloquent on small points of erudition; the owl treated

all such knowledge as trifling, and relished nothing but

metaphysics. Then the parrot would sing songs and repeat bon mots

and crack jokes upon his solemn neighbor, and laugh outrageously at

his own wit; all which proceedings the owl considered as a grievous

invasion of his dignity, and would scowl and sulk and swell, and be

silent for a whole day together.

  The prince heeded not the wranglings of his companions, being

wrapped up in the dreams of his own fancy and the contemplation of the

portrait of the beautiful princess. In this way they journeyed through

the stern passes of the Sierra Morena, across the sunburnt plains of

La Mancha and Castile, and along the banks of the "Golden Tagus,"

which winds its wizard mazes over one half of Spain and Portugal. At

length they came in sight of a strong city with walls and towers built

on a rocky promontory, round the foot of which the Tagus circled

with brawling violence.

  "Behold," exclaimed the owl, "the ancient and renowned city of

Toledo; a city famous for its antiquities. Behold those venerable

domes and towers, hoary with time and clothed with legendary grandeur,

in which so many of my ancestors have meditated."

  "Pish!" cried the parrot, interrupting his solemn antiquarian

rapture, "what have we to do with antiquities, and legends, and your

ancestry? Behold what is more to the purpose- behold the abode of

youth and beauty- behold at length, O prince, the abode of your

long-sought princess."

  The prince looked in the direction indicated by the parrot, and

beheld, in a delightful meadow on the banks of the Tagus, a stately

palace rising from amidst the bowers of a delicious garden. It was

just such a place as had been described by the dove as the residence

of the original of the picture. He gazed at it with a throbbing heart.

"Perhaps at this moment," thought he, "the beautiful princess is

sporting beneath those shady bowers, or pacing with delicate step

those stately terraces, or reposing beneath those lofty roofs!" As

he looked more narrowly he perceived that the walls of the garden were

of great height, so as to defy access, while numbers of armed guards

patrolled around them.

  The prince turned to the parrot. "O most accomplished of birds,"

said he, "thou hast the gift of human speech. Hie thee to yon

garden; seek the idol of my soul, and tell her that Prince Ahmed, a

pilgrim of love, and guided by the stars, has arrived in quest of

her on the flowery banks of the Tagus."

  The parrot, proud of his embassy, flew away to the garden, mounted

above its lofty walls, and after soaring for a time over the lawns and

groves, alighted on the balcony of a pavilion that overhung the river.

Here, looking in at the casement, he beheld the princess reclining

on a couch, with her eyes fixed on a paper, while tears gently stole

after each other down her pallid cheek.

  Pluming his wings for a moment, adjusting his bright green coat, and

elevating his top-knot, the parrot perched himself beside her with a

gallant air: then assuming a tenderness of tone, "Dry thy tears,

most beautiful of princesses," said he, "I come to bring solace to thy

heart."

  The princess was startled on hearing a voice, but turning and seeing

nothing but a little green-coated bird bobbing and bowing before

her; "Alas! what solace canst thou yield," said she, "seeing thou

art but a parrot?"

  The parrot was nettled at the question. "I have consoled many

beautiful ladies in my time," said he; "but let that pass. At

present I come ambassador from a royal prince. Know that Ahmed, the

prince of Granada, has arrived in quest of thee, and is encamped

even now on the flowery banks of the Tagus."

  The eyes of the beautiful princess sparkled at these words even

brighter than the diamonds in her coronet. "O sweetest of parrots,"

cried she, "joyful indeed are thy tidings, for I was faint and

weary, and sick almost unto death with doubt of the constancy of

Ahmed. Hie thee back, and tell him that the words of his letter are

engraven in my heart, and his poetry has been the food of my soul.

Tell him, however, that he must prepare to prove his love by force

of arms; to-morrow is my seventeenth birth-day, when the king my

father holds a great tournament; several princes are to enter the

lists, and my hand is to be the prize of the victor."

  The parrot again took wing, and rustling through the groves, flew

back to where the prince awaited his return. The rapture of Ahmed on

finding the original of his adored portrait, and finding her kind

and true, can only be conceived by those favored mortals who have

had the good fortune to realize day-dreams and turn a shadow into

substance: still there was one thing that alloyed his transport-

this impending tournament. In fact, the banks of the Tagus were

already glittering with arms, and resounding with trumpets of the

various knights, who, with proud retinues, were prancing on towards

Toledo to attend the ceremonial. The same star that had controlled the

destiny of the prince had governed that of the princess, and until her

seventeenth birth-day she had been shut up from the world, to guard

her from the tender passion. The fame of her charms, however, had been

enhanced rather than obscured by this seclusion. Several powerful

princes had contended for her hand; and her father, who was a king

of wondrous shrewdness, to avoid making enemies by showing partiality,

had referred them to the arbitrament of arms. Among the rival

candidates were several renowned for strength and prowess. What a

predicament for the unfortunate Ahmed, unprovided as he was with

weapons, and unskilled in the exercise of chivalry! "Luckless prince

that I am!" said he, "to have been brought up in seclusion under the

eye of a philosopher! Of what avail are algebra and philosophy in

affairs of love? Alas, Eben Bonabben! why hast thou neglected to

instruct me in the management of arms?" Upon this the owl broke

silence, preluding his harangue with a pious ejaculation, for he was a

devout Mussulman.

  "Allah Akbar! God is great!" exclaimed he; "in his hands are all

secret things- he alone governs the destiny of princes! Know, O

prince, that this land is full of mysteries, hidden from all but those

who, like myself, can grope after knowledge in the dark. Know that

in the neighboring mountains there is a cave, and in that cave there

is an iron table, and on that table there lies a suit of magic

armor, and beside that table there stands a spell-bound steed, which

have been shut up there for many generations."

  The prince stared with wonder, while the owl, blinking his huge

round eyes, and erecting his horns, proceeded.

  "Many years since, I accompanied my father to these parts on a

tour of his estates, and we sojourned in that cave; and thus became

I acquainted with the mystery. It is a tradition in our family which I

have heard from my grandfather, when I was yet but a very little

owlet, that this armor belonged to a Moorish magician, who took refuge

in this cavern when Toledo was captured by the Christians, and died

here, leaving his steed and weapons under a mystic spell, never to

be used but by a Moslem, and by him only from sunrise to mid-day. In

that interval, whoever uses them will overthrow every opponent."

  "Enough, let us seek this cave!" exclaimed Ahmed.

  Guided by his legendary mentor, the prince found the cavern, which

was in one of the wildest recesses of those rocky cliffs which rise

around Toledo; none but the mousing eye of an owl or an antiquary

could have discovered the entrance to it. A sepulchral lamp of

everlasting oil shed a solemn light through the place. On an iron

table in the centre of the cavern lay the magic armor, against it

leaned the lance, and beside it stood an Arabian steed, caparisoned

for the field, but motionless as a statue. The armor was bright and

unsullied as it had gleamed in days of old; the steed in as good

condition as if just from the pasture; and when Ahmed laid his hand

upon his neck, he pawed the ground and gave a loud neigh of joy that

shook the walls of the cavern. Thus amply provided with "horse and

rider and weapon to wear," the prince determined to defy the field

in the impending tourney.

  The eventful morning arrived. The lists for the combat were prepared

in the vega, or plain, just below the cliff-built walls of Toledo,

where stages and galleries were erected for the spectators, covered

with rich tapestry, and sheltered from the sun by silken awnings.

All the beauties of the land were assembled in those galleries,

while below pranced plumed knights with their pages and esquires,

among whom figured conspicuously the princes who were to contend in

the tourney. All the beauties of the land, however, were eclipsed when

the princess Aldegonda appeared in the royal pavilion, and for the

first time broke forth upon the gaze of an admiring world. A murmur of

wonder ran through the crowd at her transcendent loveliness; and the

princes who were candidates for her hand, merely on the faith of her

reported charms, now felt tenfold ardor for the conflict.

  The princess, however, had a troubled look. The color came and

went from her cheek, and her eye wandered with a restless and

unsatisfied expression over the plumed throng of knights. The trumpets

were about sounding for the encounter, when the herald announced the

arrival of a strange knight; and Ahmed rode into the field. A steel

helmet studded with gems rose above his turban; his cuirass was

embossed with gold; his cimeter and dagger were of the workmanship

of Fez, and flamed with precious stones. A round shield was at his

shoulder, and in his hand he bore the lance of charmed virtue. The

caparison of his Arabian steed was richly embroidered and swept the

ground, and the proud animal pranced and snuffed the air, and

neighed with joy at once more beholding the array of arms. The lofty

and graceful demeanor of the prince struck every eye, and when his

appellation was announced, "the Pilgrim of Love," a universal

flutter and agitation prevailed among the fair dames in the galleries.

  When Ahmed presented himself at the lists, however, they were closed

against him: none but princes, he was told, were admitted to the

contest. He declared his name and rank. Still worse!- he was a Moslem,

and could not engage in a tourney where the hand of a Christian

princess was the prize.

  The rival princes surrounded him with haughty and menacing

aspects; and one of insolent demeanor and herculean frame sneered at

his light and youthful form, and scoffed at his amorous appellation.

The ire of the prince was roused. He defied his rival to the

encounter. They took distance, wheeled, and charged; and at the

first touch of the magic lance, the brawny scoffer was tilted from his

saddle. Here the prince would have paused, but alas! he had to deal

with a demoniac horse and armor; once in action nothing could

control them. The Arabian steed charged into the thickest of the

throng; the lance overturned every thing that presented; the gentle

prince was carried pell-mell about the field, strewing it with high

and low, gentle and simple, and grieving at his own involuntary

exploits. The king stormed and raged at this outrage on his subjects

and his guests. He ordered out all his guards- they were unhorsed as

fast as they came up. The king threw off his robes, grasped buckler

and lance, and rode forth to awe the stranger with the presence of

majesty itself Alas! majesty fared no better than the vulgar; the

steed and lance were no respecters of persons; to the dismay of Ahmed,

he was borne full tilt against the king, and in a moment the royal

heels were in the air, and the crown was rolling in the dust.

  At this moment the sun reached the meridian; the magic spell resumed

its power; the Arabian steed scoured across the plain, leaped the

barrier, plunged into the Tagus, swam its raging current, bore the

prince breathless and amazed to the cavern, and resumed his station,

like a statue, beside the iron table. The prince dismounted right

gladly, and replaced the armor, to abide the further decrees of

fate. Then seating himself in the cavern, he ruminated on the

desperate state to which this demoniac steed and armor had reduced

him. Never should he dare to show his face at Toledo after

inflicting such disgrace upon its chivalry, and such an outrage on its

king. What, too, would the princess think of so rude and riotous an

achievement? Full of anxiety, he sent forth his winged messengers to

gather tidings. The parrot resorted to all the public places and

crowded resorts of the city, and soon returned with a world of gossip.

  All Toledo was in consternation. The princess had been borne off

senseless to the palace; the tournament had ended in confusion;

every one was talking of the sudden apparition, prodigious exploits,

and strange disappearance of the Moslem knight. Some pronounced him

a Moorish magician; others thought him a demon who had assumed a human

shape, while others related traditions of enchanted warriors hidden in

the caves of the mountains, and thought it might be one of these,

who had made a sudden irruption from his den. All agreed that no

mere ordinary mortal could have wrought such wonders, or unhorsed such

accomplished and stalwart Christian warriors.

  The owl flew forth at night and hovered about the dusky city,

perching on the roofs and chimneys. He then wheeled his flight up to

the royal palace, which stood on a rocky summit of Toledo, and went

prowling about its terraces and battlements, eavesdropping at every

cranny, and glaring in with his big goggling eyes at every window

where there was a light, so as to throw two or three maids of honor

into fits. It was not until the gray dawn began to peer above the

mountains that he returned from his mousing expedition, and related to

the prince what he had seen.

  "As I was prying about one of the loftiest towers of the palace,"

said he, "I beheld through a casement a beautiful princess. She was

reclining on a couch with attendants and physicians around her, but

she would none of their ministry and relief When they retired I beheld

her draw forth a letter from her bosom, and read and kiss it, and give

way to loud lamentations; at which, philosopher as I am, I could but

be greatly moved."

  The tender heart of Ahmed was distressed at these tidings. "Too true

were thy words, O sage Eben Bonabben," cried he; "care and sorrow

and sleepless nights are the lot of lovers. Allah preserve the

princess from the blighting influence of this thing called love!"

  Further intelligence from Toledo corroborated the report of the owl.

The city was a prey to uneasiness and alarm. The princess was conveyed

to the highest tower of the palace, every avenue to which was strongly

guarded. In the mean time a devouring melancholy had seized upon

her, of which no one could divine the cause- she refused food and

turned a deaf ear to every consolation. The most skilful physicians

had essayed their art in vain; it was thought some magic spell had

been practised upon her, and the king made proclamation, declaring

that whoever should effect her cure should receive the richest jewel

in the royal treasury.

  When the owl, who was dozing in a corner, heard of this

proclamation, he rolled his large eyes and looked more mysterious than

ever.

  "Allah Akbar!" exclaimed he, "happy the man that shall effect that

cure, should he but know what to choose from the royal treasury."

  "What mean you, most reverend owl?" said Ahmed.

  "Hearken, O prince, to what I shall relate. We owls, you must

know, are a learned body, and much given to dark and dusty research.

During my late prowling at night about the domes and turrets of

Toledo, I discovered a college of antiquarian owls, who hold their

meetings in a great vaulted tower where the royal treasury is

deposited. Here they were discussing the forms and inscriptions and

designs of ancient gems and jewels, and of golden and silver

vessels, heaped up in the treasury, the fashion of every country and

age; but mostly they were interested about certain relics and

talismans that have remained in the treasury since the time of

Roderick the Goth. Among these was a box of sandal-wood secured by

bands of steel of Oriental workmanship, and inscribed with mystic

characters known only to the learned few. This box and its inscription

had occupied the college for several sessions, and had caused much

long and grave dispute. At the time of my visit a very ancient owl,

who had recently arrived from Egypt, was seated on the lid of the

box lecturing upon the inscription, and he proved from it that the

coffer contained the silken carpet of the throne of Solomon the

wise; which doubtless had been brought to Toledo by the Jews who

took refuge there after the downfall of Jerusalem."

  When the owl had concluded his antiquarian harangue the prince

remained for a time absorbed in thought. "I have heard," said he,

"from the sage Eben Bonabben, of the wonderful properties of that

talisman, which disappeared at the fall of Jerusalem, and was supposed

to be lost to mankind. Doubtless it remains a sealed mystery to the

Christians of Toledo. If I can get possession of that carpet, my

fortune is secure."

  The next day the prince laid aside his rich attire, and arrayed

himself in the simple garb of an Arab of the desert. He dyed his

complexion to a tawny hue, and no one could have recognized in him the

splendid warrior who had caused such admiration and dismay at the

tournament. With staff in hand, and scrip by his side, and a small

pastoral reed, he repaired to Toledo, and presenting himself at the

gate of the royal palace, announced himself as a candidate for the

reward offered for the cure of the princess. The guards would have

driven him away with blows. "What can a vagrant Arab like thyself

pretend to do," said they, "in a case where the most learned of the

land have failed?" The king, however, overheard the tumult, and

ordered the Arab to be brought into his presence.

  "Most potent king," said Ahmed, "You behold before you a Bedouin

Arab, the greater part of whose life has been passed in the

solitudes of the desert. These solitudes, it is well known, are the

haunts of demons and evil spirits, who beset us poor shepherds in

our lonely watchings, enter into and possess our flocks and herds, and

sometimes render even the patient camel furious; against these our

counter-charm is music; and we have legendary airs handed down from

generation to generation, that we chant and pipe, to cast forth

these evil spirits. I am of a gifted line, and possess this power in

its fullest force. If it be any evil influence of the kind that

holds a spell over thy daughter, I pledge my head to free her from its

sway."

  The king, who was a man of understanding and knew the wonderful

secrets possessed by the Arabs, was inspired with hope by the

confident language of the prince. He conducted him immediately to

the lofty tower, secured by several doors, in the summit of which

was the chamber of the princess. The windows opened upon a terrace

with balustrades, commanding a view over Toledo and all the

surrounding country. The windows were darkened, for the princess lay

within, a prey to a devouring grief that refused all alleviation.

  The prince seated himself on the terrace, and performed several wild

Arabian airs on his pastoral pipe, which he had learnt from his

attendants in the Generalife at Granada. The princess continued

insensible, and the doctors who were present shook their heads, and

smiled with incredulity and contempt: at length the prince laid

aside the reed, and, to a simple melody, chanted the amatory verses of

the letter which had declared his passion.

  The princess recognized the strain- a fluttering joy stole to her

heart; she raised her head and listened; tears rushed to her eyes

and streamed down her cheeks; her bosom rose and fell with a tumult of

emotions. She would have asked for the minstrel to be brought into her

presence, but maiden coyness held her silent. The king read her

wishes, and at his command Ahmed was conducted into the chamber. The

lovers were discreet: they but exchanged glances, yet those glances

spoke volumes. Never was triumph of music more complete. The rose

had returned to the soft cheek of the princess, the freshness to her

lip, and the dewy light to her languishing eyes.

  All the physicians present stared at each other with astonishment.

The king regarded the Arab minstrel with admiration mixed with awe.

"Wonderful youth!" exclaimed he, "thou shalt henceforth be the first

physician of my court, and no other prescription will I take but thy

melody. For the present receive thy reward, the most precious jewel in

my treasury."

  "O king," replied Ahmed, "I care not for silver or gold or

precious stones. One relic hast thou in thy treasury, handed down from

the Moslems who once owned Toledo- a box of sandal-wood containing a

silken carpet: give me that box, and I am content."

  All present were surprised at the moderation of the Arab; and

still more when the box of sandal-wood was brought and the carpet

drawn forth. It was of fine green silk, covered with Hebrew and

Chaldaic characters. The court physicians looked at each other,

shrugged their shoulders, and smiled at the simplicity of this new

practitioner, who could be content with so paltry a fee.

  "This carpet," said the prince, "once covered the throne of

Solomon the wise; it is worthy of being placed beneath the feet of

beauty."

  So saying, he spread it on the terrace beneath an ottoman that had

been brought forth for the princess; then seating himself at her feet-



  "Who," said he, "shall counteract what is written in the book of

fate? Behold the prediction of the astrologers verified. Know, O king,

that your daughter and I long have loved each other in secret.

Behold in me the Pilgrim of Love!"

  These words were scarcely from his lips, when the carpet rose in the

air, bearing off the prince and princess. The king and the

physicians gazed after it with open mouths and straining eyes until it

became a little speck on the white bosom of a cloud, and then

disappeared in the blue vault of heaven.

  The king in a rage summoned his treasurer. "How is this," said he,

"that thou hast suffered an infidel to get possession of such a

talisman?"

  "Alas, sir, we knew not its nature, nor could we decipher the

inscription of the box. If it be indeed the carpet of the throne of

the wise Solomon, it is possessed of magic power, and can transport

its owner from place to place through the air."

  The king assembled a mighty army, and set off for Granada in pursuit

of the fugitives. His march was long and toilsome. Encamping in the

Vega, he sent a herald to demand restitution of his daughter. The king

himself came forth with all his court to meet him. In the king he

beheld the real minstrel, for Ahmed had succeeded to the throne on the

death of his father, and the beautiful Aldegonda was his sultana.

  The Christian king was easily pacified when he found that his

daughter was suffered to continue in her faith- not that he was

particularly pious, but religion is always a point of pride and

etiquette with princes. Instead of bloody battles, there was a

succession of feasts and rejoicings, after which the king returned

well pleased to Toledo, and the youthful couple continued to reign

as happily as wisely, in the Alhambra.

  It is proper to add, that the owl and the parrot had severally

followed the prince by easy stages to Granada, the former travelling

by night and stopping at the various hereditary possessions of his

family, the latter figuring in gay circles of every town and city on

his route.

  Ahmed gratefully requited the services which they had rendered on

his pilgrimage. He appointed the owl his prime minister, the parrot

his master of ceremonies. It is needless to say that never was a realm

more sagely administered, nor a court conducted with more exact

punctilio.
