




                 A Ramble Among the Hills.



  I USED frequently to amuse myself towards the close of the day, when

the heat had subsided, with taking long rambles about the

neighboring hills and the deep umbrageous valleys, accompanied by my

historiographic squire, Mateo, to whose passion for gossiping I on

such occasions gave the most unbounded license; and there was scarce a

rock, or ruin, or broken fountain, or lonely glen, about which he

had not some marvellous story; or, above all, some golden legend;

for never was poor devil so munificent in dispensing hidden treasures.

  In the course of one of these strolls Mateo was more than usually

communicative. It was toward sunset that we sallied forth from the

great Gate of Justice, and ascended an alley of trees until we came to

a clump of figs and pomegranates at the foot of the Tower of the Seven

Floors (de los Siete Suelos), the identical tower whence Boabdil is

said to have issued, when he surrendered his capital. Here, pointing

to a low archway in the foundation, Mateo informed me of a monstrous

sprite or hobgoblin, said to infest this tower, ever since the time of

the Moors, and to guard the treasures of a Moslem king. Sometimes it

issues forth in the dead of the night, and scours the avenues of the

Alhambra, and the streets of Granada, in the shape of a headless

horse, pursued by six dogs with terrible yells and howlings.

  "But have you ever met with it yourself, Mateo, in any of your

rambles?" demanded I.

  "No, senor, God be thanked! but my grandfather, the tailor, knew

several persons that had seen it, for it went about much oftener in

his time than at present; sometimes in one shape, sometimes in

another. Every body in Granada has heard of the Belludo, for the old

women and the nurses frighten the children with it when they cry. Some

say it is the spirit of a cruel Moorish king, who killed his six

sons and buried them in these vaults, and that they hunt him at nights

in revenge."

  I forbear to dwell upon the marvellous details given by the

simple-minded Mateo about this redoubtable phantom, which has, in

fact, been time out of mind a favorite theme of nursery tales and

popular tradition in Granada, and of which honorable mention is made

by an ancient and learned historian and topographer of the place.

  Leaving this eventful pile, we continued our course, skirting the

fruitful orchards of the Generalife, in which two or three

nightingales were pouring forth a rich strain of melody. Behind

these orchards we passed a number of Moorish tanks, with a door cut

into the rocky bosom of the hill, but closed up. These tanks, Mateo

informed me, were favorite bathing-places of himself and his

comrades in boyhood, until frightened away by a story of a hideous

Moor, who used to issue forth from the door in the rock to entrap

unwary bathers.

  Leaving these haunted tanks behind us, we pursued our ramble up a

solitary mule-path winding among the hills, and soon found ourselves

amidst wild and melancholy mountains, destitute of trees, and here and

there tinted with scanty verdure. Every thing within sight was

severe and sterile, and it was scarcely possible to realize the idea

that but a short distance behind us was the Generalife, with its

blooming orchards and terraced gardens, and that we were in the

vicinity of delicious Granada, that city of groves and fountains.

But such is the nature of Spain; wild and stern the moment it

escapes from cultivation; the desert and the garden are ever side by

side.

  The narrow defile up which we were passing is called, according to

Mateo, el Barranco de la tinaja, or the ravine of the jar, because a

jar full of Moorish gold was found here in old times. The brain of

poor Mateo was continually running upon these golden legends.

  "But what is the meaning of the cross I see yonder upon a heap of

stones, in that narrow part of the ravine?"

  "Oh, that's nothing- a muleteer was murdered there some years

since."


  "So then, Mateo, you have robbers and murderers even at the gates of

the Alhambra?"

  "Not at present, senor; that was formerly, when there used to be

many loose fellows about the fortress; but they've all been weeded

out. Not but that the gipsies who live in caves in the hillsides, just

out of the fortress, are many of them fit for any thing; but we have

had no murder about here for a long time past. The man who murdered

the muleteer was hanged in the fortress."

  Our path continued up the barranco, with a bold, rugged height to

our left, called the "Silla del Moro," or Chair of the Moor, from

the tradition already alluded to, that the unfortunate Boabdil fled

thither during a popular insurrection, and remained all day seated

on the rocky summit, looking mournfully down on his factious city.

  We at length arrived on the highest part of the promontory above

Granada, called the mountain of the sun. The evening was

approaching; the setting sun just gilded the loftiest heights. Here

and there a solitary shepherd might be descried driving his flock down

the declivities, to be folded for the night; or a muleteer and his

lagging animals, threading some mountain path, to arrive at the city

gates before nightfall.

  Presently the deep tones of the cathedral bell came swelling up

the defiles, proclaiming the hour of "oration" or prayer. The note was

responded to from the belfry of every church, and from the sweet bells

of the convents among the mountains. The shepherd paused on the fold

of the hill, the muleteer in the midst of the road, each took off

his hat and remained motionless for a time, murmuring his evening

prayer. There is always something pleasingly solemn in this custom, by

which, at a melodious signal, every human being throughout the land

unites at the same moment in a tribute of thanks to God for the

mercies of the day. It spreads a transient sanctity over the land, and

the sight of the sun sinking in all his glory, adds not a little to

the solemnity of the scene.

  In the present instance the effect was heightened by the wild and

lonely nature of the place. We were on the naked and broken summit

of the haunted mountain of the sun, where ruined tanks and cisterns,

and the mouldering foundations of extensive buildings, spoke of former

populousness, but where all was now silent and desolate.

  As we were wandering about among these traces of old times, we

came to a circular pit, penetrating deep into the bosom of the

mountain; which Mateo pointed out as one of the wonders and

mysteries of the place. I supposed it to be a well dug by the

indefatigable Moors, to obtain their favorite element in its

greatest purity. Mateo, however, had a different story, and one much

more to his humor. According to a tradition, in which his father and

grandfather firmly believed, this was an entrance to the

subterranean caverns of the mountain, in which Boabdil and his court

lay bound in magic spell; and whence they sallied forth at night, at

allotted times, to revisit their ancient abodes.

  "Ah, senor, this mountain is full of wonders of the kind. In another

place there was a hole somewhat like this, and just within it hung

an iron pot by a chain; nobody knew what was in that pot, for it was

always covered up; but every body supposed it full of Moorish gold.

Many tried to draw it forth, for it seemed just within reach; but

the moment it was touched it would sink far, far down, and not come up

again for some time. At last one who thought it must be enchanted

touched it with the cross, by way of breaking the charm; and faith

he did break it, for the pot sank out of sight and never was seen

any more.

  "All this is fact, senor; for my grandfather was an eye-witness."

  "What! Mateo; did he see the pot?"

  "No, senor, but he saw the hole where the pot had hung."

  "It's the same thing, Mateo."

  The deepening twilight, which, in this climate, is of short

duration, admonished us to leave this haunted ground. As we

descended the mountain defile, there was no longer herdsman nor

muleteer to be seen, nor any thing to be heard but our own footsteps

and the lonely chirping of the cricket. The shadows of the valley grew

deeper and deeper, until all was dark around us. The lofty summit of

the Sierra Nevada alone retained a lingering gleam of daylight; its

snowy peaks glaring against the dark blue firmament, and seeming close

to us, from the extreme purity of the atmosphere.

  "How near the Sierra looks this evening!" said Mateo; "it seems as

if you could touch it with your hand; and yet it is many long

leagues off." While he was speaking, a star appeared over the snowy

summit of the mountain, the only one yet visible in the heavens, and

so pure, so large, so bright and beautiful, as to call forth

ejaculations of delight from honest Mateo.

  "Que estrella hermosa! que clara y limpia es!- No pueda ser estrella

mas brillante!" ("What a beautiful star! how clear and lucid- a star

could not be more brilliant!")

  I have often remarked this sensibility of the common people of Spain

to the charms of natural objects. The lustre of a star, the beauty

or fragrance of a flower, the crystal purity of a fountain, will

inspire them with a kind of poetical delight; and then, what

euphonious words their magnificent language affords, with which to

give utterance to their transports!

  "But what lights are those, Mateo, which I see twinkling along the

Sierra Nevada, just below the snowy region, and which might be taken

for stars, only that they are ruddy, and against the dark side of

the mountain?"

  "Those, senor, are fires, made by the men who gather snow and ice

for the supply of Granada. They go up every afternoon with mules and

asses, and take turns, some to rest and warm themselves by the

fires, while others fill the panniers with ice. They then set off down

the mountains, so as to reach the gates of Granada before sunrise.

That Sierra Nevada, senor, is a lump of ice in the middle of

Andalusia, to keep it all cool in summer."

  It was now completely dark; we were passing through the barranco,

where stood the cross of the murdered muleteer; when I beheld a number

of lights moving at a distance, and apparently advancing up the

ravine. On nearer approach, they proved to be torches borne by a train

of uncouth figures arrayed in black: it would have been a procession

dreary enough at any time, but was peculiarly so in this wild and

solitary place.

  Mateo drew near, and told me, in a low voice, that it was a

funeral train bearing a corpse to the burying-ground among the hills.

  As the procession passed by, the lugubrious light of the torches,

falling on the rugged features and funeral-weeds of the attendants,

had the most fantastic effect, but was perfectly ghastly, as it

revealed the countenance of the corpse, which, according to the

Spanish custom, was borne uncovered on an open bier. I remained for

some time gazing after the dreary train as it wound up the dark defile

of the mountain. It put me in mind of the old story of a procession of

demons bearing the body of a sinner up the crater of Stromboli.

  "Ah! senor," cried Mateo, "I could tell you a story of a

procession once seen among these mountains, but then you'd laugh at

me, and say it was one of the legacies of my grandfather the tailor."

  "By no means, Mateo. There is nothing I relish more than a

marvellous tale."

  "Well, senor, it is about one of those very men we have been talking

of, who gather snow on the Sierra Nevada.

  "You must know, that a great many years since, in my grandfather's

time, there was an old fellow, Tio Nicolo (Uncle Nicholas) by name,

who had filled the panniers of his mule with snow and ice, and was

returning down the mountain. Being very drowsy, he mounted upon the

mule, and soon falling asleep, went with his head nodding and

bobbing about from side to side, while his surefooted old mule stepped

along the edge of precipices, and down steep and broken barrancos,

just as safe and steady as if it had been on plain ground. At

length, Tio Nicolo awoke, and gazed about him, and rubbed his eyes-

and, in good truth, he had reason. The moon shone almost as bright

as day, and he saw the city below him, as plain as your hand, and

shining with its white buildings, like a silver platter in the

moonshine; but, Lord! senor, it was nothing like the city he had

left a few hours before! Instead of the cathedral, with its great dome

and turrets, and the churches with their spires, and the convents with

their pinnacles, all surmounted with the blessed cross, he saw nothing

but Moorish mosques, and minarets, and cupolas, all topped off with

glittering crescents, such as you see on the Barbary flags.

  "Well, senor, as you may suppose, Tio Nicolo was mightily puzzled at

all this, but while he was gazing down upon the city, a great army

came marching up the mountains, winding along the ravines, sometimes

in the moonshine sometimes in the shade. As it drew nigh, he saw

that there were horse and foot all in Moorish armor. Tio Nicolo

tried to scramble out of their way, but his old mule stood stock

still, and refused to budge, trembling, at the same time, like a leaf-

for dumb beasts, senor, are just as much frightened at such things

as human beings. Well, senor, the hobgoblin army came marching by;

there were men that seemed to blow trumpets, and others to beat

drums and strike cymbals, yet never a sound did they make; they all

moved on without the least noise, just as I have seen painted armies

move across the stage in the theatre of Granada, and all looked as

pale as death. At last, in the rear of the army, between two black

Moorish horsemen, rode the Grand Inquisitor of Granada, on a mule as

white as snow. Tio Nicolo wondered to see him in such company, for the

Inquisitor was famous for his hatred of Moors, and indeed, of all

kinds of Infidels, Jews, and Heretics, and used to hunt them out

with fire and scourge.

  "However, Tio Nicolo felt himself safe, now that there was a

priest of such sanctity at hand. So making the sign of the cross, he

called out for his benediction, when hombre! he received a blow that

sent him and his old mule over the edge of a steep bank, down which

they rolled, head over heels, to the bottom! Tio Nicolo did not come

to his senses until long after sunrise, when he found himself at the

bottom of a deep ravine, his mule grazing beside him, and his panniers

of snow completely melted. He crawled back to Granada sorely bruised

and battered, but was glad to find the city looking as usual, with

Christian churches and crosses.

  "When he told the story of his night's adventure, every one

laughed at him; some said he had dreamed it all, as he dozed on his

mule; others thought it all a fabrication of his own- but what was

strange, senor, and made people afterwards think more seriously of the

matter, was, that the Grand Inquisitor died within the year. I have

often heard my grandfather, the tailor, say that there was more

meant by that hobgoblin army bearing off the resemblance of the

priest, than folks dared to surmise."

  "Then you would insinuate, friend Mateo, that there is a kind of

Moorish limbo, or purgatory, in the bowels of these mountains, to

which the padre Inquisitor was borne off."

  "God forbid, senor! I know nothing of the matter. I only relate what

I heard from my grandfather."

  By the time Mateo had finished the tale which I have more succinctly

related, and which was interlarded with many comments, and spun out

with minute details, we reached the gate of the Alhambra.

  The marvellous stories hinted at by Mateo, in the early part of

our ramble about the Tower of the Seven Floors, set me as usual upon

my goblin researches. I found that the redoubtable phantom, the

Belludo, had been time out of mind a favorite theme of nursery tales

and popular traditions in Granada, and that honorable mention had even

been made of it by an ancient historian and topographer of the

place. The scattered members of one of these popular traditions I have

gathered together, collated them with infinite pains, and digested

them into the following legend; which only wants a number of learned

notes and references at bottom to take its rank among those concrete

productions gravely passed upon the world for Historical Facts.

               Legend of the Moor's Legacy.



  JUST within the fortress of the Alhambra, in front of the royal

palace, is a broad open esplanade, called the Place or Square of the

Cisterns (la Plaza de los Algibes), so called from being undermined by

reservoirs of water, hidden from sight, and which have existed from

the time of the Moors. At one corner of this esplanade is a Moorish

well, cut through the living rock to a great depth, the water of which

is cold as ice and clear as crystal. The wells made by the Moors are

always in repute, for it is well known what pains they took to

penetrate to the purest and sweetest springs and fountains. The one of

which we now speak is famous throughout Granada, insomuch that

water-carriers, some bearing great water-jars on their shoulders,

others driving asses before them laden with earthen vessels, are

ascending and descending the steep woody avenues of the Alhambra, from

early dawn until a late hour of the night.

  Fountains and wells, ever since the scriptural days, have been noted

gossiping places in hot climates; and at the well in question there is

a kind of perpetual club kept up during the livelong day, by the

invalids, old women, and other curious do-nothing folk of the

fortress, who sit here on the stone benches, under an awning spread

over the well to shelter the toll-gatherer from the sun, and dawdle

over the gossip of the fortress, and question every water-carrier that

arrives about the news of the city, and make long comments on every

thing they hear and see. Not an hour of the day but loitering

housewives and idle maid-servants may be seen, lingering with

pitcher on head, or in hand, to hear the last of the endless tattle of

these worthies.

  Among the water-carriers who once resorted to this well, there was a

sturdy, strong-backed, bandy-legged little fellow, named Pedro Gil,

but called Peregil for shortness. Being a water-carrier, he was a

Gallego, or native of Galicia, of course. Nature seems to have

formed races of men, as she has of animals, for different kinds of

drudgery. In France the shoeblacks are all Savoyards, the porters of

hotels all Swiss, and in the days of hoops and hair-powder in England,

no man could give the regular swing to a sedan-chair but a

bog-trotting Irishman. So in Spain, the carriers of water and

bearers of burdens are all sturdy little natives of Galicia. No man

says, "Get me a porter," but, "Call a Gallego."

  To return from this digression, Peregil the Gallego had begun

business with merely a great earthen jar which he carried upon his

shoulder; by degrees he rose in the world, and was enabled to purchase

an assistant of a correspondent class of animals, being a stout

shaggy-haired donkey. On each side of this his long-eared

aide-de-camp, in a kind of pannier, were slung his water-jars, covered

with fig-leaves to protect them from the sun. There was not a more

industrious water-carrier in all Granada, nor one more merry withal.

The streets rang with his cheerful voice as he trudged after his

donkey, singing forth the usual summer note that resounds through

the Spanish towns: "Quien quiere agua- agua mas fria que la nieve?"-

"Who wants water- water colder than snow? Who wants water from the

well of the Alhambra, cold as ice and clear as crystal?" When he

served a customer with a sparkling glass, it was always with a

pleasant word that caused a smile; and if, perchance, it was a

comely dame or dimpling damsel, it was always with a sly leer and a

compliment to her beauty that was irresistible. Thus Peregil the

Gallego was noted throughout all Granada for being one of the

civilest, pleasantest, and happiest of mortals.

  Yet it is not he who sings loudest and jokes most that has the

lightest heart. Under all this air of merriment, honest Peregil had

his cares and troubles. He had a large family of ragged children to

support, who were hungry and clamorous as a nest of young swallows,

and beset him with their outcries for food whenever he came home of an

evening. He had a helpmate, too, who was any thing but a help to

him. She had been a village beauty before marriage, noted for her

skill at dancing the bolero and rattling the castanets; and she

still retained her early propensities, spending the hard earnings of

honest Peregil in frippery, and laying the very donkey under

requisition for junketing parties into the country on Sundays, and

saints' days, and those innumerable holidays which are rather more

numerous in Spain than the days of the week. With all this she was a

little of a slattern, something more of a lie-abed, and, above all,

a gossip of the first water; neglecting house, household, and every

thing else, to loiter slipshod in the houses of her gossip neighbors.

  He, however, who tempers the wind to the shorn lamb, accommodates

the yoke of matrimony to the submissive neck. Peregil bore all the

heavy dispensations of wife and children with as meek a spirit as

his donkey bore the water-jars; and, however he might shake his ears

in private, never ventured to question the household virtues of his

slattern spouse.

  He loved his children too even as an owl loves its owlets, seeing in

them his own image multiplied and perpetuated; for they were a sturdy,

long-backed, bandy-legged little brood. The great pleasure of honest

Peregil was, whenever he could afford himself a scanty holiday, and

had a handful of marevedis to spare, to take the whole litter forth

with him, some in his arms, some tugging at his skirts, and some

trudging at his heels, and to treat them to a gambol among the

orchards of the Vega, while his wife was dancing with her holiday

friends in the Angosturas of the Darro.

  It was a late hour one summer night, and most of the

water-carriers had desisted from their toils. The day had been

uncommonly sultry; the night was one of those delicious moonlights,

which tempt the inhabitants of southern climes to indemnify themselves

for the heat and inaction of the day, by lingering in the open air,

and enjoying its tempered sweetness until after midnight. Customers

for water were therefore still abroad. Peregil, like a considerate,

painstaking father, thought of his hungry children. "One more

journey to the well," said he to himself, "to earn a Sunday's

puchero for the little ones." So saying, he trudged manfully up the

steep avenue of the Alhambra, singing as he went, and now and then

bestowing a hearty thwack with a cudgel on the flanks of his donkey,

either by way of cadence to the song, or refreshment to the animal;

for dry blows serve in lieu of provender in Spain for all beasts of

burden.

  When arrived at the well, he found it deserted by every one except a

solitary stranger in Moorish garb, seated on a stone bench in the

moonlight. Peregil paused at first and regarded him with surprise, not

unmixed with awe, but the Moor feebly beckoned him to approach. "I

am faint and ill," said he, "aid me to return to the city, and I

will pay thee double what thou couldst gain by thy jars of water."

  The honest heart of the little water-carrier was touched with

compassion at the appeal of the stranger. "God forbid," said he, "that

I should ask fee or reward for doing a common act of humanity." He

accordingly helped the Moor on his donkey, and set off slowly for

Granada, the poor Moslem being so weak that it was necessary to hold

him on the animal to keep him from falling to the earth.

  When they entered the city, the water-carrier demanded whither he

should conduct him. "Alas!" said the Moor, faintly, "I have neither

home nor habitation, I am a stranger in the land. Suffer me to lay

my head this night beneath thy roof, and thou shalt be amply repaid."

  Honest Peregil thus saw himself unexpectedly saddled with an infidel

guest, but he was too humane to refuse a night's shelter to a fellow

being in so forlorn a plight, so he conducted the Moor to his

dwelling. The children, who had sallied forth open-mouthed as usual on

hearing the tramp of the donkey, ran back with affright, when they

beheld the turbaned stranger, and hid themselves behind their

mother. The latter stepped forth intrepidly, like a ruffling hen

before her brood when a vagrant dog approaches.

  "What infidel companion," cried she, "is this you have brought

home at this late hour, to draw upon us the eyes of the Inquisition?"

  "Be quiet, wife," replied the Gallego, "here is a poor sick

stranger, without friend or home; wouldst thou turn him forth to

perish in the streets?"

  The wife would still have remonstrated, for although she lived in

a hovel she was a furious stickler for the credit of her house; the

little water-carrier, however, for once was stiff-necked, and

refused to bend beneath the yoke. He assisted the poor Moslem to

alight, and spread a mat and a sheep-skin for him, on the ground, in

the coolest part of the house; being the only kind of bed that his

poverty afforded.

  In a little while the Moor was seized with violent convulsions,

which defied all the ministering skill of the simple water-carrier.

The eye of the poor patient acknowledged his kindness. During an

interval of his fits he called him to his side, and addressing him

in a low voice, "My end," said he, "I fear is at hand. If I die, I

bequeath you this box as a reward for your charity": so saying, he

opened his albornoz, or cloak, and showed a small box of sandalwood,

strapped round his body. "God grant, my friend," replied the worthy

little Gallego, "that you may live many years to enjoy your

treasure, whatever it may be." The Moor shook his head; he laid his

hand upon the box, and would have said something more concerning it,

but his convulsions returned with increasing violence, and in a little

while he expired.

  The water-carrier's wife was now as one distracted. "This comes,"

said she, "of your foolish good nature, always running into scrapes to

oblige others. What will become of us when this corpse is found in our

house? We shall be sent to prison as murderers; and if we escape

with our lives, shall be ruined by notaries and alguazils."

  Poor Peregil was in equal tribulation, and almost repented himself

of having done a good deed. At length a thought struck him. "It is not

yet day," said he; "I can convey the dead body out of the city, and

bury it in the sands on the banks of the Xenil. No one saw the Moor

enter our dwelling, and no one will know any thing of his death."

  So said, so done. The wife aided him; they rolled the body of the

unfortunate Moslem in the mat on which he had expired, laid it

across the ass, and Peregil set out with it for the banks of the

river.

  As ill luck would have it, there lived opposite to the water-carrier

a barber named Pedrillo Pedrugo, one of the most prying, tattling, and

mischief-making of his gossip tribe. He was a weasel-faced,

spider-legged varlet, supple and insinuating; the famous barber of

Seville could not surpass him for his universal knowledge of the

affairs of others, and he had no more power of retention than a sieve.

It was said that he slept but with one eye at a time, and kept one ear

uncovered, so that, even in his sleep, he might see and hear all

that was going on. Certain it is, he was a sort of scandalous

chronicle for the quid-nuncs of Granada, and had more customers than

all the rest of his fraternity.

  This meddlesome barber heard Peregil arrive at an unusual hour at

night, and the exclamations of his wife and children. His head was

instantly popped out of a little window which served him as a

look-out, and he saw his neighbor assist a man in Moorish garb into

his dwelling. This was so strange an occurrence, that Pedrillo Pedrugo

slept not a wink that night. Every five minutes he was at his

loophole, watching the lights that gleamed through the chinks of his

neighbor's door, and before daylight he beheld Peregil sally forth

with his donkey unusually laden.

  The inquisitive barber was in a fidget; he slipped on his clothes,

and, stealing forth silently, followed the water-carrier at a

distance, until he saw him dig a hole in the sandy bank of the

Xenil, and bury something that had the appearance of a dead body.

  The barber hied him home, and fidgeted about his shop, setting every

thing upside down, until sunrise. He then took a basin under his

arm, and sallied forth to the house of his daily customer the alcalde.

  The alcalde was just risen. Pedrillo Pedrugo seated him in a

chair, threw a napkin round his neck, put a basin of hot water under

his chin, and began to mollify his beard with his fingers.

  "Strange doings!" said Pedrugo, who played barber and newsmonger

at the same time- "Strange doings! Robbery, and murder, and burial all

in one night!"

  "Hey!- how!- what is that you say?" cried the alcalde.

  "I say," replied the barber, rubbing a piece of soap over the nose

and mouth of the dignitary, for a Spanish barber disdains to employ

a brush- "I say that Peregil the Gallego has robbed and murdered a

Moorish Mussulman, and buried him, this blessed night. Maldita sea

la noche- accursed be the night for the same!"

  "But how do you know all this?" demanded the alcalde.

  "Be patient, senor, and you shall hear all about it," replied

Pedrillo, taking him by the nose and sliding a razor over his cheek.

He then recounted all that he had seen, going through both

operations at the same time, shaving his beard, washing his chin,

and wiping him dry with a dirty napkin, while he was robbing,

murdering, and burying the Moslem.

  Now it so happened that this alcalde was one of the most

overbearing, and at the same time most griping and corrupt curmudgeons

in all Granada. It could not be denied, however, that he set a high

value upon justice, for he sold it at its weight in gold. He

presumed the case in point to be one of murder and robbery;

doubtless there must be a rich spoil; how was it to be secured into

the legitimate hands of the law? for as to merely entrapping the

delinquent- that would be feeding the gallows; but entrapping the

booty- that would be enriching the judge, and such, according to his

creed, was the great end of justice. So thinking, he summoned to his

presence his trustiest alguazil- a gaunt, hungry-looking varlet, clad,

according to the custom of his order, in the ancient Spanish garb: a

broad black beaver turned up at its sides, a quaint ruff, a small

black cloak dangling from his shoulders, rusty black under-clothes

that set off his spare wiry frame, while in his hand he bore a slender

white wand, the dreaded insignia of his office. Such was the legal

bloodhound of the ancient Spanish breed, that he put upon the traces

of the unlucky water-carrier, and such was his speed and certainty,

that he was upon the haunches of poor Peregil before he had returned

to his dwelling, and brought both him and his donkey before the

dispenser of justice.

  The alcalde bent upon him one of the most terrific frowns. "Hark ye,

culprit!" roared he, in a voice that made the knees of the little

Gallego smite together- "hark ye, culprit! there is no need of denying

thy guilt, every thing is known to me. A gallows is the proper

reward for the crime thou hast committed, but I am merciful, and

readily listen to reason. The man that has been murdered in thy

house was a Moor, an infidel, the enemy of our faith. It was doubtless

in a fit of religious zeal that thou hast slain him. I will be

indulgent, therefore; render up the property of which thou hast robbed

him, and we will hush the matter up."

  The poor water-carrier called upon all the saints to witness his

innocence; alas! not one of them appeared; and if they had, the

alcalde would have disbelieved the whole calendar. The water-carrier

related the whole story of the dying Moor with the straightforward

simplicity of truth, but it was all in vain. "Wilt thou persist in

saying," demanded the judge, "that this Moslem had neither gold nor

jewels, which were the object of thy cupidity?"

  "As I hope to be saved, your worship," replied the water-carrier,

"he had nothing but a small box of sandalwood which he bequeathed to

me in reward for my services."

  "A box of sandalwood! a box of sandalwood!" exclaimed the alcalde,

his eyes sparkling at the idea of precious jewels. "And where is

this box? where have you concealed it?"

  "An' it please your grace," replied the water-carrier, "it is in one

of the panniers of my mule, and heartily at the service of your

worship."

  He had hardly spoken the words, when the keen alguazil darted off,

and reappeared in an instant with the mysterious box of sandalwood.

The alcalde opened it with an eager and trembling hand; all pressed

forward to gaze upon the treasure it was expected to contain, when, to

their disappointment, nothing appeared within, but a parchment scroll,

covered with Arabic characters, and an end of a waxen taper.

  When there is nothing to be gained by the conviction of a

prisoner, justice, even in Spain, is apt to be impartial. The alcalde,

having recovered from his disappointment, and found that there was

really no booty in the case, now listened dispassionately to the

explanation of the water-carrier, which was corroborated by the

testimony of his wife. Being convinced, therefore, of his innocence,

he discharged him from arrest; nay more, he permitted him to carry off

the Moor's legacy, the box of sandalwood and its contents, as the

well-merited reward of his humanity; but he retained his donkey in

payment of costs and charges.

  Behold the unfortunate little Gallego reduced once more to the

necessity of being his own water-carrier, and trudging up to the

well of the Alhambra with a great earthen jar upon his shoulder.

  As he toiled up the hill in the heat of a summer noon, his usual

good humor forsook him. "Dog of an alcalde!" would he cry, "to rob a

poor man of the means of his subsistence, of the best friend he had in

the world!" And then at the remembrance of the beloved companion of

his labors, all the kindness of his nature would break forth. "Ah,

donkey of my heart!" would he exclaim, resting his burden on a

stone, and wiping the sweat from his brow- "Ah, donkey of my heart!

I warrant me thou thinkest of thy old master! I warrant me thou

missest the water-jars- poor beast."

  To add to his afflictions, his wife received him, on his return

home, with whimperings and repinings; she had clearly the

vantage-ground of him, having warned him not to commit the egregious

act of hospitality which had brought on him all these misfortunes;

and, like a knowing woman, she took every occasion to throw her

superior sagacity in his teeth. If her children lacked food, or needed

a new garment, she could answer with a sneer- "Go to your father- he

is heir to King Chico of the Alhambra: ask him to help you out of

the Moor's strongbox."

  Was ever poor mortal so soundly punished for having done a good

action? The unlucky Peregil was grieved in flesh and spirit, but still

he bore meekly with the railings of his spouse. At length, one

evening, when, after a hot day's toil, she taunted him in the usual

manner, he lost all patience. He did not venture to retort upon her,

but his eye rested upon the box of sandalwood, which lay on a shelf

with lid half open, as if laughing in mockery at his vexation. Seizing

it up, he dashed it with indignation to the floor: "Unlucky was the

day that I ever set eyes on thee," he cried, "or sheltered thy

master beneath my roof!"

  As the box struck the floor, the lid flew wide open, and the

parchment scroll rolled forth.

  Peregil sat regarding the scroll for some time in moody silence.

At length rallying his ideas: "Who knows," thought he, "but this

writing may be of some importance, as the Moor seems to have guarded

it with such care?" Picking it up therefore, he put it in his bosom,

and the next morning, as he was crying water through the streets, he

stopped at the shop of a Moor, a native of Tangiers, who sold trinkets

and perfumery in the Zacatin, and asked him to explain the contents.

  The Moor read the scroll attentively, then stroked his beard and

smiled. "This manuscript," said he, "is a form of incantation for

the recovery of hidden treasure, that is under the power of

enchantment. It is said to have such virtue, that the strongest

bolts and bars, nay the adamantine rock itself, will yield before it!"

  "Bah!" cried the little Gallego, "what is all that to me? I am no

enchanter, and know nothing of buried treasure." So saying, he

shouldered his water-jar, left the scroll in the hands of the Moor,

and trudged forward on his daily rounds.

  That evening, however, as he rested himself about twilight at the

well of the Alhambra, he found a number of gossips assembled at the

place, and their conversation, as is not unusual at that shadowy hour,

turned upon old tales and traditions of a supernatural nature. Being

all poor as rats, they dwelt with peculiar fondness upon the popular

theme of enchanted riches left by the Moors in various parts of the

Alhambra. Above all, they concurred in the belief that there were

great treasures buried deep in the earth under the Tower of the

Seven Floors.

  These stories made an unusual impression on the mind of the honest

Peregil, and they sank deeper and deeper into his thoughts as he

returned alone down the darkling avenues. "If, after all, there should

be treasure hid beneath that tower: and if the scroll I left with

the Moor should enable me to get at it!" In the sudden ecstasy of

the thought he had well nigh let fall his water-jar.

  That night he tumbled and tossed, and could scarcely get a wink of

sleep for the thoughts that were bewildering his brain. Bright and

early, he repaired to the shop of the Moor, and told him all that

was passing in his mind. "You can read Arabic," said he; "suppose we

go together to the tower, and try the effect of the charm; if it fails

we are no worse off than before; but if it succeeds, we will share

equally all the treasure we may discover."

  "Hold," replied the Moslem; "this writing is not sufficient of

itself; it must be read at midnight, by the light of a taper

singularly compounded and prepared, the ingredients of which are not

within my reach. Without such a taper the scroll is of no avail."

  "Say no more!" cried the little Gallego; "I have such a taper at

hand, and will bring it here in a moment." So saying he hastened home,

and soon returned with the end of yellow wax taper that he had found

in the box of sandalwood.

  The Moor felt it and smelt of it. "Here are rare and costly

perfumes," said he, "Combined with this yellow wax. This is the kind

of taper specified in the scroll. While this burns, the strongest

walls and most secret caverns will remain open. Woe to him, however,

who lingers within until it be extinguished. He will remain

enchanted with the treasure."

  It was now agreed between them to try the charm that very night.

At a late hour, therefore, when nothing was stirring but bats and

owls, they ascended the woody hill of the Alhambra, and approached

that awful tower, shrouded by trees and rendered formidable by so many

traditionary tales. By the light of a lantern, they groped their way

through bushes, and over fallen stones, to the door of a vault beneath

the tower. With fear and trembling they descended a flight of steps

cut into the rock. It led to an empty chamber damp and drear, from

which another flight of steps led to a deeper vault. In this way

they descended four several flights, leading into as many vaults one

below the other, but the floor of the fourth was solid; and though,

according to tradition, there remained three vaults still below, it

was said to be impossible to penetrate further, the residue being shut

up by strong enchantment. The air of this vault was damp and chilly,

and had an earthy smell, and the light scarce cast forth any rays.

They paused here for a time in breathless suspense until they

faintly heard the clock of the watchtower strike midnight; upon this

they lit the waxen taper, which diffused an odor of myrrh and

frankincense and storax.

  The Moor began to read in a hurried voice. He had scarce finished

when there was a noise as of subterraneous thunder. The earth shook,

and the floor, yawning open, disclosed a flight of steps. Trembling

with awe they descended, and by the light of the lantern found

themselves in another vault, covered with Arabic inscriptions. In

the centre stood a great chest, secured with seven bands of steel,

at each end of which sat an enchanted Moor in armor, but motionless as

a statue, being controlled by the power of the incantation. Before the

chest were several jars filled with gold and silver and precious

stones. In the largest of these they thrust their arms up to the

elbow, and at every dip hauled forth handfuls of broad yellow pieces

of Moorish gold, or bracelets and ornaments of the same precious

metal, while occasionally a necklace of oriental pearl would stick

to their fingers. Still they trembled and breathed short while

cramming their pockets with the spoils; and cast many a fearful glance

at the two enchanted Moors, who sat grim and motionless, glaring

upon them with unwinking eyes. At length, struck with a sudden panic

at some fancied noise, they both rushed up the staircase, tumbled over

one another into the upper apartment, overturned and extinguished

the waxen taper, and the pavement again closed with a thundering

sound.

  Filled with dismay, they did not pause until they had groped their

way out of the tower, and beheld the stars shining through the

trees. Then seating themselves upon the grass, they divided the spoil,

determining to content themselves for the present with this mere

skimming of the jars, but to return on some future night and drain

them to the bottom. To make sure of each other's good faith, also,

they divided the talismans between them, one retaining the scroll

and the other the taper; this done, they set off with light hearts and

well-lined pockets for Granada.

  As they wended their way down the hill, the shrewd Moor whispered

a word of counsel in the ear of the simple little water-carrier.

  "Friend Peregil," said he, "all this affair must be kept a

profound secret until we have secured the treasure, and conveyed it

out of harm's way. If a whisper of it gets to the ear of the

alcalde, we are undone!"

  "Certainly," replied the Gallego, "nothing can be more true."

  "Friend Peregil," said the Moor, "you are a discreet man, and I make

no doubt can keep a secret: but you have a wife."

  "She shall not know a word of it," replied the little water-carrier,

sturdily.

  "Enough," said the Moor, "I depend upon thy discretion and thy

promise."

  Never was promise more positive and sincere; but, alas! what man can

keep a secret from his wife? Certainly not such a one as Peregil the

water-carrier, who was one of the most loving and tractable of

husbands. On his return home, he found his wife moping in a corner.

"Mighty well," cried she as he entered, "you've come at last; after

rambling about until this hour of the night. I wonder you have not

brought home another Moor as a housemate." Then bursting into tears,

she began to wring her hands and smite her breast: "Unhappy woman that

I am!" exclaimed she, "what will become of me? My house stripped and

plundered by lawyers and alguazils; my husband a do-no-good, that no

longer brings home bread to his family, but goes rambling about day

and night, with infidel Moors! O my children! my children! what will

become of us? we shall all have to beg in the streets!"

  Honest Peregil was so moved by the distress of his spouse, that he

could not help whimpering also. His heart was as full as his pocket,

and not to be restrained. Thrusting his hand into the latter he hauled

forth three or four broad gold pieces, and slipped them into her

bosom. The poor woman stared with astonishment, and could not

understand the meaning of this golden shower. Before she could recover

her surprise, the little Gallego drew forth a chain of gold and

dangled it before her, capering with exultation, his mouth distended

from ear to ear.

  "Holy Virgin protect us!" exclaimed the wife. "What hast thou been

doing, Peregil? surely thou hast not been committing murder and

robbery!"

  The idea scarce entered the brain of the poor woman, than it

became a certainty with her. She saw a prison and a gallows in the

distance, and a little bandy-legged Gallego hanging pendant from it;

and, overcome by the horrors conjured up by her imagination, fell into

violent hysterics.

  What could the poor man do? He had no other means of pacifying his

wife, and dispelling the phantoms of her fancy, than by relating the

whole story of his good fortune. This, however, he did not do until he

had exacted from her the most solemn promise to keep it a profound

secret from every living being.

  To describe her joy would be impossible. She flung her arms round

the neck of her husband, and almost strangled him with her caresses.

"Now, wife," exclaimed the little man with honest exultation, "what

say you now to the Moor's legacy? Henceforth never abuse me for

helping a fellow-creature in distress."

  The honest Gallego retired to his sheepskin mat, and slept as

soundly as if on a bed of down. Not so his wife; she emptied the whole

contents of his pockets upon the mat, and sat counting gold pieces

of Arabic coin, trying on necklaces and earrings, and fancying the

figure she should one day make when permitted to enjoy her riches.

  On the following morning the honest Gallego took a broad golden

coin, and repaired with it to a jeweller's shop in the Zacatin to

offer it for sale, pretending to have found it among the ruins of

the Alhambra. The jeweller saw that it had an Arabic inscription,

and was of the purest gold; he offered, however, but a third of its

value, with which the water-carrier was perfectly content. Peregil now

bought new clothes for his little flock, and all kinds of toys,

together with ample provisions for a hearty meal, and returning to his

dwelling, sat all his children dancing around him, while he capered in

the midst, the happiest of fathers.

  The wife of the water-carrier kept her promise of secrecy with

surprising strictness. For a whole day and a half she went about

with a look of mystery and a heart swelling almost to bursting, yet

she held her peace, though surrounded by her gossips. It is true,

she could not help giving herself a few airs, apologized for her

ragged dress, and talked of ordering a new basquina all trimmed with

gold lace and bugles, and a new lace mantilla. She threw out hints

of her husband's intention of leaving off his trade of water-carrying,

as it did not altogether agree with his health. In fact she thought

they should all retire to the country for the summer, that the

children might have the benefit of the mountain air, for there was

no living in the city in this sultry season.

  The neighbors stared at each other, and thought the poor woman had

lost her wits; and her airs and graces and elegant pretensions were

the theme of universal scoffing and merriment among her friends, the

moment her back was turned.

  If she restrained herself abroad, however, she indemnified herself

at home, and putting a string of rich oriental pearls round her

neck, Moorish bracelets on her arms, and an aigrette of diamonds on

her head, sailed backwards and forwards in her slattern rags about the

room, now and then stopping to admire herself in a broken mirror. Nay,

in the impulse of her simple vanity, she could not resist, on one

occasion, showing herself at the window to enjoy the effect of her

finery on the passers by.

  As the fates would have it, Pedrillo Pedrugo, the meddlesome barber,

was at this moment sitting idly in his shop on the opposite side of

the street, when his ever-watchful eye caught the sparkle of a

diamond. In an instant he was at his loophole reconnoitering the

slattern spouse of the water-carrier, decorated with the splendor of

an eastern bride. No sooner had he taken an accurate inventory of

her ornaments, than he posted off with all speed to the alcalde. In

a little while the hungry alguazil was again on the scent, and

before the day was over the unfortunate Peregil was once more

dragged into the presence of the judge.

  "How is this, villain!" cried the alcalde, in a furious voice.

"You told me that the infidel who died in your house left nothing

behind but an empty coffer, and now I hear of your wife flaunting in

her rags decked out with pearls and diamonds. Wretch that thou art!

prepare to render up the spoils of thy miserable victim, and to

swing on the gallows that is already tired of waiting for thee."

  The terrified water-carrier fell on his knees, and made a full

relation of the marvellous manner in which he had gained his wealth.

The alcalde, the alguazil, and the inquisitive barber, listened with

greedy ears to this Arabian tale of enchanted treasure. The alguazil

was dispatched to bring the Moor who had assisted in the

incantation. The Moslem entered half frightened out of his wits at

finding himself in the hands of the harpies of the law. When he beheld

the water-carrier standing with sheepish looks and downcast

countenance, he comprehended the whole matter. "Miserable animal,"

said he, as he passed near him, "did I not warn thee against

babbling to thy wife?"

  The story of the Moor coincided exactly with that of his

colleague; but the alcalde affected to be slow of belief, and threw

out menaces of imprisonment and rigorous investigation.

  "Softly, good Senor Alcalde," said the Mussulman, who by this time

had recovered his usual shrewdness and self-possession. "Let us not

mar fortune's favors in the scramble for them. Nobody knows any

thing of this matter but ourselves; let us keep the secret. There is

wealth enough in the cave to enrich us all. Promise a fair division,

and all shall be produced; refuse, and the cave shall remain for

ever closed."

  The alcalde consulted apart with the alguazil. The latter was an old

fox in his profession. "Promise any thing," said he, "until you get

possession of the treasure. You may then seize upon the whole, and

if he and his accomplice dare to murmur, threaten them with the

fagot and the stake as infidels and sorcerers."

  The alcalde relished the advice. Smoothing his brow and turning to

the Moor, "This is a strange story," said he, "and may be true, but

I must have ocular proof of it. This very night you must repeat the

incantation in my presence, If there be really such treasure, we

will share it amicably between us, and say nothing further of the

matter; if ye have deceived me, expect no mercy at my hands. In the

mean time you must remain in custody."

  The Moor and the water-carrier cheerfully agreed to these

conditions, satisfied that the event would prove the truth of their

words.

  Towards midnight the alcalde sallied forth secretly, attended by the

alguazil and the meddlesome barber, all strongly armed. They conducted

the Moor and the water-carrier as prisoners, and were provided with

the stout donkey of the latter to bear off the expected treasure. They

arrived at the tower without being observed, and tying the donkey to a

fig-tree, descended into the fourth vault of the tower.

  The scroll was produced, the yellow taper lighted, and the Moor read

the form of incantation. The earth trembled as before, and the

pavement opened with a thundering sound, disclosing the narrow

flight of steps. The alcalde, the alguazil, and the barber were struck

aghast, and could not summon courage to descend. The Moor and the

water-carrier entered the lower vault, and found the two Moors

seated as before, silent and motionless. They removed two of the great

jars, filled with golden coin and precious stones. The water-carrier

bore them up one by one upon his shoulders, but though a strong-backed

little man, and accustomed to carry burdens, he staggered beneath

their weight, and found, when slung on each side of his donkey, they

were as much as the animal could bear.

  "Let us be content for the present," said the Moor; "here is as much

treasure as we can carry off without being perceived, and enough to

make us all wealthy to our heart's desire."

  "Is there more treasure remaining behind?" demanded the alcalde.

  "The greatest prize of all," said the Moor, "a huge coffer bound

with bands of steel, and filled with pearls and precious stones."

  "Let us have up the coffer by all means," cried the grasping

alcalde.

  "I will descend for no more," said the Moor, doggedly; "enough is

enough for a reasonable man- more is superfluous."

  "And I," said the water-carrier, "will bring up no further burden to

break the back of my poor donkey."

  Finding commands, threats and entreaties equally vain, the alcalde

turned to his two adherents. "Aid me" said he, "to bring up the

coffer, and its contents shall be divided between us." So saying he

descended the steps, followed with trembling reluctance by the

alguazil and the barber.

  No sooner did the Moor behold them fairly earthed than he

extinguished the yellow taper; the pavement closed with its usual

crash, and the three worthies remained buried in its womb.

  He then hastened up the different flights of steps, nor stopped

until in the open air. The little water-carrier followed him as fast

as his short legs would permit.

  "What hast thou done?" cried Peregil, as soon as he could recover

breath. "The alcalde and the other two are shut up in the vault."

  "It is the will of Allah!" said the Moor devoutly.

  "And will you not release them?" demanded the Gallego.

  "Allah forbid!" replied the Moor, smoothing his beard. "It is

written in the book of fate that they shall remain enchanted until

some future adventurer arrive to break the charm. The will of God be

done!" so saying, he hurled the end of the waxen taper far among the

gloomy thickets of the glen.

  There was now no remedy, so the Moor and the water-carrier proceeded

with the richly laden donkey toward the city, nor could honest Peregil

refrain from hugging and kissing his long-eared fellow-laborer, thus

restored to him from the clutches of the law; and in fact, it is

doubtful which gave the simple hearted little man most joy at the

moment, the gaining of the treasure, or the recovery of the donkey.

  The two partners in good luck divided their spoil amicably and

fairly, except that the Moor, who had a little taste for trinketry,

made out to get into his heap the most of the pearls and precious

stones and other baubles, but then he always gave the water-carrier in

lieu magnificent jewels of massy gold, of five times the size, with

which the latter was heartily content. They took care not to linger

within reach of accidents, but made off to enjoy their wealth

undisturbed in other countries. The Moor returned to Africa, to his

native city of Tangiers, and the Gallego, with his wife, his children,

and his donkey, made the best of his way to Portugal. Here, under

the admonition and tuition of his wife, he became a personage of

some consequence, for she made the worthy little man array his long

body and short legs in doublet and hose, with a feather in his hat and

a sword by his side, and laying aside his familiar appellation of

Peregil, assume the more sonorous title of Don Pedro Gil: his

progeny grew up a thriving and merry-hearted, though short and

bandy-legged generation, while Senora Gil, befringed, belaced, and

betasselled from her head to her heels, with glittering rings on every

finger, became a model of slattern fashion and finery.

  As to the alcalde and his adjuncts, they remained shut up under

the great Tower of the Seven Floors, and there they remain spell-bound

at the present day. Whenever there shall be a lack in Spain of pimping

barbers, sharking alguazils, and corrupt alcaldes, they may be

sought after; but if they have to wait until such time for their

deliverance, there is danger of their enchantment enduring until

doomsday.

               The Tower of Las Infantas.



  IN AN evening's stroll up a narrow glen, overshadowed by fig

trees, pomegranates, and myrtles, which divides the lands of the

fortress from those of the Generalife, I was struck with the

romantic appearance of a Moorish tower in the outer wall of the

Alhambra, rising high above the tree-tops, and catching the ruddy rays

of the setting sun. A solitary window at a great height commanded a

view of the glen; and as I was regarding it, a young female looked

out, with her head adorned with flowers. She was evidently superior to

the usual class of people inhabiting the old towers of the fortress;

and this sudden and picturesque glimpse of her reminded me of the

descriptions of captive beauties in fairy tales. These fanciful

associations were increased on being informed by my attendant Mateo,

that this was the Tower of the Princesses (la Torre de las

Infantas); so called, from having been, according to tradition, the

residence of the daughters of the Moorish kings. I have since

visited the tower. It is not generally shown to strangers, though well

worthy attention, for the interior is equal, for beauty of

architecture, and delicacy of ornament, to any part of the palace. The

elegance of the central hall, with its marble fountain, its lofty

arches, and richly fretted dome; the arabesques and stucco-work of the

small but well-proportioned chambers, though injured by time and

neglect, all accord with the story of its being anciently the abode of

royal beauty.

  The little old fairy queen who lives under the staircase of the

Alhambra, and frequents the evening tertulias of Dame Antonia, tells

some fanciful traditions about three Moorish princesses, who were once

shut up in this tower by their father, a tyrant king of Granada, and

were only permitted to ride out at night about the hills, when no

one was permitted to come in their way under pain of death. They

still, according to her account, may be seen occasionally when the

moon is in the full, riding in lonely places along the mountain

side, on palfreys richly caparisoned and sparkling with jewels, but

they vanish on being spoken to.

  But before I relate any thing further respecting these princesses,

the reader may be anxious to know something about the fair

inhabitant of the tower with her head dressed with flowers, who looked

out from the lofty window. She proved to be the newly-married spouse

of the worthy adjutant of invalids; who, though well stricken in

years, had had the courage to take to his bosom a young and buxom

Andalusian damsel. May the good old cavalier be happy in his choice,

and find the Tower of the Princesses a more secure residence for

female beauty than it seems to have proved in the time of the Moslems,

if we may believe the following legend!

            Legend of the Three Beautiful Princesses.



  IN OLD times there reigned a Moorish king in Granada, whose name was

Mohamed, to which his subjects added the appellation of El Hayzari, or

"The Left-handed." Some say he was so called on account of his being

really more expert with his sinister than his dexter hand; others,

because he was prone to take every thing by the wrong end; or in other

words, to mar wherever he meddled. Certain it is, either through

misfortune or mismanagement, he was continually in trouble: thrice was

he driven from his throne, and, on one occasion, barely escaped to

Africa with his life, in the disguise of a fisherman.* Still he was as

brave as he was blundering; and though left-handed, wielded his

cimeter to such purpose, that he each time re-established himself upon

his throne by dint of hard fighting. Instead, however, of learning

wisdom from adversity, he hardened his neck, and stiffened his left

arm in wilfulness. The evils of a public nature which he thus

brought upon himself and his kingdom may be learned by those who

will delve into the Arabian annals of Granada; the present legend

deals but with his domestic policy.



  * The reader will recognize the sovereign connected with the

fortunes of the Abencerrages. His story appears to be a little

fictionized in the legend.



  As this Mohamed was one day riding forth with a train of his

courtiers, by the foot of the mountain of Elvira, he met a band of

horsemen returning from a foray into the land of the Christians.

They were conducting a long string of mules laden with spoil, and many

captives of both sexes, among whom the monarch was struck with the

appearance of a beautiful damsel, richly attired, who sat weeping on a

low palfrey, and heeded not the consoling words of a duenna who rode

beside her.

  The monarch was struck with her beauty, and, on inquiring of the

captain of the troop, found that she was the daughter of the alcayde

of a frontier fortress, that had been surprised and sacked in the

course of the foray. Mohamed claimed her as his royal share of the

booty, and had her conveyed to his harem in the Alhambra. There

every thing was devised to soothe her melancholy; and the monarch,

more and more enamored, sought to make her his queen. The Spanish maid

at first repulsed his addresses- he was an infidel- he was the open

foe of her country- what was worse, he was stricken in years!

  The monarch, finding his assiduities of no avail, determined to

enlist in his favor the duenna, who had been captured with the lady.

She was an Andalusian by birth, whose Christian name is forgotten,

being mentioned in Moorish legends by no other appellation than that

of the discreet Kadiga- and discreet in truth she was, as her whole

history makes evident. No sooner had the Moorish king held a little

private conversation with her, than she saw at once the cogency of his

reasoning, and undertook his cause with her young mistress.

  "Go to, now!" cried she; "what is there in all this to weep and wail

about? Is it not better to be mistress of this beautiful palace,

with all its gardens and fountains, than to be shut up within your

father's old frontier tower? As to this Mohamed being an infidel, what

is that to the purpose? You marry him, not his religion: and if he

is waxing a little old, the sooner will you be a widow, and mistress

of yourself; at any rate, you are in his power, and must either be a

queen or a slave. When in the hands of a robber, it is better to

sell one's merchandise for a fair price, than to have it taken by main

force."

  The arguments of the discreet Kadiga prevailed. The Spanish lady

dried her tears, and became the spouse of Mohamed the Left-handed; she

even conformed, in appearance, to the faith of her royal husband;

and her discreet duenna immediately became a zealous convert to the

Moslem doctrines: it was then the latter received the Arabian name

of Kadiga, and was permitted to remain in the confidential employ of

her mistress.

  In due process of time the Moorish king was made the proud and happy

father of three lovely daughters, all born at a birth: he could have

wished they had been sons, but consoled himself with the idea that

three daughters at a birth were pretty well for a man somewhat

stricken in years, and left-handed!

  As usual with all Moslem monarchs, he summoned his astrologers on

this happy event. They cast the nativities of the three princesses,

and shook their heads. "Daughters, O king!" said they, "are always

precarious property; but these will most need your watchfulness when

they arrive at a marriageable age; at that time gather them under your

wings, and trust them to no other guardianship."

  Mohamed the Left-handed was acknowledged to be a wise king by his

courtiers, and was certainly so considered by himself. The

prediction of the astrologers caused him but little disquiet, trusting

to his ingenuity to guard his daughters and outwit the Fates.

  The three-fold birth was the last matrimonial trophy of the monarch;

his queen bore him no more children, and died within a few years,

bequeathing her infant daughters to his love, and to the fidelity of

the discreet Kadiga.

  Many years had yet to elapse before the princesses would arrive at

that period of danger- the marriageable age: "It is good, however,

to be cautious in time," said the shrewd monarch; so he determined

to have them reared in the royal castle of Salobrena. This was a

sumptuous palace, incrusted, as it were, in a powerful Moorish

fortress on the summit of a hill overlooking the Mediterranean sea. It

was a royal retreat, in which the Moslem monarchs shut up such of

their relatives, as might endanger their safety; allowing them all

kinds of luxuries and amusements, in the midst of which they passed

their lives in voluptuous indolence.

  Here the princesses remained, immured from the world, but surrounded

by enjoyment, and attended by female slaves who anticipated their

wishes. They had delightful gardens for their recreation, filled

with the rarest fruits and flowers, with aromatic groves and

perfumed baths. On three sides the castle looked down upon a rich

valley, enamelled with all kinds of culture, and bounded by the lofted

Alpuxarra mountains; on the other side it overlooked the broad sunny

sea.

  In this delicious abode, in a propitious climate, and under a

cloudless sky, the three princesses grew up into wondrous beauty; but,

though all reared alike, they gave early tokens of diversity of

character. Their names were Zayda, Zorayda, and Zorahayda; and such

was their order of seniority, for there had been precisely three

minutes between their births.

  Zayda, the eldest, was of an intrepid spirit, and took the lead of

her sisters in every thing, as she had done in entering into the

world. She was curious and inquisitive, and fond of getting at the

bottom of things.

  Zorayda had a great feeling for beauty, which was the reason, no

doubt, of her delighting to regard her own image in a mirror or a

fountain, and of her fondness for flowers, and jewels, and other

tasteful ornaments.

  As to Zorahayda, the youngest, she was soft and timid, and extremely

sensitive, with a vast deal of disposable tenderness, as was evident

from her number of pet-flowers, and pet-birds, and pet-animals, all of

which she cherished with the fondest care. Her amusements, too, were

of a gentle nature, and mixed up with musing and reverie. She would

sit for hours in a balcony, gazing on the sparkling stars of a

summer's night, or on the sea when lit up by the moon; and at such

times, the song of a fisherman, faintly heard from the beach, or the

notes of a Moorish flute from some gliding bark, sufficed to elevate

her feelings into ecstasy. The least uproar of the elements,

however, filled her with dismay; and a clap of thunder was enough to

throw her into a swoon.

  Years rolled on smoothly and serenely; the discreet Kadiga, to

whom the princesses were confided, was faithful to her trust, and

attended them with unremitting care.

  The castle of Salobrena, as has been said, was built upon a hill

on the seacoast. One of the exterior walls straggled down the

profile of the hill, until it reached a jutting rock overhanging the

sea, with a narrow sandy beach at its foot, laved by the rippling

billows. A small watchtower on this rock had been fitted up as a

pavilion, with latticed windows to admit the sea-breeze. Here the

princesses used to pass the sultry hours of mid-day.

  The curious Zayda was one day seated at a window of the pavilion, as

her sisters, reclining on ottomans, were taking the siesta or noontide

slumber. Her attention was attracted to a galley which came coasting

along, with measured strokes of the oar. As it drew near, she observed

that it was filled with armed men. The galley anchored at the foot

of the tower: a number of Moorish soldiers landed on the narrow beach,

conducting several Christian prisoners. The curious Zayda awakened her

sisters, and all three peeped cautiously through the close jalousies

of the lattice which screened them from sight. Among the prisoners

were three Spanish cavaliers, richly dressed. They were in the

flower of youth, and of noble presence; and the lofty manner in

which they carried themselves, though loaded with chains and

surrounded with enemies, bespoke the grandeur of their souls. The

princesses gazed with intense and breathless interest. Cooped up as

they had been in this castle among female attendants, seeing nothing

of the male sex but black slaves, or the rude fishermen of the

sea-coast, it is not to be wondered at that the appearance of three

gallant cavaliers, in the pride of youth and manly beauty, should

produce some commotion in their bosom.

  "Did ever nobler being tread the earth than that cavalier in

crimson?" cried Zayda, the eldest of the sisters. "See how proudly

he bears himself, as though all around him were his slaves!"

  "But notice that one in green!" exclaimed Zorayda. "What grace! what

elegance! what spirit!"

  The gentle Zorahayda said nothing, but she secretly gave

preference to the cavalier in blue.

  The princesses remained gazing until the prisoners were out of

sight; then heaving long-drawn sighs, they turned round, looked at

each other for a moment, and sat down, musing and pensive, on their

ottomans.

  The discreet Kadiga found them in this situation; they related

what they had seen, and even the withered heart of the duenna was

warmed. "Poor youths!" exclaimed she, "I'll warrant their captivity

makes many a fair and high-born lady's heart ache in their native

land! Ah my children, you have little idea of the life these cavaliers

lead in their own country. Such prankling at tournaments! such

devotion to the ladies! such courting and serenading!"

  The curiosity of Zayda was fully aroused; she was insatiable in

her inquiries, and drew from the duenna the most animated pictures

of the scenes of her youthful days and native land. The beautiful

Zorayda bridled up, and slyly regarded herself in a mirror, when the

theme turned upon the charms of the Spanish ladies; while Zorahayda

suppressed a struggling sigh at the mention of moonlight serenades.

  Every day the curious Zayda renewed her inquiries, and every day the

sage duenna repeated her stories, which were listened to with profound

interest, though with frequent sighs, by her gentle auditors. The

discreet old woman awoke at length to the mischief she might be doing.

She had been accustomed to think of the princesses only as children;

but they had imperceptibly ripened beneath her eye, and now bloomed

before her three lovely damsels of the marriageable age. It is time,

thought the duenna, to give notice to the king.

  Mohamed the Left-handed was seated one morning on a divan in a

cool hall of the Alhambra, when a slave arrived from the fortress of

Salobrena, with a message from the sage Kadiga, congratulating him

on the anniversary of his daughters' birth-day. The slave at the

same time presented a delicate little basket decorated with flowers,

within which, on a couch of vine and fig-leaves, lay a peach, an

apricot, and a nectarine, with their bloom and down and dewy sweetness

upon them, and all in the early stage of tempting ripeness. The

monarch was versed in the Oriental language of fruits and flowers, and

rapidly divined the meaning of this emblematical offering.

  "So," said he, "the critical period pointed out by the astrologers

is arrived: my daughters are at a marriageable age. What is to be

done? They are shut up from the eyes of men; they are under the eyes

of the discreet Kadiga- all very good- but still they are not under my

own eye, as was prescribed by the astrologers: I must gather them

under my wing, and trust to no other guardianship."

  So saying, he ordered that a tower of the Alhambra should be

prepared for their reception, and departed at the head of his guards

for the fortress of Salobrena, to conduct them home in person.

  About three years had elapsed since Mohamed had beheld his

daughters, and he could scarcely credit his eyes at the wonderful

change which that small space of time had made in their appearance.

During the interval, they had passed that wondrous boundary line in

female life which separates the crude, unformed, and thoughtless

girl from the blooming, blushing, meditative woman. It is like passing

from the flat, bleak, uninteresting plains of La Mancha to the

voluptuous valleys and swelling hills of Andalusia.

  Zayda was tall and finely formed, with a lofty demeanor and a

penetrating eye. She entered with a stately and decided step, and made

a profound reverence to Mohamed, treating him more as her sovereign

than her father. Zorayda was of the middle height, with an alluring

look and swimming gait, and a sparkling beauty, heightened by the

assistance of the toilette. She approached her father with a smile,

kissed his hand, and saluted him with several stanzas from a popular

Arabian poet, with which the monarch was delighted. Zorahayda was

shy and timid, smaller than her sisters, and with a beauty of that

tender beseeching kind which looks for fondness and protection. She

was little fitted to command, like her elder sister, or to dazzle like

the second, but was rather formed to creep to the bosom of manly

affection, to nestle within it, and be content. She drew near to her

father, with a timid and almost faltering step, and would have taken

his hand to kiss, but on looking up into his face, and seeing it

beaming with a paternal smile, the tenderness of her nature broke

forth, and she threw herself upon his neck.

  Mohamed the Left-handed surveyed his blooming daughters with mingled

pride and perplexity; for while he exulted in their charms, he

bethought himself of the prediction of the astrologers. "Three

daughters! three daughters!" muttered he repeatedly to himself, "and

all of a marriageable age! Here's tempting Hesperian fruit, that

requires a dragon watch!"

  He prepared for his return to Granada, by sending heralds before

him, commanding every one to keep out of the road by which he was to

pass, and that all doors and windows should be closed at the

approach of the princesses. This done, he set forth, escorted by a

troop of black horsemen of hideous aspect, and clad in shining armor.

  The princesses rode beside the king, closely veiled, on beautiful

white palfreys, with velvet caparisons, embroidered with gold, and

sweeping the ground; the bits and stirrups were of gold, and the

silken bridles adorned with pearls and precious stones. The palfreys

were covered with little silver bells, which made the most musical

tinkling as they ambled gently along. Woe to the unlucky wight,

however, who lingered in the way when he heard the tinkling of these

bells!- the guards were ordered to cut him down without mercy.

  The cavalcade was drawing near to Granada, when it overtook on the

banks of the river Xenil, a small body of Moorish soldiers with a

convoy of prisoners. It was too late for the soldiers to get out of

the way, so they threw themselves on their faces on the earth,

ordering their captives to do the like. Among the prisoners were the

three identical cavaliers whom the princesses had seen from the

pavilion. They either did not understand, or were too haughty to

obey the order, and remained standing and gazing upon the cavalcade as

it approached.

  The ire of the monarch was kindled at this flagrant defiance of

his orders. Drawing his cimeter, and pressing forward, he was about to

deal a left-handed blow that might have been fatal to, at least, one

of the gazers, when the princesses crowded round him, and implored

mercy for the prisoners; even the timid Zorahayda forgot her

shyness, and became eloquent in their behalf. Mohamed paused, with

uplifted cimeter, when the captain of the guard threw himself at his

feet. "Let not your highness," said he, "do a deed that may cause

great scandal throughout the kingdom. These are three brave and

noble Spanish knights, who have been taken in battle, fighting like

lions; they are of high birth, and may bring great ransoms."

  "Enough!" said the king. "I will spare their lives, but punish their

audacity- let them be taken to the Vermilion Towers, and put to hard

labor."

  Mohamed was making one of his usual left-handed blunders. In the

tumult and agitation of this blustering scene, the veils of the

three princesses had been thrown back, and the radiance of their

beauty revealed; and in prolonging the parley, the king had given that

beauty time to have its full effect. In those days people fell in love

much more suddenly than at present, as all ancient stories make

manifest: it is not a matter of wonder, therefore, that the hearts

of the three cavaliers were completely captured; especially as

gratitude was added to their admiration; it is a little singular,

however, though no less certain, that each of them was enraptured with

a several beauty. As to the princesses, they were more than ever

struck with the noble demeanor of the captives, and cherished in their

breasts all that they had heard of their valor and noble lineage.

  The cavalcade resumed its march; the three princesses rode pensively

along on their tinkling palfreys, now and then stealing a glance

behind in search of the Christian captives, and the latter were

conducted to their allotted prison in the Vermilion Towers.

  The residence provided for the princesses was one of the most dainty

that fancy could devise. It was in a tower somewhat apart from the

main palace of the Alhambra, though connected with it by the wall

which encircled the whole summit of the hill. On one side it looked

into the interior of the fortress, and had, at its foot, a small

garden filled with the rarest flowers. On the other side it overlooked

a deep embowered ravine separating the grounds of the Alhambra from

those of the Generalife. The interior of the tower was divided into

small fairy apartments, beautifully ornamented in the light Arabian

style, surrounding a lofty hall, the vaulted roof of which rose almost

to the summit of the tower. The walls and the ceilings of the hall

were adorned with arabesque and fretwork, sparkling with gold and with

brilliant pencilling. In the centre of the marble pavement was an

alabaster fountain, set round with aromatic shrubs and flowers, and

throwing up a jet of water that cooled the whole edifice and had a

lulling sound. Round the hall were suspended cages of gold and

silver wire, containing singing-birds of the finest plumage or

sweetest note.

  The princesses had been represented as always cheerful when in the

castle of the Salobrena; the king had expected to see them

enraptured with the Alhambra. To his surprise, however, they began

to pine, and grow melancholy, and dissatisfied with every thing around

them. The flowers yielded them no fragrance, the song of the

nightingale disturbed their night's rest, and they were out of all

patience with the alabaster fountain with its eternal drop-drop and

splash-splash, from morning till night, and from night till morning.

  The king, who was somewhat of a testy, tyrannical disposition,

took this at first in high dudgeon; but he reflected that his

daughters had arrived at an age when the female mind expands and its

desires augment. "They are no longer children," said he to himself,

"they are women grown, and require suitable objects to interest them."

He put in requisition, therefore, all the dressmakers, and the

jewellers, and the artificers in gold and silver throughout the

Zacatin of Granada, and the princesses were overwhelmed with robes

of silk, and tissue, and brocade, and cashmere shawls, and necklaces

of pearls and diamonds, and rings, and bracelets, and anklets, and all

manner of precious things.

  All, however, was of no avail; the princesses continued pale and

languid in the midst of their finery, and looked like three blighted

rose-buds, drooping from one stalk. The king was at his wits' end.

He had in general a laudable confidence in his own judgment, and never

took advice. "The whims and caprices of three marriageable damsels,

however, are sufficient," said he, "to puzzle the shrewdest head."

So for once in his life he called in the aid of counsel.

  The person to whom he applied was the experienced duenna.

  "Kadiga," said the king, "I know you to be one of the most

discreet women in the whole world, as well as one of the most

trustworthy; for these reasons I have always continued you about the

persons of my daughters. Fathers cannot be too wary in whom they

repose such confidence; I now wish you to find out the secret malady

that is preying upon the princesses, and to devise some means of

restoring them to health and cheerfulness."

  Kadiga promised implicit obedience. In fact she knew more of the

malady of the princesses than they did themselves. Shutting herself up

with them, however, she endeavored to insinuate herself into their

confidence.

  "My dear children, what is the reason you are so dismal and downcast

in so beautiful a place, where you have every thing that heart can

wish?"

  The princesses looked vacantly round the apartment, and sighed.

  "What more, then, would you have? Shall I get you the wonderful

parrot that talks all languages, and is the delight of Granada?"

  "Odious!" exclaimed the princess Zayda. "A horrid, screaming bird,

that chatters words without ideas: one must be without brains to

tolerate such a pest."

  "Shall I send for a monkey from the rock of Gibraltar, to divert you

with his antics?"

  "A monkey! faugh!" cried Zorayda; "the detestable mimic of man. I

hate the nauseous animal."

  "What say you to the famous black singer Casem, from the royal

harem, in Morocco? They say he has a voice as fine as a woman's."

  "I am terrified at the sight of these black slaves," said the

delicate Zorahayda; "besides, I have lost all relish for music."

  "Ah! my child, you would not say so," replied the old woman,

slyly, "had you heard the music I heard last evening, from the three

Spanish cavaliers, whom we met on our journey. But, bless me,

children! what is the matter that you blush so, and are in such a

flutter?"

  "Nothing, nothing, good mother; pray proceed."

  "Well; as I was passing by the Vermilion Towers last evening, I

saw the three cavaliers resting after their day's labor. One was

playing on the guitar, so gracefully, and the others sang by turns;

and they did it in such style, that the very guards seemed like

statues, or men enchanted. Allah forgive me! I could not help being

moved at hearing the songs of my native country. And then to see three

such noble and handsome youths in chains and slavery!"

  Here the kind-hearted old woman could not restrain her tears.

  "Perhaps, mother, you could manage to procure us a sight of these

cavaliers," said Zayda.

  "I think," said Zorayda, "a little music would be quite reviving."

  The timid Zorahayda said nothing, but threw her arms round the

neck of Kadiga.

  "Mercy on me!" exclaimed the discreet old woman; "what are you

talking of, my children? Your father would be the death of us all if

he heard of such a thing. To be sure, these cavaliers are evidently

well-bred, and high-minded youths; but what of that? they are the

enemies of our faith, and you must not even think of them but with

abhorrence."

  There is an admirable intrepidity in the female will, particularly

when about the marriageable age, which is not to be deterred by

dangers and prohibitions. The princesses hung round their old

duenna, and coaxed, and entreated, and declared that a refusal would

break their hearts.

  What could she do? She was certainly the most discreet old woman

in the whole world, and one of the most faithful servants to the king;

but was she to see three beautiful princesses break their hearts for

the mere tinkling of a guitar? Besides, though she had been so long

among the Moors, and changed her faith in imitation of her mistress,

like a trusty follower, yet she was a Spaniard born, and had the

lingerings of Christianity in her heart. So she set about to

contrive how the wish of the princesses might be gratified.

  The Christian captives, confined in the Vermilion Towers, were under

the charge of a big-whiskered, broad-shouldered renegado, called

Hussein Baba, who was reputed to have a most itching palm. She went to

him privately, and slipping a broad piece of gold into his hand,

"Hussein Baba," said she; "My mistresses, the three princesses, who

are shut up in the tower, and in sad want of amusement, have heard

of the musical talents of the three Spanish cavaliers, and are

desirous of hearing a specimen of their skill. I am sure you are too

kind-hearted to refuse them so innocent a gratification."

  "What! and to have my head set grinning over the gate of my own

tower! for that would be the reward, if the king should discover it."

  "No danger of any thing of the kind; the affair may be managed so

that the whim of the princesses may be gratified, and their father

be never the wiser. You know the deep ravine outside of the walls

which passes immediately below the tower. Put the three Christians

to work there, and at the intervals of their labor, let them play

and sing, as if for their own recreation. In this way the princesses

will be able to hear them from the windows of the tower, and you may

be sure of their paying well for your compliance."

  As the good old woman concluded her harangue, she kindly pressed the

rough hand of the renegado, and left within it another piece of gold.

  Her eloquence was irresistible. The very next day the three

cavaliers were put to work in the ravine. During the noontide heat,

when their fellow-laborers were sleeping in the shade, and the guard

nodding drowsily at his post, they seated themselves among the herbage

at the foot of the tower, and sang a Spanish roundelay to the

accompaniment of the guitar.

  The glen was deep, the tower was high, but their voices rose

distinctly in the stillness of the summer noon. The princesses

listened from their balcony, they had been taught the Spanish language

by their duenna, and were moved by the tenderness of the song. The

discreet Kadiga, on the contrary, was terribly shocked. "Allah

preserve us!" cried she, "they are singing a love-ditty, addressed

to yourselves. Did ever mortal hear of such audacity? I will run to

the slave-master, and have them soundly bastinadoed."

  "What! bastinado such gallant cavaliers, and for singing so

charmingly!" The three beautiful princesses were filled with horror at

the idea. With all her virtuous indignation, the good old woman was of

a placable nature, and easily appeased. Besides, the music seemed to

have a beneficial effect upon her young mistresses. A rosy bloom had

already come to their cheeks, and their eyes began to sparkle. She

made no further objection, therefore, to the amorous ditty of the

cavaliers.

  When it was finished, the princesses remained silent for a time;

at length Zorayda took up a lute, and with a sweet, though faint and

trembling voice, warbled a little Arabian air, the burden of which

was, "The rose is concealed among her leaves, but she listens with

delight to the song of the nightingale."

  From this time forward the cavaliers worked almost daily in the

ravine. The considerate Hussein Baba became more and more indulgent,

and daily more prone to sleep at his post. For some time a vague

intercourse was kept up by popular songs and romances, which, in

some measure, responded to each other, and breathed the feelings of

the parties. By degrees the princesses showed themselves at the

balcony, when they could do so without being perceived by the

guards. They conversed with the cavaliers also, by means of flowers,

with the symbolical language of which they were mutually acquainted.

The difficulties of their intercourse added to its charms, and

strengthened the passion they had so singularly conceived; for love

delights to struggle with difficulties, and thrives the most hardily

on the scantiest soil.

  The change effected in the looks and spirits of the princesses by

this secret intercourse, surprised and gratified the left-handed king;

but no one was more elated than the discreet Kadiga, who considered it

all owing to her able management.

  At length there was an interruption in this telegraphic

correspondence; for several days the cavaliers ceased to make their

appearance in the glen. The princesses looked out from the tower in

vain. In vain they stretched their swan-like necks from the balcony;

in vain they sang like captive nightingales in their cage: nothing was

to be seen of their Christian lovers; not a note responded from the

groves. The discreet Kadiga sallied forth in quest of intelligence,

and soon returned with a face full of trouble. "Ah, my children!"

cried she, "I saw what all this would come to, but you would have your

way; you may now hang up your lutes on the willows. The Spanish

cavaliers are ransomed by their families; they are down in Granada,

and preparing to return to their native country."

  The three beautiful princesses were in despair at the tidings. Zayda

was indignant at the slight put upon them, in thus being deserted

without a parting word. Zorayda wrung her hands and cried, and

looked in the glass, and wiped away her tears, and cried afresh. The

gentle Zorahayda leaned over the balcony and wept in silence, and

her tears fell drop by drop among the flowers of the bank where the

faithless cavaliers had so often been seated.

  The discreet Kadiga did all in her power to soothe their sorrow.

"Take comfort, my children," said she, "this is nothing when you are

used to it. This is the way of the world. Ah! when you are as old as I

am, you will know how to value these men. I'll warrant these cavaliers

have their loves among the Spanish beauties of Cordova and Seville,

and will soon be serenading under their balconies, and thinking no

more of the Moorish beauties in the Alhambra. Take comfort, therefore,

my children, and drive them from your hearts."

  The comforting words of the discreet Kadiga only redoubled the

distress of the three princesses, and for two days they continued

inconsolable. On the morning of the third, the good old woman

entered their apartment, all ruffling with indignation.

  "Who would have believed such insolence in mortal man!" exclaimed

she, as soon as she could find words to express herself; "but I am

rightly served for having connived at this deception of your worthy

father. Never talk more to me of your Spanish cavaliers."

  "Why, what has happened, good Kadiga?" exclaimed the princesses in

breathless anxiety.

  "What has happened?- treason has happened! or what is almost as bad,

treason has been proposed; and to me, the most faithful of subjects,

the trustiest of duennas! Yes, my children, the Spanish cavaliers have

dared to tamper with me, that I should persuade you to fly with them

to Cordova, and become their wives!"

  Here the excellent old woman covered her face with her hands, and

gave way to a violent burst of grief and indignation. The three

beautiful princesses turned pale and red, pale and red, and

trembled, and looked down, and cast shy looks at each other, but

said nothing. Meantime, the old woman sat rocking backward and forward

in violent agitation, and now and then breaking out into exclamations,

"That ever I should live to be so insulted!- I, the most faithful of

servants!"

  At length, the eldest princess, who had most spirit and always

took the lead, approached her, and laying her hand upon her

shoulder, "Well, mother," said she, "supposing we were willing to

fly with these Christian cavaliers- is such a thing possible?"

  The good old woman paused suddenly in her grief, and looking up,

"Possible," echoed she; "to be sure, it is possible. Have not the

cavaliers already bribed Hussein Baba, the renegado captain of the

guard, and arranged the whole plan? But, then, to think of deceiving

your father! your father, who has placed such confidence in me!"

Here the worthy woman gave way to a fresh burst of grief, and began to

rock backward and forward, and to wring her hands.

  "But our father has never placed any confidence in us," said the

eldest princess, "but has trusted to bolts and bars, and treated us as

captives."

  "Why, that is true enough," replied the old woman, again pausing

in her grief; "he has indeed treated you most unreasonably, keeping

you shut up here, to waste your bloom in a moping old tower, like

roses left to wither in a flower-jar. But, then, to fly from your

native land!"

  "And is not the land we fly to, the native land of our mother, where

we shall live in freedom? And shall we not each have a youthful

husband in exchange for a severe old father?"

  "Why, that again is all very true; and your father, I must

confess, is rather tyrannical: but what then," relapsing into her

grief, "would you leave me behind to bear the brunt of his vengeance?"

  "By no means, my good Kadiga; cannot you fly with us?"

  "Very true, my child; and, to tell the truth, when I talked the

matter over with Hussein Baba, he promised to take care of me, if I

would accompany you in your flight: but then, bethink you, my

children, are you willing to renounce the faith of your father?"

  "The Christian faith was the original faith of our mother," said the

eldest princess; "I am ready to embrace it, and so, I am sure, are

my sisters."

  "Right again," exclaimed the old woman, brightening up; "it was

the original faith of your mother, and bitterly did she lament, on her

death-bed, that she had renounced it. I promised her then to take care

of your souls, and I rejoice to see that they are now in a fair way to

be saved. Yes, my children, I, too, was born a Christian, and have

remained a Christian in my heart, and am resolved to return to the

faith. I have talked on the subject with Hussein Baba, who is a

Spaniard by birth, and comes from a place not far from my native town.

He is equally anxious to see his own country, and to be reconciled

to the church; and the cavaliers have promised, that, if we are

disposed to become man and wife, on returning to our native land, they

will provide for us handsomely."

  In a word, it appeared that this extremely discreet and provident

old woman had consulted with the cavaliers and the renegado, and had

concerted the whole plan of escape. The eldest princess immediately

assented to it; and her example, as usual, determined the conduct of

her sisters. It is true, the youngest hesitated, for she was gentle

and timid of soul, and there was a struggle in her bosom between

filial feeling and youthful passion: the latter, however, as usual,

gained the victory, and with silent tears, and stifled sighs, she

prepared herself for flight.

  The rugged hill on which the Alhambra is built was, in old times,

perforated with subterranean passages, cut through the rock, and

leading from the fortress to various parts of the city, and to distant

sally-ports on the banks of the Darro and the Xenil. They had been

constructed at different times by the Moorish kings, as means of

escape from sudden insurrections, or of secretly issuing forth on

private enterprises. Many of them are now entirely lost, while

others remain, partly choked with rubbish, and partly walled up;

monuments of the jealous precautions and warlike stratagems of the

Moorish government. By one of these passages, Hussein Baba had

undertaken to conduct the princesses to a sally-port beyond the

walls of the city, where the cavaliers were to be ready with fleet

steeds, to bear the whole party over the borders.

  The appointed night arrived: the tower of the princesses had been

locked up as usual, and the Alhambra was buried in deep sleep. Towards

midnight, the discreet Kadiga listened from the balcony of a window

that looked into the garden. Hussein Baba, the renegado, was already

below, and gave the appointed signal. The duenna fastened the end of a

ladder of ropes to the balcony, lowered it into the garden and

descended. The two eldest princesses followed her with beating hearts;

but when it came to the turn of the youngest princess, Zorahayda,

she hesitated, and trembled. Several times she ventured a delicate

little foot upon the ladder, and as often drew it back, while her poor

little heart fluttered more and more the longer she delayed. She

cast a wistful look back into the silken chamber; she had lived in it,

to be sure, like a bird in a cage; but within it she was secure; who

could tell what dangers might beset her, should she flutter forth into

the wide world! Now she bethought her of the gallant Christian

lover, and her little foot was instantly upon the ladder; and anon she

thought of her father, and shrank back. But fruitless is the attempt

to describe the conflict in the bosom of one so young and tender and

loving, but so timid, and so ignorant of the world.

  In vain her sisters implored, the duenna scolded, and the renegado

blasphemed beneath the balcony; the gentle little Moorish maid stood

doubting and wavering on the verge of elopement, tempted by the

sweetness of the sin, but terrified at its perils.

  Every moment increased the danger of discovery. A distant tramp

was heard. "The patrols are walking their rounds," cried the renegado;

"if we linger, we perish. Princess, descend instantly, or we leave

you."

  Zorahayda was for a moment in fearful agitation; then loosening

the ladder of ropes, with desperate resolution, she flung it from

the balcony.

  "It is decided!" cried she; "flight is now out of my power! Allah

guide and bless ye, my dear sisters!"

  The two eldest princesses were shocked at the thoughts of leaving

her behind, and would fain have lingered, but the patrol was

advancing; the renegado was furious, and they were hurried away to the

subterraneous passage. They groped their way through a fearful

labyrinth, cut through the heart of the mountain, and succeeded in

reaching, undiscovered, an iron gate that opened outside of the walls.

The Spanish cavaliers were waiting to receive them, disguised as

Moorish soldiers of the guard, commanded by the renegado.

  The lover of Zorahayda was frantic, when he learned that she had

refused to leave the tower; but there was no time to waste in

lamentations. The two princesses were placed behind their lovers,

the discreet Kadiga mounted behind the renegado, and they all set

off at a round pace in the direction of the Pass of Lope, which

leads through the mountains towards Cordova.

  They had not proceeded far when they heard the noise of drums and

trumpets from the battlements of the Alhambra.

  "Our flight is discovered!" said the renegado.

  "We have fleet steeds, the night is dark, and we may distance all

pursuit," replied the cavaliers.

  They put spurs to their horses, and scoured across the Vega. They

attained the foot of the mountain of Elvira, which stretches like a

promontory into the plain. The renegado paused and listened. "As yet,"

said he, "there is no one on our traces, we shall make good our escape

to the mountains." While he spoke, a light blaze sprang up on the

top of the watchtower of the Alhambra.

  "Confusion!" cried the renegado, "that bale fire will put all the

guards of the passes on the alert. Away! away! Spur like mad- there is

no time to be lost."

  Away they dashed- the clattering of their horses' hoofs echoed

from rock to rock, as they swept along the road that skirts the

rocky mountain of Elvira. As they galloped on, the bale fire of the

Alhambra was answered in every direction; light after light blazed

on the atalayas, or watchtowers of the mountains.

  "Forward! forward!" cried the renegado, with many an oath, "to the

bridge- to the bridge, before the alarm has reached there!"

  They doubled the promontory of the mountains, and arrived in sight

of the famous Bridge of Pinos, that crosses a rushing stream often

dyed with Christian and Moslem blood. To their confusion, the tower on

the bridge blazed with lights and glittered with armed men. The

renegado pulled up his steed, rose in his stirrups and looked about

him for a moment; then beckoning to the cavaliers, he struck off

from the road, skirted the river for some distance, and dashed into

its waters. The cavaliers called upon the princesses to cling to them,

and did the same. They were borne for some distance down the rapid

current, the surges roared round them, but the beautiful princesses

clung to their Christian knights, and never uttered a complaint. The

cavaliers attained the opposite bank in safety, and were conducted

by the renegado, by rude and unfrequented paths, and wild barrancos,

through the heart of the mountains, so as to avoid all the regular

passes. In a word, they succeeded in reaching the ancient city of

Cordova; where their restoration to their country and friends was

celebrated with great rejoicings, for they were of the noblest

families. The beautiful princesses were forthwith received into the

bosom of the Church, and, after being in all due form made regular

Christians, were rendered happy wives.

  In our hurry to make good the escape of the princesses across the

river, and up the mountains, we forgot to mention the fate of the

discreet Kadiga. She had clung like a cat to Hussein Baba in the

scamper across the Vega, screaming at every bound, and drawing many an

oath from the whiskered renegado; but when he prepared to plunge his

steed into the river, her terror knew no bounds. "Grasp me not so

tightly," cried Hussein Baba; "hold on by my belt and fear nothing."

She held firmly with both hands by the leathern belt that girded the

broad-backed renegado; but when he halted with the cavaliers to take

breath on the mountain summit, the duenna was no longer to be seen.

  "What has become of Kadiga?" cried the princesses in alarm.

  "Allah alone knows!" replied the renegado; "my belt came loose

when in the midst of the river, and Kadiga was swept with it down

the stream. The will of Allah be done! but it was an embroidered belt,

and of great price."

  There was no time to waste in idle regrets; yet bitterly did the

princesses bewail the loss of their discreet counsellor. That

excellent old woman, however, did not lose more than half of her

nine lives in the water: a fisherman, who was drawing his nets some

distance down the stream, brought her to land, and was not a little

astonished at his miraculous draught. What further became of the

discreet Kadiga, the legend does not mention; certain it is that she

evinced her discretion in never venturing within the reach of

Mohamed the Left-handed.

  Almost as little is known of the conduct of that sagacious monarch

when he discovered the escape of his daughters, and the deceit

practised upon him by the most faithful of servants. It was the only

instance in which he had called in the aid of counsel, and he was

never afterwards known to be guilty of a similar weakness. He took

good care, however, to guard his remaining daughter, who had no

disposition to elope: it is thought, indeed, that she secretly

repented having remained behind: now and then she was seen leaning

on the battlements of the tower, and looking mournfully towards the

mountains in the direction of Cordova, and sometimes the notes of

her lute were heard accompanying plaintive ditties, in which she was

said to lament the loss of her sisters and her lover, and to bewail

her solitary life. She died young, and, according to popular rumor,

was buried in a vault beneath the tower, and her untimely fate has

given rise to more than one traditionary fable.



  The following legend, which seems in some measure to spring out of

the foregoing story, is too closely connected with high historic names

to be entirely doubted. The Count's daughter, and some of her young

companions, to whom it was read in one of the evening tertulias,

thought certain parts of it had much appearance of reality; and

Dolores, who was much more versed than they in the improbable truths

of the Alhambra, believed every word of it.
