



Chapter 38





The secretary put his hand before his eyes to shade them from the 

glare of the lamp, and for some moments looked at Hugh with a 

frowning brow, as if he remembered to have seen him lately, but 

could not call to mind where, or on what occasion.  His uncertainty 

was very brief, for before Hugh had spoken a word, he said, as his 

countenance cleared up:



'Ay, ay, I recollect.  It's quite right, John, you needn't wait.  

Don't go, Dennis.'



'Your servant, master,' said Hugh, as Grueby disappeared.



'Yours, friend,' returned the secretary in his smoothest manner.  

'What brings YOU here?  We left nothing behind us, I hope?'



Hugh gave a short laugh, and thrusting his hand into his breast, 

produced one of the handbills, soiled and dirty from lying out of 

doors all night, which he laid upon the secretary's desk after 

flattening it upon his knee, and smoothing out the wrinkles with 

his heavy palm.



'Nothing but that, master.  It fell into good hands, you see.'



'What is this!' said Gashford, turning it over with an air of 

perfectly natural surprise.  'Where did you get it from, my good 

fellow; what does it mean?  I don't understand this at all.'



A little disconcerted by this reception, Hugh looked from the 

secretary to Dennis, who had risen and was standing at the table 

too, observing the stranger by stealth, and seeming to derive the 

utmost satisfaction from his manners and appearance.  Considering 

himself silently appealed to by this action, Mr Dennis shook his 

head thrice, as if to say of Gashford, 'No.  He don't know anything 

at all about it.  I know he don't.  I'll take my oath he don't;' 

and hiding his profile from Hugh with one long end of his frowzy 

neckerchief, nodded and chuckled behind this screen in extreme 

approval of the secretary's proceedings.



'It tells the man that finds it, to come here, don't it?' asked 

Hugh.  'I'm no scholar, myself, but I showed it to a friend, and he 

said it did.'



'It certainly does,' said Gashford, opening his eyes to their 

utmost width; 'really this is the most remarkable circumstance I 

have ever known.  How did you come by this piece of paper, my good 

friend?'



'Muster Gashford,' wheezed the hangman under his breath, 'agin' all 

Newgate!'



Whether Hugh heard him, or saw by his manner that he was being 

played upon, or perceived the secretary's drift of himself, he came 

in his blunt way to the point at once.



'Here!' he said, stretching out his hand and taking it back; 'never 

mind the bill, or what it says, or what it don't say.  You don't 

know anything about it, master,--no more do I,--no more does he,' 

glancing at Dennis.  'None of us know what it means, or where it 

comes from: there's an end of that.  Now I want to make one against 

the Catholics, I'm a No-Popery man, and ready to be sworn in.  

That's what I've come here for.'



'Put him down on the roll, Muster Gashford,' said Dennis 

approvingly.  'That's the way to go to work--right to the end at 

once, and no palaver.'



'What's the use of shooting wide of the mark, eh, old boy!' cried 

Hugh.



'My sentiments all over!' rejoined the hangman.  'This is the sort 

of chap for my division, Muster Gashford.  Down with him, sir.  Put 

him on the roll.  I'd stand godfather to him, if he was to be 

christened in a bonfire, made of the ruins of the Bank of England.'



With these and other expressions of confidence of the like 

flattering kind, Mr Dennis gave him a hearty slap on the back, 

which Hugh was not slow to return.



'No Popery, brother!' cried the hangman.



'No Property, brother!' responded Hugh.



'Popery, Popery,' said the secretary with his usual mildness.



'It's all the same!' cried Dennis.  'It's all right.  Down with 

him, Muster Gashford.  Down with everybody, down with everything!  

Hurrah for the Protestant religion!  That's the time of day, 

Muster Gashford!'



The secretary regarded them both with a very favourable expression 

of countenance, while they gave loose to these and other 

demonstrations of their patriotic purpose; and was about to make 

some remark aloud, when Dennis, stepping up to him, and shading his 

mouth with his hand, said, in a hoarse whisper, as he nudged him 

with his elbow:



'Don't split upon a constitutional officer's profession, Muster 

Gashford.  There are popular prejudices, you know, and he mightn't 

like it.  Wait till he comes to be more intimate with me.  He's a 

fine-built chap, an't he?'



'A powerful fellow indeed!'



'Did you ever, Muster Gashford,' whispered Dennis, with a horrible 

kind of admiration, such as that with which a cannibal might regard 

his intimate friend, when hungry,--'did you ever--and here he drew 

still closer to his ear, and fenced his mouth with both his open 

bands--'see such a throat as his?  Do but cast your eye upon it.  

There's a neck for stretching, Muster Gashford!'



The secretary assented to this proposition with the best grace he 

could assume--it is difficult to feign a true professional relish: 

which is eccentric sometimes--and after asking the candidate a few 

unimportant questions, proceeded to enrol him a member of the Great 

Protestant Association of England.  If anything could have exceeded 

Mr Dennis's joy on the happy conclusion of this ceremony, it would 

have been the rapture with which he received the announcement that 

the new member could neither read nor write: those two arts being 

(as Mr Dennis swore) the greatest possible curse a civilised 

community could know, and militating more against the professional 

emoluments and usefulness of the great constitutional office he had 

the honour to hold, than any adverse circumstances that could 

present themselves to his imagination.



The enrolment being completed, and Hugh having been informed by 

Gashford, in his peculiar manner, of the peaceful and strictly 

lawful objects contemplated by the body to which he now belonged--

during which recital Mr Dennis nudged him very much with his elbow, 

and made divers remarkable faces--the secretary gave them both to 

understand that he desired to be alone.  Therefore they took their 

leaves without delay, and came out of the house together.



'Are you walking, brother?' said Dennis.



'Ay!' returned Hugh.  'Where you will.'



'That's social,' said his new friend.  'Which way shall we take?  

Shall we go and have a look at doors that we shall make a pretty 

good clattering at, before long--eh, brother?'



Hugh answering in the affirmative, they went slowly down to 

Westminster, where both houses of Parliament were then sitting.  

Mingling in the crowd of carriages, horses, servants, chairmen, 

link-boys, porters, and idlers of all kinds, they lounged about; 

while Hugh's new friend pointed out to him significantly the weak 

parts of the building, how easy it was to get into the lobby, and 

so to the very door of the House of Commons; and how plainly, when 

they marched down there in grand array, their roars and shouts 

would be heard by the members inside; with a great deal more to the 

same purpose, all of which Hugh received with manifest delight.



He told him, too, who some of the Lords and Commons were, by name, 

as they came in and out; whether they were friendly to the Papists 

or otherwise; and bade him take notice of their liveries and 

equipages, that he might be sure of them, in case of need.  

Sometimes he drew him close to the windows of a passing carriage, 

that he might see its master's face by the light of the lamps; and, 

both in respect of people and localities, he showed so much 

acquaintance with everything around, that it was plain he had often 

studied there before; as indeed, when they grew a little more 

confidential, he confessed he had.



Perhaps the most striking part of all this was, the number of 

people--never in groups of more than two or three together--who 

seemed to be skulking about the crowd for the same purpose.  To the 

greater part of these, a slight nod or a look from Hugh's companion 

was sufficient greeting; but, now and then, some man would come and 

stand beside him in the throng, and, without turning his head or 

appearing to communicate with him, would say a word or two in a low 

voice, which he would answer in the same cautious manner.  Then 

they would part, like strangers.  Some of these men often 

reappeared again unexpectedly in the crowd close to Hugh, and, as 

they passed by, pressed his hand, or looked him sternly in the 

face; but they never spoke to him, nor he to them; no, not a word.



It was remarkable, too, that whenever they happened to stand where 

there was any press of people, and Hugh chanced to be looking 

downward, he was sure to see an arm stretched out--under his own 

perhaps, or perhaps across him--which thrust some paper into the 

hand or pocket of a bystander, and was so suddenly withdrawn that 

it was impossible to tell from whom it came; nor could he see in 

any face, on glancing quickly round, the least confusion or 

surprise.  They often trod upon a paper like the one he carried in 

his breast, but his companion whispered him not to touch it or to 

take it up,--not even to look towards it,--so there they let them 

lie, and passed on.



When they had paraded the street and all the avenues of the 

building in this manner for near two hours, they turned away, and 

his friend asked him what he thought of what he had seen, and 

whether he was prepared for a good hot piece of work if it should 

come to that.  The hotter the better,' said Hugh, 'I'm prepared for 

anything.'--'So am I,' said his friend, 'and so are many of us; 

and they shook hands upon it with a great oath, and with many 

terrible imprecations on the Papists.



As they were thirsty by this time, Dennis proposed that they should 

repair together to The Boot, where there was good company and 

strong liquor.  Hugh yielding a ready assent, they bent their steps 

that way with no loss of time.



This Boot was a lone house of public entertainment, situated in the 

fields at the back of the Foundling Hospital; a very solitary spot 

at that period, and quite deserted after dark.  The tavern stood at 

some distance from any high road, and was approachable only by a 

dark and narrow lane; so that Hugh was much surprised to find 

several people drinking there, and great merriment going on.  He 

was still more surprised to find among them almost every face that 

had caught his attention in the crowd; but his companion having 

whispered him outside the door, that it was not considered good 

manners at The Boot to appear at all curious about the company, he 

kept his own counsel, and made no show of recognition.



Before putting his lips to the liquor which was brought for them, 

Dennis drank in a loud voice the health of Lord George Gordon, 

President of the Great Protestant Association; which toast Hugh 

pledged likewise, with corresponding enthusiasm.  A fiddler who was 

present, and who appeared to act as the appointed minstrel of the 

company, forthwith struck up a Scotch reel; and that in tones so 

invigorating, that Hugh and his friend (who had both been drinking 

before) rose from their seats as by previous concert, and, to the 

great admiration of the assembled guests, performed an 

extemporaneous No-Popery Dance.
