


Chapter 46





When Barnaby returned with the bread, the sight of the pious old 

pilgrim smoking his pipe and making himself so thoroughly at home, 

appeared to surprise even him; the more so, as that worthy person, 

instead of putting up the loaf in his wallet as a scarce and 

precious article, tossed it carelessly on the table, and producing 

his bottle, bade him sit down and drink.



'For I carry some comfort, you see,' he said.  'Taste that.  Is it 

good?'



The water stood in Barnaby's eyes as he coughed from the strength 

of the draught, and answered in the affirmative.



'Drink some more,' said the blind man; 'don't be afraid of it.  

You don't taste anything like that, often, eh?'



'Often!' cried Barnaby.  'Never!'



'Too poor?' returned the blind man with a sigh.  'Ay.  That's bad.  

Your mother, poor soul, would be happier if she was richer, 

Barnaby.'



'Why, so I tell her--the very thing I told her just before you came 

to-night, when all that gold was in the sky,' said Barnaby, drawing 

his chair nearer to him, and looking eagerly in his face.  'Tell 

me.  Is there any way of being rich, that I could find out?'



'Any way!  A hundred ways.'



'Ay, ay?' he returned.  'Do you say so?  What are they?--Nay, 

mother, it's for your sake I ask; not mine;--for yours, indeed.  

What are they?'



The blind man turned his face, on which there was a smile of 

triumph, to where the widow stood in great distress; and answered,



'Why, they are not to be found out by stay-at-homes, my good 

friend.'



'By stay-at-homes!' cried Barnaby, plucking at his sleeve.  'But I 

am not one.  Now, there you mistake.  I am often out before the 

sun, and travel home when he has gone to rest.  I am away in the 

woods before the day has reached the shady places, and am often 

there when the bright moon is peeping through the boughs, and 

looking down upon the other moon that lives in the water.  As I 

walk along, I try to find, among the grass and moss, some of that 

small money for which she works so hard and used to shed so many 

tears.  As I lie asleep in the shade, I dream of it--dream of 

digging it up in heaps; and spying it out, hidden under bushes; and 

seeing it sparkle, as the dew-drops do, among the leaves.  But I 

never find it.  Tell me where it is.  I'd go there, if the journey 

were a whole year long, because I know she would be happier when I 

came home and brought some with me.  Speak again.  I'll listen to 

you if you talk all night.'



The blind man passed his hand lightly over the poor fellow's face, 

and finding that his elbows were planted on the table, that his 

chin rested on his two hands, that he leaned eagerly forward, and 

that his whole manner expressed the utmost interest and anxiety, 

paused for a minute as though he desired the widow to observe this 

fully, and then made answer:



'It's in the world, bold Barnaby, the merry world; not in solitary 

places like those you pass your time in, but in crowds, and where 

there's noise and rattle.'



'Good! good!' cried Barnaby, rubbing his hands.  'Yes! I love 

that.  Grip loves it too.  It suits us both.  That's brave!'



'--The kind of places,' said the blind man, 'that a young fellow 

likes, and in which a good son may do more for his mother, and 

himself to boot, in a month, than he could here in all his life--

that is, if he had a friend, you know, and some one to advise 

with.'



'You hear this, mother?' cried Barnaby, turning to her with 

delight.  'Never tell me we shouldn't heed it, if it lay shining 

at out feet.  Why do we heed it so much now?  Why do you toil from 

morning until night?'



'Surely,' said the blind man, 'surely.  Have you no answer, widow?  

Is your mind,' he slowly added, 'not made up yet?'



'Let me speak with you,' she answered, 'apart.'



'Lay your hand upon my sleeve,' said Stagg, arising from the table; 

'and lead me where you will.  Courage, bold Barnaby.  We'll talk 

more of this: I've a fancy for you.  Wait there till I come back.  

Now, widow.'



She led him out at the door, and into the little garden, where they 

stopped.



'You are a fit agent,' she said, in a half breathless manner, 'and 

well represent the man who sent you here.'



'I'll tell him that you said so,' Stagg retorted.  'He has a regard 

for you, and will respect me the more (if possible) for your 

praise.  We must have our rights, widow.'



'Rights!  Do you know,' she said, 'that a word from me--'



'Why do you stop?' returned the blind man calmly, after a long 

pause.  'Do I know that a word from you would place my friend in 

the last position of the dance of life?  Yes, I do.  What of that?  

It will never be spoken, widow.'



'You are sure of that?'



'Quite--so sure, that I don't come here to discuss the question.  I 

say we must have our rights, or we must be bought off.  Keep to 

that point, or let me return to my young friend, for I have an 

interest in the lad, and desire to put him in the way of making his 

fortune.  Bah! you needn't speak,' he added hastily; 'I know what 

you would say: you have hinted at it once already.  Have I no 

feeling for you, because I am blind?  No, I have not.  Why do you 

expect me, being in darkness, to be better than men who have their 

sight--why should you?  Is the hand of Heaven more manifest in my 

having no eyes, than in your having two?  It's the cant of you 

folks to be horrified if a blind man robs, or lies, or steals; oh 

yes, it's far worse in him, who can barely live on the few 

halfpence that are thrown to him in streets, than in you, who can 

see, and work, and are not dependent on the mercies of the world.  

A curse on you!  You who have five senses may be wicked at your 

pleasure; we who have four, and want the most important, are to 

live and be moral on our affliction.  The true charity and justice 

of rich to poor, all the world over!'



He paused a moment when he had said these words, and caught the 

sound of money, jingling in her hand.



'Well?' he cried, quickly resuming his former manner.  'That should 

lead to something.  The point, widow?'



'First answer me one question,' she replied.  'You say he is close 

at hand.  Has he left London?'



'Being close at hand, widow, it would seem he has,' returned the 

blind man.



'I mean, for good?  You know that.'



'Yes, for good.  The truth is, widow, that his making a longer stay 

there might have had disagreeable consequences.  He has come away 

for that reason.'



'Listen,' said the widow, telling some money out, upon a bench 

beside them.  'Count.'



'Six,' said the blind man, listening attentively.  'Any more?'



'They are the savings,' she answered, 'of five years.  Six 

guineas.'



He put out his hand for one of the coins; felt it carefully, put it 

between his teeth, rung it on the bench; and nodded to her to 

proceed.



'These have been scraped together and laid by, lest sickness or 

death should separate my son and me.  They have been purchased at 

the price of much hunger, hard labour, and want of rest.  If you 

CAN take them--do--on condition that you leave this place upon the 

instant, and enter no more into that room, where he sits now, 

expecting your return.'



'Six guineas,' said the blind man, shaking his head, 'though of the 

fullest weight that were ever coined, fall very far short of twenty 

pounds, widow.'



'For such a sum, as you know, I must write to a distant part of the 

country.  To do that, and receive an answer, I must have time.'



'Two days?' said Stagg.



'More.'



'Four days?'



'A week.  Return on this day week, at the same hour, but not to the 

house.  Wait at the corner of the lane.'



'Of course,' said the blind man, with a crafty look, 'I shall find 

you there?'



'Where else can I take refuge?  Is it not enough that you have made 

a beggar of me, and that I have sacrificed my whole store, so 

hardly earned, to preserve this home?'



'Humph!' said the blind man, after some consideration.  'Set me 

with my face towards the point you speak of, and in the middle of 

the road.  Is this the spot?'



'It is.'



'On this day week at sunset.  And think of him within doors.--For 

the present, good night.'



She made him no answer, nor did he stop for any.  He went slowly 

away, turning his head from time to time, and stopping to listen, 

as if he were curious to know whether he was watched by any one.  

The shadows of night were closing fast around, and he was soon lost 

in the gloom.  It was not, however, until she had traversed the 

lane from end to end, and made sure that he was gone, that she re-

entered the cottage, and hurriedly barred the door and window.



'Mother!' said Barnaby.  'What is the matter?  Where is the blind 

man?'



'He is gone.'



'Gone!' he cried, starting up.  'I must have more talk with him.  

Which way did he take?'



'I don't know,' she answered, folding her arms about him.  'You 

must not go out to-night.  There are ghosts and dreams abroad.'



'Ay?' said Barnaby, in a frightened whisper.



'It is not safe to stir.  We must leave this place to-morrow.'



'This place!  This cottage--and the little garden, mother!'



'Yes!  To-morrow morning at sunrise.  We must travel to London; 

lose ourselves in that wide place--there would be some trace of us 

in any other town--then travel on again, and find some new abode.'



Little persuasion was required to reconcile Barnaby to anything 

that promised change.  In another minute, he was wild with delight; 

in another, full of grief at the prospect of parting with his 

friends the dogs; in another, wild again; then he was fearful of 

what she had said to prevent his wandering abroad that night, and 

full of terrors and strange questions.  His light-heartedness in 

the end surmounted all his other feelings, and lying down in his 

clothes to the end that he might be ready on the morrow, he soon 

fell fast asleep before the poor turf fire.



His mother did not close her eyes, but sat beside him, watching.  

Every breath of wind sounded in her ears like that dreaded footstep 

at the door, or like that hand upon the latch, and made the calm 

summer night, a night of horror.  At length the welcome day 

appeared.  When she had made the little preparations which were 

needful for their journey, and had prayed upon her knees with many 

tears, she roused Barnaby, who jumped up gaily at her summons.



His clothes were few enough, and to carry Grip was a labour of 

love.  As the sun shed his earliest beams upon the earth, they 

closed the door of their deserted home, and turned away.  The sky 

was blue and bright.  The air was fresh and filled with a thousand 

perfumes.  Barnaby looked upward, and laughed with all his heart.



But it was a day he usually devoted to a long ramble, and one of 

the dogs--the ugliest of them all--came bounding up, and jumping 

round him in the fulness of his joy.  He had to bid him go back in 

a surly tone, and his heart smote him while he did so.  The dog 

retreated; turned with a half-incredulous, half-imploring look; 

came a little back; and stopped.



It was the last appeal of an old companion and a faithful friend--

cast off.  Barnaby could bear no more, and as he shook his head and 

waved his playmate home, he burst into tears.



'Oh mother, mother, how mournful he will be when he scratches at 

the door, and finds it always shut!'



There was such a sense of home in the thought, that though her own 

eyes overflowed she would not have obliterated the recollection of 

it, either from her own mind or from his, for the wealth of the 

whole wide world.

