




  CHAPTER 31

  Queen Mab



  Next morning Stubb accosted Flask.

  "Such a queer dream, King-Post, I never had. You know the old

man's ivory leg, well I dreamed he kicked me with it; and when I tried

to kick back, upon my soul, my little man, I kicked my leg right

off! And then, presto! Ahab seemed a pyramid, and I like a blazing

fool, kept kicking at it. But what was still more curious, Flask-

you know how curious all dreams are- through all this rage that I

was in, I somehow seemed to be thinking to myself, that after all,

it was not much of an insult, that kick from Ahab. 'Why,' thinks I,

'what's the row? It's not a real leg, only a false one.' And there's a

mighty difference between a living thump and a dead thump. That's what

makes a blow from the hand, Flask, fifty times more savage to bear

than a blow from a cane. The living member- that makes the living

insult, my little man. And thinks I to myself all the while, mind,

while I was stubbing my silly toes against that cursed pyramid- so

confoundedly contradictory was it all, all the while, I say, I was

thinking to myself, 'what's his leg now, but a cane-. a whale-bone

cane. Yes,' thinks I, 'it was only a playful cudgelling- in fact, only

a whaleboning that he gave me- not a base kick. Besides,' thinks I,

'look at it once; why, the end of it- the foot part- what a small sort

of end it is; whereas, if a broad footed farmer kicked me, there's a

devilish broad insult. But this insult is whittled down to a point

only.' But now comes the greatest joke of the dream, Flask. While I

was battering away at the pyramid, a sort of badger-haired old merman,

with a hump on his back, takes me by the shoulders, and slews me

round. 'What are you 'bout?' says he. Slid! man, but I was frightened.

Such a phiz! But, somehow, next moment I was over the fright. 'What am

I about?' says I at last. 'And what business is that of yours, I

should like to know, Mr. Humpback? Do you want a kick?' By the lord,

Flask, I had no sooner said that, than he turned round his stern to

me, bent over, and dragging up a lot of seaweed he had for a clout-

what do you think, I saw?- why thunder alive, man, his stern was stuck

full of marlinspikes, with the points out. Says I on second thought,

'I guess I won't kick you, old fellow.' 'Wise Stubb,' said he, 'wise

Stubb;' and kept muttering it all the time, a sort of eating of his

gums like a chimney hag. Seeing he wasn't going to stop saying over

his 'wise Stubb, wise Stubb,' I thought I might as well fall to

kicking the pyramid again. But I had only just lifted my foot for

it, when he roared out, 'Stop that kicking!' 'Halloa,' says I, 'what's

the matter now, old fellow?' 'Look ye here,' says he; 'let's argue the

insult. Captain Ahab kicked ye, didn't he?' 'Yes, he did,' says I-

'right here it was.' 'Very good,' says he- 'he used his ivory leg,

didn't he?' 'Yes, he did,' says I. 'Well then,' says he, 'wise

Stubb, what have you to complain of? Didn't he kick with right good

will? it wasn't a common pitch pine leg he kicked with, was it? No,

you were kicked by a great man, and with a beautiful ivory leg, Stubb.

It's an honor; I consider it an honor. Listen, wise Stubb. In old

England the greatest lords think it great glory to be slapped by a

queen, and made garter-knights of; but, be your boast, Stubb, that

ye were kicked by old Ahab, and made a wise man of. Remember what I

say; be kicked by him; account his kicks honors; and on no account

kick back; for you can't help yourself, wise Stubb. Don't you see that

pyramid?' With that, he all of a sudden seemed somehow, in some

queer fashion, to swim off into the air. I snored; rolled over; and

there I was in my hammock! Now, what do you think of that dream,

Flask?"

  "I don't know; it seems a sort of foolish to me, tho.'"

  "May be; may be. But it's made a wise man of me, Flask. D'ye see

Ahab standing there, sideways looking over the stern? Well, the best

thing you can do, Flask, is to let the old man alone; never speak to

him, whatever he says. Halloa! What's that he shouts? Hark!"

  "Mast-head, there! Look sharp, all of ye! There are whales

hereabouts!

  If ye see a white one, split your lungs for him!

  "What do you think of that now, Flask? ain't there a small drop of

something queer about that, eh? A white whale- did ye mark that,

man? Look ye- there's something special in the wind. Stand by for

it, Flask. Ahab has that that's bloody on his mind. But, mum; he comes

this way."






  CHAPTER 32

  Cetology



  Already we are boldly launched upon the deep; but soon we shall be

lost in its unshored harborless immensities. Ere that come to pass;

ere the Pequod's weedy hull rolls side by side with the barnacled

hulls of the leviathan; at the outset it is but well to attend to a

matter almost indispensable to a thorough appreciative understanding

of the more special leviathanic revelations and allusions of all sorts

which are to follow.

  It is some systematized exhibition of the whale in his broad genera,

that I would now fain put before you. Yet is it no easy task. The

classification of the constituents of a chaos, nothing less is here

essayed. Listen to what the best and latest authorities have laid

down.

  "No branch of Zoology is so much involved as that which is

entitled Cetology," says Captain Scoresby, A.D. 1820.

  "It is not my intention, were it in my power, to enter into the

inquiry as to the true method of dividing the cetacea into groups

and families.... Utter confusion exists among the historians of this

animal" (sperm whale), says Surgeon Beale, A.D. 1839.

  "Unfitness to pursue our research in the unfathomable waters."

"Impenetrable veil covering our knowledge of the cetacea." "A field

strewn with thorns." "All these incomplete indications but serve to

torture us naturalists."

  Thus speak of the whale, the great Cuvier, and John Hunter, and

Lesson, those lights of zoology and anatomy. Nevertheless, though of

real knowledge there be little, yet of books there are a plenty; and

so in some small degree, with cetology, or the science of whales. Many

are the men, small and great, old and new, landsmen and seamen, who

have at large or in little, written of the whale. Run over a few:- The

Authors of the Bible; Aristotle; Pliny; Aldrovandi; Sir Thomas Browne;

Gesner; Ray; Linnaeus; Rondeletius; Willoughby; Green; Artedi;

Sibbald; Brisson; Marten; Lacepede; Bonneterre; Desmarest; Baron

Cuvier; Frederick Cuvier; John Hunter; Owen; Scoresby; Beale; Bennett;

J. Ross Browne; the Author of Miriam Coffin; Olmstead; and the Rev. T.

Cheever. But to what ultimate generalizing purpose all these have

written, the above cited extracts will show.

  Of the names in this list of whale authors only those following Owen

ever saw living whales; and but one of them was a real professional

harpooneer and whaleman. I mean Captain Scoresby. On the separate

subject of the Greenland or right-whale, he is the best existing

authority. But Scoresby knew nothing and says nothing of the great

sperm whale, compared with which the Greenland whale is almost

unworthy mentioning. And here be it said, that the Greenland whale

is an usurper upon the throne of the seas. He is not even by any means

the largest of the whales. Yet, owing to the long priority of his

claims, and the profound ignorance which till some seventy years back,

invested the then fabulous or utterly unknown sperm-whale, and which

ignorance to this present day still reigns in all but some few

scientific retreats and whale-ports; this usurpation has been every

way complete. Reference to nearly all the leviathanic allusions in the

great poets of past days, will satisfy you that the Greenland whale,

without one rival, was to them the monarch of the seas. But the time

has at last come for a new proclamation. This is Charing Cross; hear

ye! good people all,- the Greenland whale is deposed,- the great sperm

whale now reigneth!

  There are only two books in being which at all pretend to put the

living sperm whale before you, and at the same time, in the remotest

degree succeed in the attempt. Those books are Beale's and

Bennett's; both in their time surgeons to the English South-Sea

whale-ships, and both exact and reliable men. The original matter

touching the sperm whale to be found in their volumes is necessarily

small; but so far as it goes, it is of excellent quality, though

mostly confined to scientific description. As yet, however, the

sperm whale, scientific or poetic, lives not complete in any

literature. Far above all other hunted whales, his is an unwritten

life.

  Now the various species of whales need some sort of popular

comprehensive classification, if only an easy outline one for the

present, hereafter to be filled in all-outward its departments by

subsequent laborers. As no better man advances to take this matter

in hand, I hereupon offer my own poor endeavors. I promise nothing

complete; because any human thing supposed to be complete must for

that very reason infallibly be faulty. I shall not pretend to a minute

anatomical description of the various species, or- in this space at

least- to much of any description. My object here is simply to project

the draught of a systematization of cetology. I am the architect,

not the builder.

  But it is a ponderous task; no ordinary letter-sorter in the

Post-Office is equal to it. To grope down into the bottom of the sea

after them; to have one's hands among the unspeakable foundations,

ribs, and very pelvis of the world; this is a fearful thing. What am I

that I should essay to hook the nose of this leviathan! The awful

tauntings in Job might well appal me. "Will he (the leviathan) make

a covenant with thee? Behold the hope of him is vain! But I have

swam through libraries and sailed through oceans; I have had to do

with whales with these visible hands; I am in earnest; and I will try.

There are some preliminaries to settle.

  First: The uncertain, unsettled condition of this science of

Cetology is in the very vestibule attested by the fact, that in some

quarters it still remains a moot point whether a whale be a fish. In

his System of Nature, A.D. 1776, Linnaeus declares, "I hereby separate

the whales from the fish." But of my own knowledge, I know that down

to the year 1850, sharks and shad, alewives and herring, against

Linnaeus's express edict, were still found dividing the possession

of the same seas with the Leviathan.

  The grounds upon which Linnaeus would fain have banished the

whales from the waters, he states as follows: "On account of their

warm bilocular heart, their lungs, their moveable eyelids, their

hollow ears, penem intrantem feminam mammis lactantem," and finally,

"ex lege naturae jure meritoque." I submitted all this to my friends

Simeon Macey and Charley Coffin, of Nantucket, both messmates of

mine in a certain voyage, and they united in the opinion that the

reasons set forth were altogether insufficient. Charley profanely

hinted they were humbug.

  Be it known that, waiving all argument, I take the good old

fashioned ground that the whale is a fish, and call upon holy Jonah to

back me. This fundamental thing settled, the next point is, in what

internal respect does the whale differ from other fish. Above,

Linnaeus has given you those items. But in brief they are these: lungs

and warm blood; whereas, all other fish are lungless and cold blooded.

  Next: how shall we define the whale, by his obvious externals, so as

conspicuously to label him for all time to come. To be short, then,

a whale is a spouting fish with a horizontal tail. There you have him.

However contracted, that definition is the result of expanded

meditation. A walrus spouts much like a whale, but the walrus is not a

fish, because he is amphibious. But the last term of the definition is

still more cogent, as coupled with the first. Almost any one must have

noticed that all the fish familiar to landsmen have not a flat, but

a vertical, or up-and-down tail. Whereas, among spouting fish the

tail, though it may be similarly shaped, invariably assumes a

horizontal position.

  By the above definition of what a whale is, I do by no means exclude

from the leviathanic brotherhood any sea creature hitherto

identified with the whale by the best informed Nantucketers; nor, on

the other hand, link with it any fish hitherto authoritatively

regarded as alien.* Hence, all the smaller, spouting and horizontal

tailed fish must be included in this ground-plan of cetology. Now,

then, come the grand divisions of the entire whale host.



  *I am aware that down to the present time, the fish styled

Lamatins and Dugongs (Pig-fish and Sow-fish of the Coffins of

Nantucket) are included by many naturalists among the whales. But as

these pig-fish are a noisy, contemptible set, mostly lurking in the

mouths of rivers, and feeding on wet hay, and especially as they do

not spout, I deny their credentials as whales; and have presented them

with their passports to quit the Kingdom of Cetology.



  First: According to magnitude I divide the whales into three primary

BOOKS (subdivisible into CHAPTERS), and these shall comprehend them

all, both small and large.

  I. THE FOLIO WHALE; II. the OCTAVO WHALE; III. the DUODECIMO WHALE.

  As the type of the FOLIO I present the Sperm Whale; of the OCTAVO,

the Grampus; of the DUODECIMO, the Porpoise.

  FOLIOS. Among these I here include the following chapters:- I. The

Sperm Whale; II. the Right Whale; III. the Fin Back Whale; IV. the

Humpbacked Whale; V. the Razor Back Whale; VI. the Sulphur Bottom

Whale.

  BOOK I. (Folio), CHAPTER I. (Sperm Whale).- This whale, among the

English of old vaguely known as the Trumpa whale and the Physeter

whale, and the Anvil Headed whale, is the present Cachalot of the

French, and the Pottsfich of the Germans, and the Macrocephalus of the

Long Words. He is, without doubt, the largest inhabitant of the globe;

the most formidable of all whales to encounter; the most majestic in

aspect; and lastly, by far the most valuable in commerce; he being the

only creature from which that valuable substance, spermaceti, is

obtained. All his peculiarities will, in many other places, be

enlarged upon. It is chiefly with his name that I now have to do.

Philologically considered, it is absurd. Some centuries ago, when

the sperm whale was almost wholly unknown in his own proper

individuality, and when his oil was only accidentally obtained from

the stranded fish; in those days spermaceti, it would seem, was

popularly supposed to be derived from a creature identical with the

one then known in England as the Greenland or Right Whale. It was

the idea also, that this same spermaceti was that quickening humor

of the Greenland Whale which the first syllable of the word

literally expresses. In those times, also, spermaceti was

exceedingly scarce, not being used for light, but only as an

ointment and medicament. It was only to be had from the druggists as

you nowadays buy an ounce of rhubarb. When, as I opine, in the

course of time, the true nature of spermaceti became known, its

original name was still retained by the dealers; no doubt to enhance

its value by a notion so strangely significant of its scarcity. And so

the appellation must at last have come to be bestowed upon the whale

from which this spermaceti was really derived.

  BOOK I. (Folio), CHAPTER II. (Right Whale).- In one respect this

is the most venerable of the leviathans, being the one first regularly

hunted by man. It yields the article commonly known as whalebone or

baleen; and the oil specially known as "whale oil," an inferior

article in commerce. Among the fishermen, he is indiscriminately

designated by all the following titles: The Whale; the Greenland

Whale; the Black Whale; the Great Whale; the True Whale; the Right

Whale. There is a deal of obscurity concerning the Identity of the

species thus multitudinously baptized. What then is the whale, which I

include in the second species of my Folios? It is the Great Mysticetus

of the English naturalists; the Greenland Whale of the English

whaleman; the Baliene Ordinaire of the French whalemen; the

Growlands Walfish of the Swedes. It is the whale which for more than

two centuries past has been hunted by the Dutch and English in the

Arctic seas; it is the whale which the American fishermen have long

pursued in the Indian ocean, on the Brazil Banks, on the Nor' West

Coast, and various other parts of the world, designated by them

Right Whale Cruising Grounds.

  Some pretend to see a difference between the Greenland whale of

the English and the right whale of the Americans. But they precisely

agree in all their grand features; nor has there yet been presented

a single determinate fact upon which to ground a radical

distinction. It is by endless subdivisions based upon the most

inconclusive differences, that some departments of natural history

become so repellingly intricate. The right whale will be elsewhere

treated of at some length, with reference to elucidating the sperm

whale.

  BOOK I. (Folio), CHAPTER III. (Fin-Back).- Under this head I

reckon a monster which, by the various names of Fin-Back,

Tall-Spout, and Long-John, has been seen almost in every sea and is

commonly the whale whose distant jet is so often descried by

passengers crossing the Atlantic, in the New York packet-tracks. In

the length he attains, and in his baleen, the Fin-back resembles the

right whale, but is of a less portly girth, and a lighter color,

approaching to olive. His great lips present a cable-like aspect,

formed by the intertwisting, slanting folds of large wrinkles. His

grand distinguishing feature, the fin, from which he derives his name,

is often a conspicuous object. This fin is some three or four feet

long, growing vertically from the hinder part of the back, of an

angular shape, and with a very sharp pointed end. Even if not the

slightest other part of the creature be visible, this isolated fin

will, at times, be seen plainly projecting from the surface. When

the sea is moderately calm, and slightly marked with spherical

ripples, and this gnomon-like fin stands up and casts shadows upon the

wrinkled surface, it may well be supposed that the watery circle

surrounding it somewhat resembles a dial, with its style and wavy

hour-lines graved on it. On that Ahaz-dial the shadow often goes back.

The Fin-Back is not gregarious. He seems a whale-hater, as some men

are man-haters. Very shy; always going solitary; unexpectedly rising

to the surface in the remotest and most sullen waters; his straight

and single lofty jet rising like a tall misanthropic spear upon a

barren plain; gifted with such wondrous power and velocity in

swimming, as to defy all present pursuit from man; this leviathan

seems the banished and unconquerable Cain of his race, bearing for his

mark that style upon his back. From having the baleen in his mouth,

the Fin-Back is sometimes included with the right whale, among a

theoretic species denominated Whalebone whales, that is, whales with

baleen. Of these so-called Whalebone whales, there would seem to be

several varieties, most of which, however, are little known.

Broad-nosed whales and beaked whales; pike-headed whales; bunched

whales; under-jawed whales and rostrated whales, are the fisherman's

names for a few sorts.

  In connexion with this appellative of "Whalebone whales," it is of

great importance to mention, that however such a nomenclature may be

convenient in facilitating allusions to some kind of whales, yet it is

in vain to attempt a clear classification of the Leviathan, founded

upon either his baleen, or hump, or fin, or teeth; notwithstanding

that those marked parts or features very obviously seem better adapted

to afford the basis for a regular system of Cetology than any other

detached bodily distinctions, which the whale, in his kinds, presents.

How then? The baleen, hump, back-fin, and teeth; these are things

whose peculiarities are indiscriminately dispersed among all sorts

of whales, without any record to what may be the nature of their

structure in other and more essential particulars. Thus, the sperm

whale and the humpbacked whale, each has a hump; but there the

similitude ceases. Then this same humpbacked whale and the Greenland

whale, each of these has baleen; but there again the similitude

ceases. And it is just the same with the other parts above

mentioned. In various sorts of whales, they form such irregular

combinations; or, in the case of any one of them detached, such an

irregular isolation; as utterly to defy all general methodization

formed upon such a basis. On this rock every one of the

whale-naturalists has split.

  But it may possibly be conceived that, in the internal parts of

the whale, in his anatomy- there, at least, we shall be able to hit

the right classification. Nay; what thing, for example, is there in

the Greenland whale's anatomy more striking than his baleen? Yet we

have seen that by his baleen it is impossible correctly to classify

the Greenland whale. And if you descend into the bowels of the various

leviathans, why there you will not find distinctions a fiftieth part

as available to the systematizer as those external ones already

enumerated. What then remains? nothing but to take hold of the

whales bodily, in their entire liberal volume, and boldly sort them

that way. And this is the Bibliographical system here adopted; and

it is the only one that can possibly succeed, for it alone is

practicable. To proceed.

  BOOK I. (Folio) CHAPTER IV. (Hump Back).- This whale is often seen

on the northern American coast. He has been frequently captured there,

and towed into harbor. He has a great pack on him like a peddler; or

you might call him the Elephant and Castle whale. At any rate, the

popular name for him does not sufficiently distinguish him, since

the sperm whale also has a hump though a smaller one. His oil is not

very valuable. He has baleen. He is the most gamesome and

light-hearted of all the whales, making more gay foam and white

water generally than any other of them.

  BOOK I. (Folio), CHAPTER V. (Razar Back).- Of this whale little is

known but his name. I have seen him at a distance off Cape Horn. Of

a retiring nature, he eludes both hunters and philosophers. Though

no coward, he has never yet shown any part of him but his back,

which rises in a long sharp ridge. Let him go. I know little more of

him, nor does anybody else.

  BOOK I. (Folio), CHAPTER VI. (Sulphur Bottom).- Another retiring

gentleman, with a brimstone belly, doubtless got by scraping along the

Tartarian tiles in some of his profounder divings. He is seldom

seen; at least I have never seen him except in the remoter southern

seas, and then always at too great a distance to study his

countenance. He is never chased; he would run away with rope-walks

of line. Prodigies are told of him. Adieu, Sulphur Bottom! I can say

nothing more that is true of ye, nor can the oldest Nantucketer.

  Thus ends BOOK I. (Folio), and now begins BOOK II. (Octavo).

  OCTAVOES.* These embrace the whales of middling magnitude, among

which present may be numbered:- I., the Grampus; II., the Black

Fish; III., the Narwhale; IV., the Thrasher; V., the Killer.



  *Why this book of whales is not denominated the Quarto is very

plain. Because, while the whales of this order, though smaller than

those of the former order, nevertheless retain a proportionate

likeness to them in figure, yet the bookbinder's Quarto volume in

its dimensioned form does not preserve the shape of the Folio

volume, but the Octavo volume does.



  BOOK II. (Octavo), CHAPTER I. (Grampus).- Though this fish, whose

loud sonorous breathing, or rather blowing, has furnished a proverb to

landsmen, is so well known a denizen of the deep, yet is he not

popularly classed among whales. But possessing all the grand

distinctive features of the leviathan, most naturalists have

recognised him for one. He is of moderate octave size, varying from

fifteen to twenty-five feet in length, and of corresponding dimensions

round the waist. He swims in herds; he is never regularly hunted,

though his oil is considerable in quantity, and pretty good for light.

By some fishermen his approach is regarded as premonitory of the

advance of the great sperm whale.

  BOOK II. (Octavo), CHAPTER II. (Black Fish).- I give the popular

fishermen's names for all these fish, for generally they are the best.

Where any name happens to be vague or inexpressive, I shall say so,

and suggest another. I do so now touching the Black Fish, so called

because blackness is the rule among almost all whales. So, call him

the Hyena Whale, if you please. His voracity is well known and from

the circumstance that the inner angles of his lips are curved upwards,

he carries an everlasting Mephistophelean grin on his face. This whale

averages some sixteen or eighteen feet in length. He is found in

almost all latitudes. He has a peculiar way of showing his dorsal

hooked fin in swimming, which looks something like a Roman nose.

When not more profitably employed, the sperm whale hunters sometimes

capture the Hyena whale, to keep up the supply of cheap oil for

domestic employment- as some frugal housekeepers, in the absence of

company, and quite alone by themselves, burn unsavory tallow instead

of odorous wax. Though their blubber is very thin, some of these

whales will yield you upwards of thirty gallons of oil.

  BOOK II. (Octavo), CHAPTER III. (Narwhale), that is, Nostril whale.-

Another instance of a curiously named whale, so named I suppose from

his peculiar horn being originally mistaken for a peaked nose. The

creature is some sixteen feet in length, while its horn averages

five feet, though some exceed ten, and even attain to fifteen feet.

Strictly speaking, this horn is but a lengthened tusk, growing out

from the jaw in a line a little depressed from the horizontal. But

it is only found on the sinister side, which has an ill effect, giving

its owner something analogous to the aspect of a clumsy left-handed

man. What precise purpose this ivory horn or lance answers, it would

be hard to say. It does not seem to be used like the blade of the

sword-fish and bill-fish; though some sailors tell me that the

Narwhale employs it for a rake in turning over the bottom of the sea

for food. Charley Coffin said it was used for an ice-piercer; for

the Narwhale, rising to the surface of the Polar Sea, and finding it

sheeted with ice, thrusts his horn up, and so breaks through. But

you cannot prove either of these surmises to be correct. My own

opinion is, that however this one-sided horn may really be used by the

Narwhale- however that may be- it would certainly be very convenient

to him for a folder in reading pamphlets. The Narwhale I have heard

called the Tusked whale, the Horned whale, and the Unicorn whale. He

is certainly a curious example of the Unicornism to be found in almost

every kingdom of animated nature. From certain cloistered old

authors I have gathered that this same sea-unicorn's horn was in

ancient days regarded as the great antidote against poison, and as

such, preparations of it brought immense prices. It was also distilled

to a volatile salts for fainting ladies the same way that the horns of

the male deer are manufactured into hartshorn. Originally it was in

itself accounted an object of great curiosity. Black Letter tells me

that Sir Martin Frobisher on his return from that voyage, when Queen

Bess did gallantly wave her jewelled hand to him from a window of

Greenwich Palace, as his bold ship sailed down the Thames; "when Sir

Martin returned from that voyage," saith Black Letter, "on bended

knees he presented to her highness a prodigious long horn of the

Narwhale, which for a long period after hung in the castle at

Windsor." An Irish author avers that the Earl of Leicester, on

bended knees, did likewise present to her highness another horn,

pertaining to a land beast of the unicorn nature.

  The Narwhale has a very picturesque, leopard-like look, being of a

milk-white ground color, dotted with round and oblong spots of

black. His oil is very superior, clear and fine; but there is little

of it, and he is seldom hunted. He is mostly found in the

circumpolar seas.

  BOOK II. (Octavo), CHAPTER IV. (Killer).- Of this whale little is

precisely known to the Nantucketer, and nothing at all to the

professed naturalists. From what I have seen of him at a distance, I

should say that he was about the bigness of a grampus. He is very

savage- a sort of Feegee fish. He sometimes takes the great Folio

whales by the lip, and hangs there like a leech, till the mighty brute

is worried to death. The Killer is never hunted. I never heard what

sort of oil he has. Exception might be taken to the name bestowed upon

this whale, on the ground of its indistinctness. For we are all

killers, on land and on sea; Bonapartes and Sharks included.

  BOOK II. (Octavo), CHAPTER V. (Thrasher).- This gentleman is

famous for his tail which he uses for a ferule in thrashing his

foes. He mounts the Folio whale's back, and as he swims, he works

his passage by flogging him; as some schoolmasters get along in the

world by a similar process. Still less is known of the Thrasher than

of the Killer. Both are outlaws, even in the lawless seas.

  Thus ends BOOK II. (Octavo), and begins BOOK III, (Duodecimo.)

  DUODECIMOES.- These include the smaller whales. I. The Huzza

Porpoise. II. The Algerine Porpoise. III. The Mealy-mouthed Porpoise.

  To those who have not chanced specially to study the subject, it may

possibly seem strange, that fishes not commonly exceeding four or five

feet should be marshalled among WHALES- a word, which, in the

popular sense, always conveys an idea of hugeness. But the creatures

set down above as Duodecimoes are infallibly whales, by the terms of

my definition of what a whale is- i.e. a spouting fish, with a

horizontal tail.

  BOOK III. (Duodecimo), CHAPTER 1. (Huzza Porpoise).- This is the

common porpoise found all over the globe. The name is of my own

bestowal; for there are more than one sort of porpoises, and something

must be done to distinguish them. I call him thus, because he always

swims in hilarious shoals, which upon the broad sea keep tossing

themselves to heaven like caps in a Fourth-of-July crowd. Their

appearance is generally hailed with delight by the mariner. Full of

fine spirits, they invariably come from the breezy billows to

windward. They are the lads that always live before the wind. They are

accounted a lucky omen. If you yourself can withstand three cheers

at beholding these vivacious fish, then heaven help ye; the spirit

of godly gamesomeness is not in ye. A well-fed, plump Huzza Porpoise

will yield you one good gallon of good oil. But the fine and

delicate fluid extracted from his jaws is exceedingly valuable. It

is in request among jewellers and watchmakers. Sailors put in on their

hones. Porpoise meat is good eating, you know. It may never have

occurred to you that a porpoise spouts. Indeed, his spout is so

small that it is not very readily discernible. But the next time you

have a chance, watch him; and you will then see the great Sperm

whale himself in miniature.

  BOOK III. (Duodecimo), CHAPTER II. (Algerine Porpoise).- A pirate.

Very savage. He is only found, I think, in the Pacific. He is somewhat

larger than the Huzza Porpoise, but much of the same general make.

Provoke him, and he will buckle to a shark. I have lowered for him

many times, but never yet saw him captured.

  BOOK III. (Duodecimo), CHAPTER III. (Mealy-mouthed Porpoise).- The

largest kind of Porpoise; and only found in the Pacific, so far as

it is known. The only English name, by which he has hitherto been

designated, is that of the fisher- Right-Whale Porpoise, from the

circumstance that he is chiefly found in the vicinity of that Folio.

In shape, he differs in some degree from the Huzza Porpoise, being

of a less rotund and jolly girth; indeed, he is of quite a neat and

gentleman-like figure. He has no fins on his back (most other

porpoises have), he has a lovely tail, and sentimental Indian eyes

of a hazel hue. But his mealy-mouth spoils him. Though his entire back

down to his side fins is of a deep sable, yet a boundary line,

distinct as the mark in a ship's hull, called the "bright waist," that

line streaks him from stem to stern, with two separate colors, black

above and white below. The white comprises part of his head, and the

whole of his mouth, which makes him look as if he had just escaped

from a felonious visit to a meal-bag. A most mean and mealy aspect!

His oil is much like that of the common porpoise.



  Beyond the DUODECIMO, this system does not proceed, inasmuch as

the Porpoise is the smallest of the whales. Above, you have all the

Leviathans of note. But there are a rabble of uncertain, fugitive,

half-fabulous whales, which, as an American whaleman, I know by

reputation, but not personally. I shall enumerate them by their

fore-castle appellations; for possibly such a list may be valuable

to future investigators, who may complete what I have here but

begun. If any of the following whales, shall hereafter be caught and

marked, then he can readily be incorporated into this System,

according to his Folio, Octavo, or Duodecimo magnitude:- The

Bottle-Nose Whale; the Junk Whale; the Pudding-Headed Whale; the

Cape Whale; the Leading Whale; the Cannon Whale; the Scragg Whale; the

Coppered Whale; the Elephant Whale; the Iceberg Whale; the Quog Whale;

the Blue Whale; &c. From Icelandic, Dutch, and old English

authorities, there might be quoted other lists of uncertain whales,

blessed with all manner of uncouth names. But I omit them as

altogether obsolete; and can hardly help suspecting them for mere

sounds, full of Leviathanism, but signifying nothing.

  Finally: It was stated at the outset, that this system would not

be here, and at once, perfected. You cannot but plainly see that I

have kept my word. But I now leave my cetological System standing thus

unfinished, even as the great Cathedral of Cologne was left, with

the cranes still standing upon the top of the uncompleted tower. For

small erections may be finished by their first architects; grand ones,

true ones, ever leave the copestone to posterity. God keep me from

ever completing anything. This whole book is but a draught- nay, but

the draught of a draught. Oh, Time, Strength, Cash, and Patience!






  CHAPTER 33

  The Specksynder



  Concerning the officers of the whale-craft, this seems as good a

place as any to set down a little domestic peculiarity on

ship-board, arising from the existence of the harpooneer class of

officers, a class unknown of course in any other marine than the

whale-fleet.

  The large importance attached to the harpooneer's vocation is

evinced by the fact, that originally in the old Dutch Fishery, two

centuries and more ago, the command of a whale-ship was not wholly

lodged in the person now called the captain, but was divided between

him and an officer called the Specksynder. Literally this word means

Fat-Cutter; usage, however, in time made it equivalent to Chief

Harpooneer. In those days, the captain's authority was restricted to

the navigation and general management of the vessel; while over the

whale-hunting department and all its concerns, the Specksynder or

Chief Harpooneer reigned supreme. In the British Greenland Fishery,

under the corrupted title of Specksioneer, this old Dutch official

is still retained, but his former dignity is sadly abridged. At

present he ranks simply as senior Harpooneer; and as such, is but

one of the captain's more inferior subalterns. Nevertheless, as upon

the good conduct of the harpooneers the success of a whaling voyage

largely depends, and since in the American Fishery he is not only an

important officer in the boat, but under certain circumstances

(night watches on a whaling ground) the command of the ship's deck

is also his; therefore the grand political maxim of the sea demands,

that he should nominally live apart from the men before the mast,

and be in some way distinguished as their professional superior;

though always, by them, familiarly regarded as their social equal.

  Now, the grand distinction between officer and man at sea, is

this- the first lives aft, the last forward. Hence, in whale-ships and

merchantmen alike, the mates have their quarters with the captain; and

so, too, in most of the American whalers the harpooneers are lodged in

the after part of the ship. That is to say, they take their meals in

the captain's cabin, and sleep in a place indirectly communicating

with it.

  Though the long period of a Southern whaling voyage (by far the

longest of all voyages now or ever made by man), the peculiar perils

of it, and the community of interest prevailing among a company, all

of whom, high or low, depend for their profits, not upon fixed

wages, but upon their common luck, together with their common

vigilance, intrepidity, and hard work; though all these things do in

some cases tend to beget a less rigorous discipline than in

merchantmen generally; yet, never mind how much like an old

Mesopotamian family these whalemen may, in some primitive instances,

live together; for all that, the punctilious externals, at least, of

the quarter-deck are seldom materially relaxed, and in no instance

done away. Indeed, many are the Nantucket ships in which you will

see the skipper parading his quarter-deck with an elated grandeur

not surpassed in any military navy; nay, extorting almost as much

outward homage as if he wore the imperial purple, and not the

shabbiest of pilot-cloth.

  And though of all men the moody captain of the Pequod was the

least given to that sort of shallowest assumption; and though the only

homage he ever exacted, was implicit, instantaneous obedience;

though he required no man to remove the shoes from his feet ere

stepping upon the quarter-deck; and though there were times when,

owing to peculiar circumstances connected with events hereafter to

be detailed, he addressed them in unusual terms, whether of

condescension or in terrorem, or otherwise; yet even Captain Ahab

was by no means unobservant of the paramount forms and usages of the

sea.

  Nor, perhaps, will it fail to be eventually perceived, that behind

those forms and usages, as it were, he sometimes masked himself;

incidentally making use of them for other and more private ends than

they were legitimately intended to subserve. That certain sultanism of

his brain, which had otherwise in a good degree remained unmanifested;

through those forms that same sultanism became incarnate in an

irresistible dictatorship. For be a man's intellectual superiority

what it will, it can never assume the practical, available supremacy

over other men, without the aid of some sort of external arts and

entrenchments, always, in themselves, more or less paltry and base.

This it is, that for ever keeps God's true princes of the Empire

from the world's hustings; and leaves the highest honors that this air

can give, to those men who become famous more through their infinite

inferiority to the choice hidden handful of the Divine Inert, than

through their undoubted superiority over the dead level of the mass.

Such large virtue lurks in these small things when extreme political

superstitions invest them, that in some royal instances even to

idiot imbecility they have imparted potency. But when, as in the

case of Nicholas the Czar, the ringed crown of geographical empire

encircles an imperial brain; then, the plebeian herds crouch abased

before the tremendous centralization. Nor, will the tragic dramatist

who would depict mortal indomitableness in its fullest sweep and

direct swing, ever forget a hint, incidentally so important in his

art, as the one now alluded to.

  But Ahab, my Captain, still moves before me in all his Nantucket

grimness and shagginess; and in this episode touching Emperors and

Kings, I must not conceal that I have only to do with a poor old

whale-hunter like him; and, therefore, all outward majestical

trappings and housings are denied me. Oh, Ahab! what shall be grand in

thee, it must needs be plucked at from the skies, and dived for in the

deep, and featured in the unbodied air!






  CHAPTER 34

  The Cabin-Table



  It is noon; and Dough-Boy, the steward, thrusting his pale

loaf-of-bread face from the cabin-scuttle, announces dinner to his

lord and master who, sitting in the lee quarter-boat, has just been

taking an observation of the sun; and is now mutely reckoning the

latitude on the smooth, medallion-shaped tablet, reserved for that

daily purpose on the upper part of his ivory leg. From his complete

inattention to the tidings, you would think that moody Ahab had not

heard his menial. But presently, catching hold of the mizen shrouds,

he swings himself to the deck, and in an even, unexhilarated voice,

saying, "Dinner, Mr. Starbuck," disappears into the cabin.

  When the last echo of his sultan's step has died away, and Starbuck,

the first Emir, has every reason to suppose that he is seated, then

Starbuck rouses from his quietude, takes a few turns along the planks,

and, after a grave peep into the binnacle, says, with some touch of

pleasantness, "Dinner, Mr. Stubb," and descends the scuttle. The

second Emir lounges about the rigging awhile, and then slightly

shaking the main brace, to see whether it will be all right with

that important rope, he likewise takes up the old burden, and with a

rapid "Dinner, Mr. Flask," follows after his predecessors.

  But the third Emir, now seeing himself all alone on the

quarter-deck, seems to feel relieved from some curious restraint; for,

tipping all sorts of knowing winks in all sorts of directions, and

kicking off his shoes, he strikes into a sharp but noiseless squall of

a hornpipe right over the Grand Turk's head; and then, by a

dexterous sleight, pitching his cap up into the mizentop for a

shelf, he goes down rollicking so far at least as he remains visible

from the deck, reversing all other processions, by bringing up the

rear with music. But ere stepping into the cabin doorway below, he

pauses, ships a new face altogether, and, then, independent, hilarious

little Flask enters King Ahab's presence, in the character of

Abjectus, or the Slave.

  It is not the least among the strange things bred by the intense

artificialness of sea-usages, that while in the open air of the deck

some officers will, upon provocation, bear themselves boldly and

defyingly enough towards their commander; yet, ten to one, let those

very officers the next moment go down to their customary dinner in

that same commander's cabin, and straightway their inoffensive, not to

say deprecatory and humble air towards him, as he sits at the head

of the table; this is marvellous, sometimes most comical. Wherefore

this difference? A problem? Perhaps not. To have been Belshazzar, King

of Babylon; and to have been Belshazzar, not haughtily but

courteously, therein certainly must have been some touch of mundane

grandeur. But he who in the rightly regal and intelligent spirit

presides over his own private dinner-table of invited guests, that

man's unchallenged power and dominion of individual influence for

the time; that man's royalty of state transcends Belshazzar's, for

Belshazzar was not the greatest. Who has but once dined his friends,

has tasted what it is to be Caesar. It is a witchery of social

czarship which there is no withstanding. Now, if to this consideration

you super-add the official supremacy of a ship-master, then, by

inference, you will derive the cause of that peculiarity of sea-life

just mentioned.

  Over his ivory-inlaid table, Ahab presided like a mute, maned

sea-lion on the white coral beach, surrounded by his war-like but

still deferential cubs. In his own proper turn, each officer waited to

be served. They were as little children before Ahab; and yet, in Ahab,

there seemed not to lurk the smallest social arrogance. With one mind,

their intent eyes all fastened upon the old man's knife, as he

carved the chief dish before him. I do not suppose that for the

world they would have profaned that moment with the slightest

observation, even upon so neutral a topic as the weather. No! And when

reaching out his knife and fork, between which the slice of beef was

locked, Ahab thereby motioned Starbuck's plate towards him, the mate

received his meat as though receiving alms; and cut it tenderly; and a

little started if, perchance, the knife grazed against the plate;

and chewed it noiselessly; and swallowed it, not without

circumspection. For, like the Coronation banquet at Frankfort, where

the German Emperor profoundly dines with the seven imperial

electors, so these cabin meals were somehow solemn meals, eaten in

awful silence; and yet at table old Ahab forbade not conversation;

only he himself was dumb. What a relief it was to choking Stubb,

when a rat made a sudden racket in the hold below. And poor little

Flask, he was the youngest son, and little boy of this weary family

party. His were the shin-bones of the saline beef; his would have been

the drumsticks. For Flask to have presumed to help himself, this

must have seemed to him tantamount to larceny in the first degree. Had

he helped himself at the table, doubtless, never more would he have

been able to hold his head up in this honest world; nevertheless,

strange to say, Ahab never forbade him. And had Flask helped

himself, the chances were Ahab had never so much as noticed it.

Least of all, did Flask presume to help himself to butter. Whether

he thought the owners of the ship denied it to him, on account of

its clotting his clear, sunny complexion; or whether he deemed that,

on so long a voyage in such marketless waters, butter was at a

premium, and therefore was not for him, a subaltern; however it was,

Flask, alas! was a butterless man!

  Another thing. Flask was the last person down at the dinner, and

Flask is the first man up. Consider! For hereby Flask's dinner was

badly jammed in point of time. Starbuck and Stubb both had the start

of him; and yet they also have the privilege of lounging in the

rear. If Stubb even, who is but a peg higher than Flask, happens to

have but a small appetite, and soon shows symptoms of concluding his

repast, then Flask must bestir himself, he will not get more than

three mouthfuls that day; for it is against holy usage for Stubb to

precede Flask to the deck. Therefore it was that Flask once admitted

in private, that ever since he had arisen to the dignity of an

officer, from that moment he had never known what it was to be

otherwise than hungry, more or less. For what he ate did not so much

relieve his hunger, as keep it immortal in him. Peace and

satisfaction, thought Flask, have for ever departed from my stomach. I

am an officer; but, how I wish I could fish a bit of old-fashioned

beef in the fore-castle, as I used to when I was before the mast.

There's the fruit of promotion now; there's the vanity of glory:

there's the insanity of life! Besides, if it were so that any mere

sailor of the Pequod had a grudge against Flask in Flask's official

capacity, all that sailor had to do, in order to obtain ample

vengeance, was to go aft at dinnertime, and get a peep at Flask

through the cabin sky-light, sitting silly and dumfoundered before

awful Ahab.

  Now, Ahab and his three mates formed what may be called the first

table in the Pequod's cabin. After their departure, taking place in

inverted order to their arrival, the canvas cloth was cleared, or

rather was restored to some hurried order by the pallid steward. And

then the three harpooneers were bidden to the feast, they being its

residuary legatees. They made a sort of temporary servants' hall of

the high and mighty cabin.

  In strange contrast to the hardly tolerable constraint and

nameless invisible domineerings of the captain's table, was the entire

care-free license and ease, the almost frantic democracy of those

inferior fellows the harpooneers. While their masters, the mates,

seemed afraid of the sound of the hinges of their own jaws, the

harpooneers chewed their food with such a relish that there was a

report to it. They dined like lords; they filled their bellies like

Indian ships all day loading with spices. Such portentous appetites

had Queequeg and Tashtego, that to fill out the vacancies made by

the previous repast, often the pale Dough-Boy was fain to bring on a

great baron of salt-junk, seemingly quarried out of the solid ox.

And if he were not lively about it, if he did not go with a nimble

hop-skip-and-jump, then Tashtego had an ungentlemanly way of

accelerating him by darting a fork at his back, harpoon-wise. And once

Daggoo, seized with a sudden humor, assisted Dough-Boy's memory by

snatching him up bodily, and thrusting his head into a great empty

wooden trencher, while Tashtego, knife in hand, began laying out the

circle preliminary to scalping him. He was naturally a very nervous,

shuddering sort of little fellow, this bread-faced steward; the

progeny of a bankrupt baker and a hospital nurse. And what with the

standing spectacle of the black terrific Ahab, and the periodical

tumultuous visitations of these three savages, Dough-Boy's whole

life was one continual lip-quiver. Commonly, after seeing the

harpooneers furnished with all things they demanded, he would escape

from their clutches into his little pantry adjoining, and fearfully

peep out at them through the blinds of its door, till all was over.

  It was a sight to see Queequeg seated over against Tashtego,

opposing his filed teeth to the Indian's; crosswise to them, Daggoo

seated on the floor, for a bench would have brought his

hearse-plumed head to the low carlines; at every motion of his

colossal limbs, making the low cabin framework to shake, as when an

African elephant goes passenger in a ship. But for all this, the great

negro was wonderfully abstemious, not to say dainty. It seemed

hardly possible that by such comparatively small mouthfuls he could

keep up the vitality diffused through so broad, baronial, and superb a

person. But, doubtless, this noble savage fed strong and drank deep of

the abounding element of air; and through his dilated nostrils snuffed

in the sublime life of the worlds. Not by beef or by bread, are giants

made or nourished. But Queequeg, he had a mortal, barbaric smack of

the lip in eating- an ugly sound enough- so much so, that the

trembling Dough-Boy almost looked to see whether any marks of teeth

lurked in his own lean arms. And when he would hear Tashtego singing

out for him to produce himself, that his bones might be picked, the

simple-witted steward all but shattered the crockery hanging round him

in the pantry, by his sudden fits of the palsy. Nor did the

whetstone which the harpooneers carried in their pockets, for their

lances and other weapons; and with which whetstones, at dinner, they

would ostentatiously sharpen their knives; that grating sound did

not at all tend to tranquillize poor Dough-Boy. How could he forget

that in his Island days, Queequeg, for one, must certainly have been

guilty of some murderous, convivial indiscretion. Alas! Dough-Boy!

hard fares the white waiter who waits upon cannibals. Not a napkin

should he carry on his arm, but a buckler. In good time, though, to

his great delight, the three salt-sea warriors would rise and

depart; to his credulous, fable-mongering ears, all their martial

bones jingling in them at every step, like Moorish scimetars in

scabbards.

  But, though these barbarians dined in the cabin, and nominally lived

there; still, being anything but sedentary in their habits, they

were scarcely ever in it except at mealtimes, and just before

sleeping-time, when they passed through it to their own peculiar

quarters.

  In this one matter, Ahab seemed no exception to most American

whale captains, who, as a set, rather incline to the opinion that by

rights the ship's cabin belongs to them; and that it is by courtesy

alone that anybody else is, at any time, permitted there. So that,

in real truth, the mates and harpooneers of the Pequod might more

properly be said to have lived out of the cabin than in it. For when

they did enter it, it was something as a streetdoor enters a house;

turning inwards for a moment, only to be turned out the next; and,

as a permanent thing, residing in the open air. Nor did they lose much

hereby; in the cabin was no companionship; socially, Ahab was

inaccessible. Though nominally included in the census of

Christendom, he was still an alien to it. He lived in the world, as

the last of the Grisly Bears lived in settled Missouri. And as when

Spring and Summer had departed, that wild Logan of the woods,

burying himself in the hollow of a tree, lived out the winter there,

sucking his own paws; so, in his inclement, howling old age, Ahab's

soul, shut up in the caved trunk of his body, there fed upon the

sullen paws of its gloom!






  CHAPTER 35

  The Mast-Head



  It was during the more pleasant weather, that in due rotation with

the other seamen my first mast-head came round.

  In most American whalemen the mast-heads are manned almost

simultaneously with the vessel's leaving her port; even though she may

have fifteen thousand miles, and more, to sail ere reaching her proper

cruising ground. And if, after a three, four, or five years' voyage

she is drawing nigh home with anything empty in her- say, an empty

vial even- then, her mast-heads are kept manned to the last! and not

till her skysail-poles sail in among the spires of the port, does

she altogether relinquish the hope of capturing one whale more.

  Now, as the business of standing mast-heads, ashore or afloat, is

a very ancient and interesting one, let us in some measure expatiate

here. I take it, that the earliest standers of mast-heads were the old

Egyptians; because, in all my researches, I find none prior to them.

For though their progenitors, the builders of Babel, must doubtless,

by their tower, have intended to rear the loftiest mast-head in all

Asia, or Africa either; yet (ere the final truck was put to it) as

that great stone mast of theirs may be said to have gone by the board,

in the dread gale of God's wrath; therefore, we cannot give these

Babel builders priority over the Egyptians. And that the Egyptians

were a nation of mast-head standers, is an assertion based upon the

general belief among archaeologists, that the first pyramids were

founded for astronomical purposes: a theory singularly supported by

the peculiar stairlike formation of all four sides of those

edifices; whereby, with prodigious long upliftings of their legs,

those old astronomers were wont to mount to the apex, and sing out for

new stars; even as the look-outs of a modern ship sing out for a sail,

or a whale just bearing in sight. In Saint Stylites, the famous

Christian hermit of old times, who built him a lofty stone pillar in

the desert and spent the whole latter portion of his life on its

summit, hoisting his food from the ground with a tackle; in him we

have a remarkable instance of a dauntless stander-of-mast-heads; who

was not to be driven from his place by fogs or frosts, rain, hail,

or sleet; but valiantly facing everything out to the last, literally

died at his post. Of modern standers-of-mast-heads we have but a

lifeless set; mere stone, iron, and bronze men; who, though well

capable of facing out a stiff gale, are still entirely incompetent

to the business of singing out upon discovering any strange sight.

There is Napoleon; who, upon the top of the column of Vendome stands

with arms folded, some one hundred and fifty feet in the air;

careless, now, who rules the decks below, whether Louis Philippe,

Louis Blanc, or Louis the Devil. Great Washington, too, stands high

aloft on his towering main-mast in Baltimore, and like one of

Hercules' pillars, his column marks that point of human grandeur

beyond which few mortals will go. Admiral Nelson, also, on a capstan

of gun-metal, stands his mast-head in Trafalgar Square; and even

when most obscured by that London smoke, token is yet given that a

hidden hero is there; for where there is smoke, must be fire. But

neither great Washington, nor Napoleon, nor Nelson, will answer a

single hail from below, however madly invoked to befriend by their

counsels the distracted decks upon which they gaze; however it may

be surmised, that their spirits penetrate through the thick haze of

the future, and descry what shoals and what rocks must be shunned.

  It may seem unwarrantable to couple in any respect the mast-head

standers of the land with those of the sea; but that in truth it is

not so, is plainly evinced by an item for which Obed Macy, the sole

historian of Nantucket, stands accountable. The worthy Obed tells

us, that in the early times of the whale fishery, ere ships were

regularly launched in pursuit of the game, the people of that island

erected lofty spars along the seacoast, to which the look-outs

ascended by means of nailed cleats, something as fowls go upstairs

in a hen-house. A few years ago this same plan was adopted by the

Bay whalemen of New Zealand, who, upon descrying the game, gave notice

to the ready-manned boats nigh the beach. But this custom has now

become obsolete; turn we then to the one proper mast-head, that of a

whale-ship at sea. The three mast-heads are kept manned from

sun-rise to sun-set; the seamen taking their regular turns (as at

the helm), and relieving each other every two hours. In the serene

weather of the tropics it is exceedingly pleasant the mast-head:

nay, to a dreamy meditative man it is delightful. There you stand, a

hundred feet above the silent decks, striding along the deep, as if

the masts were gigantic stilts, while beneath you and between your

legs, as it were, swim the hugest monsters of the sea, even as ships

once sailed between the boots of the famous Colossus at old Rhodes.

There you stand, lost in the infinite series of the sea, with

nothing ruffled but the waves. The tranced ship indolently rolls;

the drowsy trade winds blow; everything resolves you into languor. For

the most part, in this tropic whaling life, a sublime uneventfulness

invests you; you hear no news; read no gazettes; extras with startling

accounts of commonplaces never delude you into unnecessary

excitements; you hear of no domestic afflictions; bankrupt securities;

fall of stocks; are never troubled with the thought of what you

shall have for dinner- for all your meals for three years and more are

snugly stowed in casks, and your bill of fare is immutable.

  In one of those southern whalesmen, on a long three or four years'

voyage, as often happens, the sum of the various hours you spend at

the mast-head would amount to several entire months. And it is much to

be deplored that the place to which you devote so considerable a

portion of the whole term of your natural life, should be so sadly

destitute of anything approaching to a cosy inhabitiveness, or adapted

to breed a comfortable localness of feeling, such as pertains to a

bed, a hammock, a hearse, a sentry box, a pulpit, a coach, or any

other of those small and snug contrivances in which men temporarily

isolate themselves. Your most usual point of perch is the head of

the t' gallant-mast, where you stand upon two thin parallel sticks

(almost peculiar to whalemen) called the t' gallant crosstrees.

Here, tossed about by the sea, the beginner feels about as cosy as

he would standing on a bull's horns. To be sure, in cold weather you

may carry your house aloft with you, in the shape of a watch-coat; but

properly speaking the thickest watch-coat is no more of a house than

the unclad body; for as the soul is glued inside of its fleshy

tabernacle, and cannot freely move about in it, nor even move out of

it, without running great risk of perishing (like an ignorant

pilgrim crossing the snowy Alps in winter); so a watch-coat is not

so much of a house as it is a mere envelope, or additional skin

encasing you. You cannot put a shelf or chest of drawers in your body,

and no more can you make a convenience closet of your watch-coat.

  Concerning all this, it is much to be deplored that the mast-heads

of a southern whale ship are unprovided with those enviable little

tents or pulpits, called crow's-nests, in which the look-outs of a

Greenland whaler are protected from the inclement weather of the

frozen seas. In the fireside narrative of Captain Sleet, entitled "A

Voyage among the Icebergs, in quest of the Greenland Whale, and

incidentally for the re-discovery of the Lost Icelandic Colonies of

Old Greenland;" in this admirable volume, all standers of mast-heads

are furnished with a charmingly circumstantial account of the then

recently invented crow's-nest of the Glacier, which was the name of

Captain Sleet's good craft. He called it the Sleet's crow's-nest, in

honor of himself; he being the original inventor and patentee, and

free from all ridiculous false delicacy, and holding that if we call

our own children after our own names (we fathers being the original

inventors and patentees), so likewise should we denominate after

ourselves any other apparatus we may beret. In shape, the Sleet's

crow's-nest is something like a large tierce or pipe; it is open

above, however, where it is furnished with a movable sidescreen to

keep to windward of your head in a hard gale. Being fixed on the

summit of the mast, you ascend into it through a little trap-hatch

in the bottom. On the after side, or side next the stern of the

ship, is a comfortable seat, with a locker underneath for umbrellas,

comforters, and coats. In front is a leather rack, in which to keep

your speaking trumpet, pipe, telescope, and other nautical

conveniences. When Captain Sleet in person stood his mast-head in this

crow's-nest of his, he tells us that he always had a rifle with him

(also fixed in the rack), together with a powder flask and shot, for

the purpose of popping off the stray narwhales, or vagrant sea

unicorns infesting those waters; for you cannot successfully shoot

at them from the deck owing to the resistance of the water, but to

shoot down upon them is a very different thing. Now, it was plainly

a labor of love for Captain Sleet to describe, as he does, all the

little detailed conveniences of his crow's-nest; but though he so

enlarges upon many of these, and though he treats us to a very

scientific account of his experiments in this crow's-nest, with a

small compass he kept there for the purpose of counteracting the

errors resulting from what is called the "local attraction" of all

binnacle magnets; an error ascribable to the horizontal vicinity of

the iron in the ship's planks, and in the Glacier's case, perhaps,

to there having been so many broken-down blacksmiths among her crew; I

say, that though the Captain is very discreet and scientific here,

yet, for all his learned "binnacle deviations," "azimuth compass

observations," and "approximate errors," he knows very well, Captain

Sleet, that he was not so much immersed in those profound magnetic

meditations, as to fail being attracted occasionally towards that well

replenished little case-bottle, so nicely tucked in on one side of his

crow's nest, within easy reach of his hand. Though, upon the whole,

I greatly admire and even love the brave, the honest, and learned

Captain; yet I take it very ill of him that he should so utterly

ignore that case-bottle, seeing what a faithful friend and comforter

it must have been, while with mittened fingers and hooded head he

was studying the mathematics aloft there in that bird's nest within

three or four perches of the pole.

  But if we Southern whale-fishers are not so snugly housed aloft as

Captain Sleet and his Greenlandmen were; yet that disadvantage is

greatly counter-balanced by the widely contrasting serenity of those

seductive seas in which we South fishers mostly float. For one, I used

to lounge up the rigging very leisurely, resting in the top to have

a chat with Queequeg, or any one else off duty whom I might find

there; then ascending a little way further, and throwing a lazy leg

over the top-sail yard, take a preliminary view of the watery

pastures, and so at last mount to my ultimate destination.

  Let me make a clean breast of it here, and frankly admit that I kept

but sorry guard. With the problem of the universe revolving in me, how

could I- being left completely to myself at such a thought-engendering

altitude- how could I but lightly hold my obligations to observe all

whaleships' standing orders, "Keep your weather eye open, and sing out

every time."

  And let me in this place movingly admonish you, ye ship-owners of

Nantucket! Beware of enlisting in your vigilant fisheries any lad with

lean brow and hollow eye; given to unseasonable meditativeness; and

who offers to ship with the Phaedon instead of Bowditch in his head.

Beware of such an one, I say: your whales must be seen before they can

be killed; and this sunken-eyed young Platonist will tow you ten wakes

round the world, and never make you one pint of sperm the richer.

Nor are these monitions at all unneeded. For nowadays, the

whale-fishery furnishes an asylum for many romantic, melancholy, and

absent-minded young men, disgusted with the corking care of earth, and

seeking sentiment in tar and blubber. Childe Harold not unfrequently

perches himself upon the mast-head of some luckless disappointed

whale-ship, and in moody phrase  ejaculates:-



     "Roll on, thou deep and dark blue ocean, roll!

      Ten thousand blubber-hunters sweep over thee in vain."



Very often do the captains of such ships take those absent-minded

young philosophers to task, upbraiding them with not feeling

sufficient "interest" in the voyage; half-hinting that they are so

hopelessly lost to all honorable ambition, as that in their secret

souls they would rather not see whales than otherwise. But all in

vain; those young Platonists have a notion that their vision is

imperfect; they are short-sighted; what use, then, to strain the

visual nerve? They have left their opera-glasses at home.

  "Why, thou monkey," said a harpooneer to one of these lads, "we've

been cruising now hard upon three years, and thou hast not raised a

whale yet. Whales are scarce as hen's teeth whenever thou art up

here." Perhaps they were; or perhaps there might have been shoals of

them in the far horizon; but lulled into such an opium-like

listlessness of vacant, unconscious reverie is this absent-minded

youth by the blending cadence of waves with thoughts, that at last

he loses his identity; takes the mystic ocean at his feet for the

visible image of that deep, blue, bottomless soul, pervading mankind

and nature; and every strange, half-seen, gliding, beautiful thing

that eludes him; every dimly-discovered, uprising fin of some

undiscernible form, seems to him the embodiment of those elusive

thoughts that only people the soul by continually flitting through it.

In this enchanted mood, thy spirit ebbs away to whence it came;

becomes diffused through time and space; like Crammer's sprinkled

Pantheistic ashes, forming at last a part of every shore the round

globe over.

  There is no life in thee, now, except that rocking life imparted

by a gentle rolling ship; by her, borrowed from the sea; by the sea,

from the inscrutable tides of God. But while this sleep, this dream is

on ye, move your foot or hand an inch; slip your hold at all; and your

identity comes back in horror. Over Descartian vortices you hover. And

perhaps, at midday, in the fairest weather, with one half-throttled

shriek you drop through that transparent air into the summer sea, no

more to rise for ever. Heed it well, ye Pantheists!






  CHAPTER 36

  The Quarter-Deck



  (Enter Ahab: Then, all)



  It was not a great while after the affair of the pipe, that one

morning shortly after breakfast, Ahab, as was his wont, ascended the

cabin-gangway to the deck. There most sea-captains usually walk at

that hour, as country gentlemen, after the same meal, take a few turns

in the garden.

  Soon his steady, ivory stride was heard, as to and fro he paced

his old rounds, upon planks so familiar to his tread, that they were

all over dented, like geological stones, with the peculiar mark of his

walk. Did you fixedly gaze, too, upon that ribbed and dented brow;

there also, you would see still stranger foot-prints- the

foot-prints of his one unsleeping, ever-pacing thought.

  But on the occasion in question, those dents looked deeper, even

as his nervous step that morning left a deeper mark. And, so full of

his thought was Ahab, that at every uniform turn that he made, now

at the main-mast and now at the binnacle, you could almost see that

thought turn in him as he turned, and pace in him as he paced; so

completely possessing him, indeed, that it all but seemed the inward

mould of every outer movement.

  "D'ye mark him, Flask?" whispered Stubb; "the chick that's in him

pecks the shell. 'Twill soon be out."

  The hours wore on;- Ahab now shut up within his cabin; anon,

pacing the deck, with the same intense bigotry of purpose in his

aspect.

  It drew near the close of day. Suddenly he came to a halt by the

bulwarks, and inserting his bone leg into the auger-hole there, and

with one hand grasping a shroud, he ordered Starbuck to send everybody

aft.

  "Sir!" said the mate, astonished at an order seldom or never given

on ship-board except in some extraordinary case.

  "Send everybody aft," repeated Ahab. "Mast-heads, there! come down!"

  When the entire ship's company were assembled, and with curious

and not wholly unapprehensive faces, were eyeing him, for he looked

not unlike the weather horizon when a storm is coming up, Ahab,

after rapidly glancing over the bulwarks, and then darting his eyes

among the crew, started from his standpoint; and as though not a

soul were nigh him resumed his heavy turns upon the deck. With bent

head and half-slouched hat he continued to pace, unmindful of the

wondering whispering among the men; till Stubb cautiously whispered to

Flask, that Ahab must have summoned them there for the purpose of

witnessing a pedestrian feat. But this did not last long. Vehemently

pausing, he cried:-

  "What do ye do when ye see a whale, men?"

  "Sing out for him!" was the impulsive rejoinder from a score of

clubbed voices.

  "Good!" cried Ahab, with a wild approval in his tones; observing the

hearty animation into which his unexpected question had so

magnetically thrown them.

  "And what do ye next, men?"

  "Lower away, and after him!"

  "And what tune is it ye pull to, men?"

  "A dead whale or a stove boat!"

  More and more strangely and fiercely glad and approving, grew the

countenance of the old man at every shout; while the mariners began to

gaze curiously at each other, as if marvelling how it was that they

themselves became so excited at such seemingly purposeless questions.

  But, they were all eagerness again, as Ahab, now half-revolving in

his pivot-hole, with one hand reaching high up a shroud, and

tightly, almost convulsively grasping it, addressed them thus:-

  "All ye mast-headers have before now heard me give orders about a

white whale. Look ye! d'ye see this Spanish ounce of gold?"- holding

up a broad bright coin to the sun- "it is a sixteen dollar piece, men.

D'ye see it? Mr. Starbuck, hand me yon top-maul."

  While the mate was getting the hammer, Ahab, without speaking, was

slowly rubbing the gold piece against the skirts of his jacket, as

if to heighten its lustre, and without using any words was meanwhile

lowly humming to himself, producing a sound so strangely muffled and

inarticulate that it seemed the mechanical humming of the wheels of

his vitality in him.

  Receiving the top-maul from Starbuck, he advanced towards the

main-mast with the hammer uplifted in one hand, exhibiting the gold

with the other, and with a high raised voice exclaiming: "Whosoever of

ye raises me a white-headed whale with a wrinkled brow and a crooked

jaw; whosoever of ye raises me that white-headed whale, with three

holes punctured in his starboard fluke- look ye, whosoever of ye

raises me that same white whale, he shall have this gold ounce, my

boys!"

  "Huzza! huzza!" cried the seamen, as with swinging tarpaulins they

hailed the act of nailing the gold to the mast.

  "It's a white whale, I say," resumed Ahab, as he threw down the

topmaul: "a white whale. Skin your eyes for him, men; look sharp for

white water; if ye see but a bubble, sing out."

  All this while Tashtego, Daggoo, and Queequeg had looked on with

even more intense interest and surprise than the rest, and at the

mention of the wrinkled brow and crooked jaw they had started as if

each was separately touched by some specific recollection.

  "Captain Ahab," said Tashtego, "that white whale must be the same

that some call Moby Dick."

  "Moby Dick?" shouted Ahab. "Do ye know the white whale then, Tash?"

  "Does he fan-tail a little curious, sir, before he goes down?"

said the Gay-Header deliberately.

  "And has he a curious spout, too," said Daggoo, "very bushy, even

for a parmacetty, and mighty quick, Captain Ahab?"

  "And he have one, two, three- oh! good many iron in him hide, too,

Captain," cried Queequeg disjointedly, "all twiske-tee be-twisk,

like him- him-" faltering hard for a word, and screwing his hand round

and round as though uncorking a bottle- "like him- him-"

  "Corkscrew!" cried Ahab, "aye, Queequeg, the harpoons lie all

twisted and wrenched in him; aye, Daggoo, his spout is a big one, like

a whole shock of wheat, and white as a pile of our Nantucket wool

after the great annual sheep-shearing; aye, Tashtego, and he fan-tails

like a split jib in a squall. Death and devils! men, it is Moby Dick

ye have seen- Moby Dick- Moby Dick!"

  "Captain Ahab," said Starbuck, who, with Stubb and Flask, had thus

far been eyeing his superior with increasing surprise, but at last

seemed struck with a thought which somewhat explained all the

wonder. "Captain Ahab, I have heard of Moby Dick- but it was not

Moby Dick that took off thy leg?"

  "Who told thee that?" cried Ahab; then pausing, "Aye, Starbuck; aye,

my hearties all round; it was Moby Dick that dismasted me; Moby Dick

that brought me to this dead stump I stand on now. Aye, aye," he

shouted with a terrific, loud, animal sob, like that of a

heart-stricken moose; "Aye, aye! it was that accursed white whale that

razeed me; made a poor pegging lubber of me for ever and a day!"

Then tossing both arms, with measureless imprecations he shouted

out: "Aye, aye! and I'll chase him round Good Hope, and round the

Horn, and round the Norway Maelstrom, and round perdition's flames

before I give him up. And this is what ye have shipped for, men! to

chase that white whale on both sides of land, and over all sides of

earth, till he spouts black blood and rolls fin out. What say ye, men,

will ye splice hands on it, now? I think ye do look brave."

  "Aye, aye!" shouted the harpooneers and seamen, running closer to

the excited old man: "A sharp eye for the white whale; a sharp lance

for Moby Dick!"

  "God bless ye," he seemed to half sob and half shout. "God bless ye,

men. Steward! go draw the great measure of grog. But what's this

long face about, Mr. Starbuck; wilt thou not chase the white whale!

art not game for Moby Dick?"

  "I am game for his crooked jaw, and for the jaws of Death too,

Captain Ahab, if it fairly comes in the way of the business we follow;

but I came here to hunt whales, not my commander's vengeance. How many

barrels will thy vengeance yield thee even if thou gettest it, Captain

Ahab? it will not fetch thee much in our Nantucket market."

  "Nantucket market! Hoot! But come closer, Starbuck; thou requirest a

little lower layer. If money's to be the measurer, man, and the

accountants have computed their great counting-house the globe, by

girdling it with guineas, one to every three parts of an inch; then,

let me tell thee, that my vengeance will fetch a great premium here!"

  "He smites his chest," whispered Stubb, "what's that for? methinks

it rings most vast, but hollow."

  "Vengeance on a dumb brute!" cried Starbuck, "that simply smote thee

from blindest instinct! Madness! To be enraged with a dumb thing,

Captain Ahab, seems blasphemous."

  "Hark ye yet again- the little lower layer. All visible objects,

man, are but as pasteboard masks. But in each event- in the living

act, the undoubted deed- there, some unknown but still reasoning thing

puts forth the mouldings of its features from behind the unreasoning

mask. If man will strike, strike though the mask! How can the prisoner

reach outside except by thrusting through the wall? To me, the white

whale is that wall, shoved near to me. Sometimes I think there's

naught beyond. But 'tis enough. He tasks me; he heaps me; I see in him

outrageous strength, with an inscrutable malice sinewing it. That

inscrutable thing is chiefly what I hate; and be the white whale

agent, or be the white whale principal, I will wreak that hate upon

him. Talk not to me of blasphemy, man; I'd strike the sun if it

insulted me. For could the sun do that, then could I do the other;

since there is ever a sort of fair play herein, jealousy presiding

over all creations. But not my master, man, is even that fair play.

Who's over me? Truth hath no confines. Take off thine eye! more

intolerable than fiends' glarings is a doltish stare! So, so; thou

reddenest and palest; my heat has melted thee to anger-glow. But

look ye, Starbuck, what is said in heat, that thing unsays itself.

There are men from whom warm words are small indignity. I meant not to

incense thee. Let it go. Look! see yonder Turkish cheeks of spotted

tawn- living, breathing pictures painted by the sun. The Pagan

leopards- the unrecking and unworshipping things, that live; and seek,

and give no reasons for the torrid life they feel! The crew, man,

the crew! Are they not one and all with Ahab, in this matter of the

whale? See Stubb! he laughs! See yonder Chilian! he snorts to think of

it. Stand up amid the general hurricane, thy one tost sapling

cannot, Starbuck! And what is it? Reckon it. 'Tis but to help strike a

fin; no wondrous feat for Starbuck. What is it more? From this one

poor hunt, then, the best lance out of all Nantucket, surely he will

not hang back, when every foremast-hand has clutched a whetstone.

Ah! constrainings seize thee; I see! the billow lifts thee! Speak, but

speak!- Aye, aye! thy silence, then, that voices thee. (Aside)

Something shot from my dilated nostrils, he has inhaled it in his

lungs. Starbuck now is mine; cannot oppose me now, without rebellion."

  "God keep me!- keep us all!" murmured Starbuck, lowly.

  But in his joy at the enchanted, tacit acquiescence of the mate,

Ahab did not hear his foreboding invocation; nor yet the low laugh

from the hold; nor yet the presaging vibrations of the winds in the

cordage; nor yet the hollow flap of the sails against the masts, as

for a moment their hearts sank in. For again Starbuck's downcast

eyes lighted up with the stubbornness of life; the subterranean

laugh died away; the winds blew on; the sails filled out; the ship

heaved and rolled as before. Ah, ye admonitions and warnings! why stay

ye not when ye come? But rather are ye predictions than warnings, ye

shadows! Yet not so much predictions from without, as verifications of

the fore-going things within. For with little external to constrain

us, the innermost necessities in our being, these still drive us on.

  "The measure! the measure!" cried Ahab.

  Receiving the brimming pewter, and turning to the harpooneers, he

ordered them to produce their weapons. Then ranging them before him

near the capstan, with their harpoons in their hands, while his

three mates stood at his side with their lances, and the rest of the

ship's company formed a circle round the group; he stood for an

instant searchingly eyeing every man of his crew. But those wild

eyes met his, as the bloodshot eves of the prairie wolves meet the eye

of their leader, ere he rushes on at their head in the trail of the

bison; but, alas! only to fall into the hidden snare of the Indian.

  "Drink and pass!" he cried, handing the heavy charged flagon to

the nearest seaman. "The crew alone now drink. Round with it, round!

Short draughts- long swallows, men; 'tis hot as Satan's hoof. So,

so; it goes round excellently. It spiralizes in ye; forks out at the

serpent-snapping eye. Well done; almost drained. That way it went,

this way it comes. Hand it me- here's a hollow! Men, ye seem the

years; so brimming life is gulped and gone. Steward, refill!

  "Attend now, my braves. I have mustered ye all round this capstan;

and ye mates, flank me with your lances; and ye harpooneers, stand

there with your irons; and ye, stout mariners, ring me in, that I

may in some sort revive a noble custom of my fishermen fathers

before me. O men, you will yet see that- Ha! boy, come back? bad

pennies come not sooner. Hand it me. Why, now, this pewter had run

brimming again, wert not thou St. Vitus' imp- away, thou ague!

  "Advance, ye mates! Cross your lances full before me. Well done! Let

me touch the axis." So saying, with extended arm, he grasped the three

level, radiating lances at their crossed centre; while so doing,

suddenly and nervously twitched them; meanwhile glancing intently from

Starbuck to Stubb; from Stubb to Flask. It seemed as though, by some

nameless, interior volition, he would fain have shocked into them

the same fiery emotion accumulated within the Leyden jar of his own

magnetic life. The three mates quailed before his strong, sustained,

and mystic aspect. Stubb and Flask looked sideways from him; the

honest eye of Starbuck fell downright.

  "In vain!" cried Ahab; "but, maybe, 'tis well. For did ye three

but once take the full-forced shock, then mine own electric thing,

that had perhaps expired from out me. Perchance, too, it would have

dropped ye dead. Perchance ye need it not. Down lances! And now, ye

mates, I do appoint ye three cupbearers to my three pagan kinsmen

there- yon three most honorable gentlemen and noblemen, my valiant

harpooneers. Disdain the task? What, when the great Pope washes the

feet of beggars, using his tiara for ewer? Oh, my sweet cardinals!

your own condescension, that shall bend ye to it. I do not order ye;

ye will it. Cut your seizings and draw the poles, ye harpooneers!"

  Silently obeying the order, the three harpooneers now stood with the

detached iron part of their harpoons, some three feet long, held,

barbs up, before him.

  "Stab me not with that keen steel! Cant them; cant them over! know

ye not the goblet end? Turn up the socket! So, so; now, ye

cup-bearers, advance. The irons! take them; hold them while I fill!"

Forthwith, slowly going from one officer to the other, he brimmed

the harpoon sockets with the fiery waters from the pewter.

  "Now, three to three, ye stand. Commend the murderous chalices!

Bestow them, ye who are now made parties to this indissoluble

league. Ha! Starbuck! but the deed is done! Yon ratifying sun now

waits to sit upon it. Drink, ye harpooneers! drink and swear, ye men

that man the deathful whaleboat's bow- Death to Moby Dick! God hunt us

all, if we do not hunt Moby Dick to his death!" The long, barbed steel

goblets were lifted; and to cries and maledictions against the white

whale, the spirits were simultaneously quaffed down with a hiss.

Starbuck paled, and turned, and shivered. Once more, and finally,

the replenished pewter went the rounds among the frantic crew; when,

waving his free hand to them, they all dispersed; and Ahab retired

within his cabin.






  CHAPTER 37

  Sunset



 The cabin; by the stern windows; Ahab sitting alone, and gazing out.



  I leave a white and turbid wake; pale waters, paler cheeks, where'er

I sail. The envious billows sidelong swell to whelm my track; let

them; but first I pass.

  Yonder, by ever-brimming goblet's rim, the warm waves blush like

wine. The gold brow plumbs the blue. The diver sun- slow dived from

noon- goes down; my soul mounts up! she wearies with her endless hill.

Is, then, the crown too heavy that I wear? this Iron Crown of

Lombardy. Yet is it bright with many a gem; I the wearer, see not

its far flashings; but darkly feel that I wear that, that dazzlingly

confounds. 'Tis iron- that I know- not gold. 'Tis split, too- that I

feel; the jagged edge galls me so, my brain seems to beat against

the solid metal; aye, steel skull, mine; the sort that needs no helmet

in the most brain-battering fight!

  Dry heat upon my brow? Oh! time was, when as the sunrise nobly

spurred me, so the sunset soothed. No more. This lovely light, it

lights not me; all loveliness is anguish to me, since I can ne'er

enjoy. Gifted with the high perception, I lack the low, enjoying

power; damned, most subtly and most malignantly! damned in the midst

of Paradise! Good night-good night! (waving his hand, he moves from

the window.)

  'Twas not so hard a task. I thought to find one stubborn, at the

least; but my one cogged circle fits into all their various wheels,

and they revolve. Or, if you will, like so many ant-hills of powder,

they all stand before me; and I their match. Oh, hard! that to fire

others, the match itself must needs be wasting! What I've dared,

I've willed; and what I've willed, I'll do! They think me mad-

Starbuck does; but I'm demoniac, I am madness maddened! That wild

madness that's only calm to comprehend itself! The prophecy was that I

should be dismembered; and- Aye! I lost this leg. I now prophesy

that I will dismember my dismemberer. Now, then, be the prophet and

the fulfiller one. That's more than ye, ye great gods, ever were. I

laugh and hoot at ye, ye cricket-players, ye pugilists, ye deaf Burkes

and blinded Bendigoes! I will not say as schoolboys do to bullies-

Take some one of your own size; don't pommel me! No, ye've knocked

me down, and I am up again; but ye have run and hidden. Come forth

from behind your cotton bags! I have no long gun to reach ye. Come,

Ahab's compliments to ye; come and see if ye can swerve me. Swerve me?

ye cannot swerve me, else ye swerve yourselves! man has ye there.

Swerve me? The path to my fixed purpose is laid with iron rails,

whereon my soul is grooved to run. Over unsounded gorges, through

the rifled hearts of mountains, under torrents' beds, unerringly I

rush! Naught's an obstacle, naught's an angle to the iron way!






  CHAPTER 38

  Dusk



  By the Mainmast; Starbuck leaning against it.



  My soul is more than matched; she's over-manned; and by a madman!

Insufferable sting, that sanity should ground arms on such a field!

But he drilled deep down, and blasted all my reason out of me! I think

I see his impious end; but feel that I must help him to it. Will I,

nill I, the ineffable thing has tied me to him; tows me with a cable I

have no knife to cut. Horrible old man! Who's over him, he cries;-

aye, he would be a democrat to all above; look, how he lords it over

all below! Oh! I plainly see my miserable office,- to obey, rebelling;

and worse yet, to hate with touch of pity! For in his eyes I read some

lurid woe would shrivel me up, had I it. Yet is there hope. Time and

tide flow wide. The hated whale has the round watery world to swim in,

as the small gold-fish has its glassy globe. His heaven-insulting

purpose, God may wedge aside. I would up heart, were it not like lead.

But my whole clock's run down; my heart the all-controlling weight,

I have no key to lift again.



  [A burst of revelry from the forecastle.]



  Oh, God! to sail with such a heathen crew that have small touch of

human mothers in them! Whelped somewhere by the sharkish sea. The

white whale is their demigorgon. Hark! the infernal orgies! that

revelry is forward! mark the unfaltering silence aft! Methinks it

pictures life. Foremost through the sparkling sea shoots on the gay,

embattled, bantering bow, but only to drag dark Ahab after it, where

he broods within his sternward cabin, builded over the dead water of

the wake, and further on, hunted by its wolfish gurglings. The long

howl thrills me through! Peace! ye revellers, and set the watch! Oh,

life! 'tis in an hour like this, with soul beat down and held to

knowledge,- as wild, untutored things are forced to feed- Oh, life!

'tis now that I do feel the latent horror in thee! but 'tis not me!

that horror's out of me, and with the soft feeling of the human in me,

yet will I try to fight ye, ye grim, phantom futures! Stand by me,

hold me, bind me, O ye blessed influences!






  CHAPTER 39

  First Night Watch



  (Stubb solus, and mending a brace.)



  Ha! ha! ha! ha! hem! clear my throat!- I've been thinking over it

ever since, and that ha, ha's the final consequence. Why so? Because a

laugh's the wisest, easiest answer to all that's queer; and come

what will, one comfort's always left- that unfailing comfort is,

it's all predestinated. I heard not all his talk with Starbuck; but to

my poor eye Starbuck then looked something as I the other evening

felt. Be sure the old Mogul has fixed him, too. I twigged it, knew it;

had the gift, might readily have prophesied it- for when I clapped

my eye upon his skull I saw it. Well, Stubb, wise Stubb- that's my

title- well, Stubb, what of it, Stubb? Here's a carcase. I know not

all that may be coming, but be it what it will, I'll go to it

laughing. Such a waggish leering as lurks in all your horribles! I

feel funny. Fa, la! lirra, skirra! What's my juicy little pear at home

doing now? Crying its eyes out?- Giving a party to the last arrived

harpooneers, I dare say, gay as a frigate's pennant, and so am I-

fa, la! lirra, skirra! Oh-



         We'll drink to-night with hearts as light,

           To love, as gay and fleeting

         As bubbles that swim, on the beaker's brim,

           And break on the lips while meeting.



  A brave stave that- who calls? Mr. Starbuck? Aye, aye, sir-

(Aside) he's my superior, he has his too, if I'm not mistaken.- Aye,

aye, sir, just through with this job- coming.






  CHAPTER 40

  Midnight, Forecastle



                   HARPOONEERS AND SAILORS

  (Foresail rises and discovers the watch standing, lounging, leaning,

and lying in various attitudes, all singing in chorus.)



          Farewell and adieu to you, Spanish ladies!

          Farewell and adieu to you, ladies of Spain!

                   Our captain's commanded.-



                    1ST NANTUCKET SAILOR

  Oh, boys, don't be sentimental. it's bad for the digestion! Take a

tonic, follow me! (Sings, and all follow)

           Our captain stood upon the deck,

             A spy-glass in his hand,

           A viewing of those gallant whales

             That blew at every strand.

           Oh, your tubs in your boats, my boys,

             And by your braces stand,

           And we'll have one of those fine whales,

             Hand, boys, over hand!

      So, be cheery, my lads! may your hearts never fail!

      While the bold harpooneer is striking the whale!



              MATE'S VOICE FROM THE QUARTER-DECK

  Eight bells there, forward!



                     2ND NANTUCKET SAILOR

  Avast the chorus! Eight bells there! d'ye hear, bell-boy? Strike the

bell eight, thou Pip! thou blackling! and let me call the watch.

I've the sort of mouth for that- the hogshead mouth. So, so,

(thrusts his head down the scuttle,) Star-bo-l-e-e-n-s, a-h-o-y! Eight

bells there below! Tumble up!



                       DUTCH SAILOR

  Grand snoozing to-night, maty; fat night for that. I mark this in

our old Mogul's wine; it's quite as deadening to some as filliping

to others. We sing; they sleep- aye, lie down there, like

ground-tier butts. At 'em again! There, take this copper-pump, and

hail 'em through it. Tell 'em to avast dreaming of their lassies. Tell

'em it's the resurrection; they must kiss their last, and come to

judgment. That's the way- that's it; thy throat ain't spoiled with

eating Amsterdam butter.



                       FRENCH SAILOR

  Hist, boys! let's have a jig or two before we ride to anchor in

Blanket Bay. What say ye? There comes the other watch. Stand by all

legs! Pip! little Pip! hurrah with your tambourine!



                   PIP (Sulky and sleepy)

  Don't know where it is.



                       FRENCH SAILOR

  Beat thy belly, then, and wag thy ears. Jig it, men, I say;

merry's the word; hurrah! Damn me, won't you dance? Form, now,

Indian-file, and gallop into the double-shuffle? Throw yourselves!

Legs! legs!



                       ICELAND SAILOR

  I don't like your floor, maty; it's too springy to my taste. I'm

used to ice-floors. I'm sorry to throw cold water on the subject;

but excuse me.



                       MALTESE SAILOR

  Me too; where's your girls? Who but a fool would take his left

hand by his right, and say to himself, how d'ye do? Partners! I must

have partners!



                       SICILIAN SAILOR

  Aye; girls and a green!- then I'll hop with ye; yea, turn

grasshopper!



                      LONG-ISLAND SAILOR

  Well, well, ye sulkies, there's plenty more of us. Hoe corn when you

may, say I. All legs go to harvest soon. Ah! here comes the music; now

for it!



AZORE SAILOR (Ascending, and pitching the tambourine up the scuttle.)

  Here you are, Pip; and there's the windlass-bits; up you mount! Now,

boys!

  (The half of them dance to the tambourine; some go below; some sleep

or lie among the coils of rigging. Oaths a-plenty.)



                    AZORE SAILOR (Dancing)

  Go it, Pip! Bang it, bell-boy! Rig it, dig it, stig it, quig it,

bell-boy! Make fire-flies; break the jinglers!



                             PIP

  Jinglers, you say?- there goes another, dropped off; I pound it so.



                          CHINA SAILOR

  Rattle thy teeth, then, and pound away; make a pagoda of thyself.





                          FRENCH SAILOR

  Merry-mad! Hold up thy hoop, Pip, till I jump through it! Split

jibs! tear yourself!



                    TASHTEGO (Quietly smoking)

  That's a white man; he calls that fun: humph! I save my sweat.



                         OLD MANX SAILOR

  I wonder whether those jolly lads bethink them of what they are

dancing over. I'll dance over your grave, I will- that's the bitterest

threat of your night-women, that beat head-winds round corners. O

Christ! to think of the green navies and the green-skulled crews!

Well, well; belike the whole world's a ball, as you scholars have

it; and so 'tis right to make one ballroom of it. Dance on, lads,

you're young; I was once.



                       3D NANTUCKET SAILOR

  Spell oh!- whew! this is worse than pulling after whales in a

calm- give a whiff, Tash.

  (They cease dancing, and gather in clusters. Meantime the sky

darkens- the wind rises.)



                          LASCAR SAILOR

  By Brahma! boys, it'll be douse sail soon. The sky-born, high-tide

Ganges turned to wind! Thou showest thy black brow, Seeva!



          MALTESE SAILOR (Reclining and shaking his cap)

  It's the waves- the snow's caps turn to jig it now. They'll shake

their tassels soon. Now would all the waves were women, then I'd go

drown, and chassee with them evermore! There's naught so sweet on

earth- heaven may not match it!- as those swift glances of warm,

wild bosoms in the dance, when the over-arboring arms hide such

ripe, bursting grapes.



                    SICILIAN SAILOR (Reclining)

  Tell me not of it! Hark ye, lad- fleet interlacings of the limbs-

lithe swayings- coyings- flutterings! lip! heart! hip! all graze:

unceasing touch and go! not taste, observe ye, else come satiety.

Eh, Pagan? (Nudging.)



                 TAHITAN SAILOR (Reclining on a mat)

  Hail, holy nakedness of our dancing girls!- the Heeva-Heeva! Ah! low

veiled, high palmed Tahiti! I still rest me on thy mat, but the soft

soil has slid! I saw thee woven in the wood, my mat! green the first

day I brought ye thence; now worn and wilted quite. Ah me!- not thou

nor I can bear the change! How then, if so be transplanted to yon sky?

Hear I the roaring streams from Pirohitee's peak of spears, when

they leap down the crags and drown the villages?- The blast, the

blast! Up, spine, and meet it! (Leaps to his feet.)



                        PORTUGUESE SAILOR

  How the sea rolls swashing 'gainst the side! Stand by for reefing,

hearties! the winds are just crossing swords, pell-mell they'll go

lunging presently.



                          DANISH SAILOR

  Crack, crack, old ship! so long as thou crackest, thou holdest! Well

done! The mate there holds ye to it stiffly. He's no more afraid

than the isle fort at Cattegat, put there to fight the Baltic with

storm-lashed guns, on which the sea-salt cakes!



                       4TH NANTUCKET SAILOR

  He has his orders, mind ye that. I heard old Ahab tell him he must

always kill a squall, something as they burst a waterspout with a

pistol- fire your ship right into it!



                          ENGLISH SAILOR

  Blood! but that old man's a grand old cove! We are the lads to

hunt him up his whale!



                             ALL

  Aye! aye!



                       OLD MANX SAILOR

  How the three pines shake! Pines are the hardest sort of tree to

live when shifted to any other soil, and here there's none but the

crew's cursed clay. Steady, helmsman! steady. This is the sort of

weather when brave hearts snap ashore, and keeled hulls split at

sea. Our captain has his birthmark; look yonder, boys, there's another

in the sky lurid- like, ye see, all else pitch black.



                            DAGGOO

  What of that? Who's afraid of black's afraid of me! I'm quarried out

of it!



                         SPANISH SAILOR

  (Aside.) He wants to bully, ah!- the old grudge makes me touchy

(Advancing.) Aye, harpooneer, thy race is the undeniable dark side

of mankind- devilish dark at that. No offence.



                          DAGGOO (Grimly)

  None.



                        ST. JAGO'S SAILOR

  That Spaniard's mad or drunk. But that can't be, or else in his

one case our old Mogul's fire-waters are somewhat long in working.



                       5TH NANTUCKET SAILOR

  What's that I saw- lightning? Yes.



                           SPANISH SAILOR

  No; Daggoo showing his teeth.



                         DAGGOO (Springing)

  Swallow thine, mannikin! White skin, white liver!



                    SPANISH SAILOR (Meeting him)

  Knife thee heartily! big frame, small spirit!



                               ALL

  A row! a row! a row!



                     TASHTEGO (With a whiff)

  A row a'low, and a row aloft- Gods and men- both brawlers! Humph!



                         BELFAST SAILOR

  A row! arrah a row! The Virgin be blessed, a row! Plunge in with ye!



                          ENGLISH SAILOR

  Fair play! Snatch the Spaniard's knife! A ring, a ring!



                          OLD MANX SAILOR

  Ready formed. There! the ringed horizon. In that ring Cain struck

Abel. Sweet work, right work! No? Why then, God, mad'st thou the ring?



                MATE'S VOICE FROM THE QUARTER-DECK

  Hands by the halyards! in top-gallant sails! Stand by to reef

topsails!



                               ALL

  The squall! the squall! jump, my jollies! (They scatter.)





                PIP (Shrinking under the windlass)

  Jollies? Lord help such jollies! Crish, crash! there goes the

jib-stay! Blang-whang! God! Duck lower, Pip, here comes the royal

yard! It's worse than being in the whirled woods, the last day of

the year! Who'd go climbing after chestnuts now? But there they go,

all cursing, and here I don't. Fine prospects to 'em; they're on the

road to heaven. Hold on hard! Jimmini, what a squall! But those

chaps there are worse yet- they are your white squalls, they. White

squalls? white whale, shirr! shirr! Here have I heard all their chat

just now, and the white whale- shirr! shirr!- but spoken of once!

and only this evening- it makes me ingle all over like my

tambourine- that anaconda of an old man swore 'em in to hunt him!

Oh! thou big white God aloft there somewhere in yon darkness, have

mercy on this small black boy down here; preserve him from all men

that have no bowels to feel fear!

