




TRANSLATOR'S PREFACE.



On comparing with the original Russian some English translations

of Count Tolstoi's works, published both in this country and in

England, I concluded that they were far from being accurate.  The

majority of them were retranslations from the French, and I found

that the respective transitions through which they had passed

tended to obliterate many of the beauties of the Russian language

and of the peculiar characteristics of Russian life.  A 

satisfactory translation can be made only by one who understands

the language and SPIRIT of the Russian people.  As Tolstoi's

writings contain so many idioms it is not an easy task to render

them into intelligible English, and the one who successfully

accomplishes this must be a native of Russia, commanding the

English and Russian languages with equal fluency.



The story of "Ivan the Fool" portrays Tolstoi's communistic

ideas, involving the abolition of military forces, middlemen,

despotism, and money.  Instead of these he would establish on

earth a kingdom in which each and every person would become a

worker and producer.  The author describes the various struggles

through which three brothers passed, beset as they were by devils

large and small, until they reached the ideal state of existence

which he believes to be the only happy one attainable in this

world.



On reading this little story one is surprised that the Russian

censor passed it, as it is devoted to a narration of ideas quite

at variance with the present policy of the government of that

country.



"A Lost Opportunity" is a singularly true picture of peasant

life, which evinces a deep study of the subject on the part of

the writer.  Tolstoi has drawn many of the peculiar customs of

the Russian peasant in a masterly manner, and I doubt if he has

given a more comprehensive description of this feature of Russian

life in any of his other works.  In this story also he has

presented many traits which are common to human nature throughout

the world, and this gives an added interest to the book.  The

language is simple and picturesque, and the characters are drawn

with remarkable fidelity to nature.  The moral of this tale

points out how the hero Ivan might have avoided the terrible

consequences of a quarrel with his neighbor (which grew out of

nothing) if he had lived in accordance with the scriptural

injunction to forgive his brother's sins and seek not for

revenge.



The story of "Polikushka" is a very graphic description of the

life led by a servant of the court household of a certain

nobleman, in which the author portrays the different conditions

and surroundings enjoyed by these servants from those of the

ordinary or common peasants.  It is a true and powerful

reproduction of an element in Russian life but little written

about heretofore.  Like the other stories of this great writer,

"Polikushka" has a moral to which we all might profitably give

heed.  He illustrates the awful consequences of intemperance, and

concludes that only kind treatment can reform the victims of

alcohol.



For much valuable assistance in the work of  these translations,

I am deeply indebted to the bright English scholarship of my

devoted wife.


