





CHAPTER XXXI.



In which a witch did dwell, in loathly weeds,

And wilful want, all careless of her deeds;

So choosing solitary to abide,

Far from all neighbours, that her devilish deeds

And hellish arts from people she might hide,

And hurt far off, unknown, whome'er she envied.



Faerie Queene.





THE health of Lucy Ashton soon required the assistance of a

person more skilful in the office of a sick-nurse than the female

domestics of the family.  Ailsie Gourlay, sometimes called the

Wise Woman of Bowden, was the person whom, for her own strong

reasons, Lady Ashton selected as an attendant upon her daughter.



This woman had acquired a considerable reputation among the

ignorant by the pretended cures which she performed, especially

in "oncomes," as the Scotch call them, or mysterious diseases,

which baffle the regular physician.  Her pharmacopoeia consisted

partly of herbs selected in planetary hours, partly of words,

signs, and charms, which sometimes, perhaps, produced a

favourable influence upon the imagination of her patients.  Such

was the avowed profession of Luckie Gourlay, which, as may well

be supposed, was looked upon with a suspicious eye, not only by

her neighbours, but even by the clergy of the district.  In

private, however, she traded more deeply in the occult sciences;

for, notwithstanding the dreadful punishments inflicted upon the

supposed crime of witchcraft, there wanted not those who, steeled

by want and bitterness of spirit, were willing to adopt the

hateful and dangerous character, for the sake of the influence

which its terrors enabled them to exercise in the vicinity, and

the wretched emolument which they could extract by the practice

of their supposed art.



Ailsie Gourlay was not indeed fool enough to acknowledge a

compact with the Evil One, which would have been a swift and

ready road to the stake and tar-barrel.  Her fairy, she said,

like Caliban's, was a harmless fairy.  Nevertheless, she "spaed

fortunes," read dreams, composed philtres, discovered stolen

goods, and made and dissolved matches as successfully as if,

according to the belief of the whole neighbourhood, she had been

aided in those arts by Beelzebub himself.  The worst of the

pretenders to these sciences was, that they were generally

persons who, feeling themselves odious to humanity, were careless

of what they did to deserve the public hatred.  Real crimes were

often committed under pretence of magical imposture; and it

somewhat relieves the disgust with which we read, in the criminal

records, the conviction of these wretches, to be aware that many

of them merited, as poisoners, suborners, and diabolical agents

in secret domestic crimes, the severe fate to which they were

condemned for the imaginary guilt of witchcraft.



Such was Aislie Gourlay, whom, in order to attain the absolute

subjugation of Lucy Ashton's mind, her mother thought it fitting

to place near her person.  A woman of less consequence than Lady

Ashton had not dared to take such a step; but her high rank and

strength of character set her above the censure of the world, and

she was allowed to have seleced for her daughter's attendant the

best and most experienced sick-nurse and

"mediciner" in the neighbourhood, where an inferior person would

have fallen under the reproach of calling in the assistance of a

partner and ally of the great Enemy of mankind.



The beldam caught her cue readily and by innuendo, without

giving Lady Ashton the pain of distinct explanation.  She was in

many respects qualified for the part she played, which indeed

could not be efficiently assumed without some knowledge of the

human heart and passions.  Dame Gourlay perceived that Lucy

shuddered at her external appearance, which we have already

described when we found her in the death-chamber of blind Alice;

and while internally she hated the poor girl for the involuntary

horror with which she saw she was regarded, she commenced her

operations by endeavouring to efface or overcome those prejudices

which, in her heart, she resented as mortal offences.  This was

easily done, for the hag's external ugliness was soon balanced by

a show of kindness and interest, to which Lucy had of late been

little accustomed; her attentive services and real skill gained

her the ear, if not the confidence, of her patient; and under

pretence of diverting the solitude of a sick-room, she soon led

her attention captive by the legends in which she was well

skilled, and to which Lucy's habit of reading and reflection

induced her to "lend an attentive ear."  Dame Gourlay's tales

were at first of a mild and

interesting character--



Of fays that nightly dance upon the wold,

And lovers doom'd to wander and to weep,

And castles high, where wicked wizards keep

Their captive thralls.



Gradually, however, they assumed a darker and more

mysterious character, and became such as, told by the midnight

lamp, and enforced by the tremulous tone, the quivering and livid

lip, the uplifted skinny forefinger, and the shaking head of the

blue-eyed hag, might have appalled a less credulous imagination

in an age more hard of belief.  The old Sycorax saw her

advantage, and gradually narrowed her magic circle around the

devoted victim on whose spirit she practised.  Her legends began

to relate to the fortunes of the Ravenswood family, whose ancient

grandeur and portentous authority credulity had graced with so

many superstitious attributes.  The story of the fatal fountain

was narrated at full length, and with formidable additions, by

the ancient sibyl.  The prophecy, quoted by Caleb, concerning the

dead bride who was to be won by the last of the Ravenswoods, had

its own mysterious commentary; and the singular circumstance of

the apparition seen by the Master of Ravenswood in the forest,

having partly transpired through his hasty inquiries in the

cottage of Old Alice, formed a theme for many exaggerations.



Lucy might have despised these tales if they had been related

concerning another family, or if her own situation had been less

despondent.  But circumstanced as she was, the idea that an evil

fate hung over her attachment became predominant over her other

feelings; and the gloom of superstition darkened a mind already

sufficiently weakned by sorrow, distress, uncertainty, and an

oppressive sense of desertion and desolation.  Stories were told

by her attendant so closely resembling her own in their

circumstances, that she was gradually led to converse upon such

tragic and mystical subjects with the beldam, and to repose a

sort of confidence in the sibyl, whom she still regarded with

involuntary shuddering.  Dame Gourlay knew how to avail herself

of this imperfect confidence.  She directed Lucy's thoughts to

the means of inquiring into futurity--the surest mode perhaps, of

shaking the understanding and destroying the spirits.  Omens were

expounded, dreams were interpreted, and other tricks of jugglery

perhaps resorted to, by which the pretended adepts of the period

deceived and fascinated their deluded followers.  I find it

mentioned in the articles of dittay against Ailsie Gourlay--for

it is some comfort to know that the old hag was tried, condemned,

and burned on the top of North Berwick Law, by sentence of a

commission from the privy council--I find, I say, it was charged

against her, among other offences, that she had, by the aid and

delusions of Satan, shown to a young person of quality, in a

mirror glass, a gentleman then abroad, to whom the said young

person was betrothed, and who appeared in the vision to be in the

act of bestowing his hand upon another lady.  But this and some

other parts of the record appear to have been studiously left

imperfect in names and dates, probably out of regard to the

honour of the families concerned.  If Dame Gourlay was able

actually to play off such a piece of jugglery, it is clear she

must have had better assistance to practise the


deception than her own skill or funds could supply.  Meanwhile,

this mysterious visionary traffic had its usual effect in

unsettling Miss Ashton's mind.  Her temper became unequal, her

health decayed daily, her manners grew moping, melancholy, and

uncertain.  her father, guessing partly at the cause of these

appearances, made a point of banishing Dame Gourlay from the

castle; but the arrow was shot, and was rankling barb-deep in the

side of the wounded deer.



It was shortly after the departure of this woman, that Lucy

Ashton, urged by her parents, announced to them, with a vivacity

by which they were startled, "That she was concious heaven and

earth and hell had set themselves against her union with

Ravenswood; still her contract," she said, "was a binding

contract, and she neither would nor could resign it without the

consent of Ravenswood.  Let me be assured," she concluded, "that

he will free me from my engagement, and dispose of me as you

please, I care not how.  When the diamonds are gone, what

signifies the casket?"



The tone of obstinacy with which this was said, her eyes

flashingt with unnatural light, and her hands firmly clenched,

precluded the possibility of dispute; and the utmost length which

Lady Ashton's art could attain, only got her the privilege of

dictating the letter, by which her daughter required to know of

Ravenswood whether he intended to abide by or to surrender what

she termed "their unfortuante engagement."  Of this advantage

Lady Ashton so far and so ingeniously availed herself that,

according to the wording of the letter, the reader would have

supposed Lucy was calling upon her lover to renounce a contract

which was contrary to the interests and inclinations of both.

Not trusting even to this point of deception, Lady Ashton finally

determined to suppress the letter altogether, in hopes that

Lucy's impatience would induce her to condemn Ravenswood unheard

and in absence.  In this she was disappointed.  The time, indeed,

had long elapsed when an answer should have been received from

the continent.  The faint ray of hope which still glimmered in

Lucy's mind was well nigh extinguished.  But the idea never

forsook her that her letter might not have been duly forwarded.

One of her mother's new machinations unexpectedly furnished her

with the means of ascertaining what she most desired to know.



The female agent of hell having been dismissed from the castle,

Lady Ashton, who wrought by all variety of means,

resolved to employ, for working the same end on Lucy's mind, an

agent of a very different character.  This was no other than the

Reverent Mr. Bide-the-Bent, a presbyterian clergyman, formerly

mentioned, of the very strictest order and the most rigid

orthodoxy, whose aid she called in, upon the principle of the

tyrant in the in the tragedy:



I'll have a priest shall preach her from her faith,

And make it sin not to renounce that vow

Which I'd have broken.



But Lady Ashton was mistaken in the agent she had selected.  His

prejudices, indeed, were easily enlisted on her side, and it was

no difficult matter to make him regard with horror the prospect

of a union betwixt the daughter of a God-fearing, professing, and

Presbyterian family of distinction and the heir of a bloodthirsty

prelatist and persecutor, the hands of whose fathers had been

dyed to the wrists in the blood of God's saints.  This resembled,

in the divine's opinion, the union of a Moabitish stranger with a

daughter of Zion.  But with all the more severe prejudices and

principles of his sect, Bide-the-Bent possessed a sound judgment,

and had learnt sympathy even in that very school of presecution

where the heart is so frequently hardened.  In a private

interview with Miss Ashton, he was deeply moved by her distress,

and could not but admit the justice of her request to be

permitted a direct communication with Ravenswood upon the subject

of their solemn contract.  When she urged to him the great

uncertainty under which she laboured whether her letter had been

ever forwarded, the old man paced the room with long steps, shook

his grey head, rested repeatedly for a space on his ivory-headed

staff, and, after much hesitation, confessed that he thought her

doubts so reasonable that he would himself aid in the removal of

them.



"I cannot but opine, Miss Lucy," he said, "that your

worshipful lady mother hath in this matter an eagerness whilk,

although it ariseth doubtless from love to your best interests

here and hereafter, for the man is of persecuting blood, and

himself a persecutor, a Cavalier or Malignant, and a scoffer, who

hath no inheritance in Jesse; nevertheless, we are commanded to

do justice unto all, and to fulfil our bond and covenant, as well

to the stranger as to him who is in brotherhood with us.

Wherefore myself, even I myself, will be aiding unto the delivery

of your letter to the man Edgar Ravenswood, trusting that the

issue therof may be your deliverance from the nets in which he

hath sinfully engaged you.  And that I may do in this neither

more nor less than hath been warranted by your honourable

parents, I pray you to transcribe, without increment or

subtraction, the letter formerly expeded under the dictation of

your right honourable mother; and I shall put it into such sure

course of being delivered, that if, honourable young madam, you

shall receive no answer, it will be necessary that you conclude

that the man meaneth in silence to abandon that naughty

contract, which, peradventure, he may be  unwilling directly to

restore."



Lucy eagerly embraced the expedient of the worthy divine.  A new

letter was written in the precise terms of the former, and

consigned by Mr. Bide-the-Bent to the charge of Saunders

Moonshine, a zealous elder of the church when on shore, and when

on board his brig as bold a smuggler as ever ran out a sliding

bowsprit to the winds that blow betwixt Campvere and the east

coast of Scotland.  At the recommendation of his pastor, Saunders

readily undertook that the letter should be securely conveyed to

the Master of Ravenswood at the court where he now resided.



This retrospect became necessary to explain the conference

betwixt Miss Ashton, her mother, and Bucklaw which we have

detailed in a preceding chapter.



Lucy was now like the sailor who, while drifting through a

tempestuous ocean, clings for safety to a single plank, his

powers of grasping it becoming every moment more feeble, and the

deep darkness of the night only checkered by the flashes of

lightning, hissing as they show the white tops of the billows, in

which he is soon to be engulfed.



Week crept away after week, and day after day.  St. Jude's day

arrived, the last and protracted term to which Lucy had limited

herself, and there was neither letter nor news of

Ravenswood.
