






CHAPTER XVII.



Here is a father now,

Will truck his daughter for a foreign venture,

Make her the stop-gap to some canker'd feud,

Or fling her o'er, like Jonah, to the fishes,

To appease the sea at highest.



Anonymous.





THE Lord Keeper opened his discourse with an appearance of

unconcern, marking, however, very carefully, the effect of his

communication upon young Ravenswood.



"You are aware," he said, "my young friend, that suspicion is

the natural vice of our unsettled times, and exposes the best

and wisest of us to the imposition of artful rascals.  If I had

been disposed to listen to such the other day, or even if I had

been the wily politicians which you have been taught to believe

me, you, Master of Ravenswood, instead of being at freedom, and

with fully liberty to solicit and act against me as you please,

in defence of what you suppose to be your rights, would have been

in the Castle of Edinburgh, or some other state prison; or, if

you had escaped that destiny, it must have been by flight to a

foreign country, and at the risk of a sentence of fugitation."



"My Lord Keeper," said the Master, "I think you would not jest

on such a subject; yet it seems impossible you can be in

earnest."



"Innocence," said the Lord Keeper, "is also confident, and

sometimes, though very excusably, presumptuously so."



"I do not understand," said Ravenswood, "how a consciouness of

innocence can be, in any case,  accounted presumtuous."



"Imprudent, at least, it may be called," said Sir William

Ashton, "since it is apt to lead us into the mistake of

supposeing that sufficiently evident to others of which, in fact,

we are only conscious ourselves.  I have known a rogue, for this

very reason, make a better defence than an innocent man could

have done in the same circumstances of suspicion.  Having no

consciousness of innocence to support him, such a fellow applies

himself to all the advantages which the law will afford him, and

sometimes--if his counsel be men of talent--succeeds in

compelling his judges to receive him as innocent.  I remember the

celebrated case of Sir Coolie Condiddle of Condiddle, who was

tried for theft under trust, of which all the world knew him

guilty, and yet was not only acquitted, but lived to sit in

judgment on honester folk."



"Allow me to beg you will return to the point," said the Master;

"you seemed to say that I had suffered under some

suspicion."



"Suspicion, Master!  Ay, truly, and I can show you the proofs of

it; if I happen only to have them with me.  Here, Lockhard."  His

attendant came.  "Fetch me the little private mail with the

padlocks, that I recommended to your particular charge, d'ye

hear?"



"Yes, my lord."  Lockhard vanished; and the Keeper

continued, as if half speaking to himself.



"I think the papers are with me--I think so, for, as I was to be

in this country, it was natural for me to bring them with me.  I

have them, however, at Ravenswood Castle, that I am sure; so

perhaps you might condescend----"



Here Lockhard entered, and put the leathern scrutoire, or mail-

box, into his hands.  The Keeper produced one or two papers,

respecting the information laid before the privy council

concerning the riot, as it was termed, at the funeral of Allan

Lord Ravenswood, and the active share he had himself taken in

quashing the proceedings against the Master.  These documents had

been selected with care, so as to irritate the natural curiosity

of Ravenswood upon such a subject, without gratifying it, yet to

show that Sir William Ashton had acted upon that trying occasion

the part of an advocate and peacemaker betwixt him and the

jealous authorities of the day.  Having furnished his host with

such subjects for examination, the Lord Keeper went to the

breakfast-table, and entered into light conversation, addressed

partly to old Caleb, whose resentment against the usurper of the

Castle of Ravenswood began to be softened by his familiarity, and

partly to his daughter.



After perusing these papers, the Master of Ravenswood remained

for a minute or two with his hand pressed against his brow, in

deep and profound meditation.  He then again ran his eye hastily

over the papers, as if desirous of discovering in them some deep

purpose, or some mark of fabrication, which had escaped him at

first perusal.  Apparently the second reading confirmed the

opinion which had pressed upon him at the first, for he started

from the stone bench on which he was sitting, and, going to the

Lord Keeper, took his hand, and, strongly pressing it, asked his

pardon repeatedly for the injustice he had done him, when it

appeared he was experiencing, at his hands, the benefit of

protection to his person and vindication to his character.



The statesman received these acknowledgments at first with well-

feigned surprise, and then with an affectation of frank

cordiality.  The tears began already to start from Lucy's blue

eyes at viewing this unexpected and moving scene.  To see the

Master, late so haughty and reserved, and whom she had always

supposed the injured person, supplicating her father for

forgiveness, was a change at once surprising, flattering, and

affecting.



"Dry your eyes, Lucy," said her father; "why should you weep,

because your father, though a lawyer, is discovered to be a fair

and honourable man?  What have you to thank me for, my dear

Master," he continued, addressing Ravenswood, "that you would not

have done in my case?  'Suum cuique tribuito,' was the Roman

justice, and I learned it when I studied Justinian.  Besides,

have you not overpaid me a thousand times, in saving the life of

this dear child?"



"Yes," answered the Master, in all the remorse of self-

accusation; "but the little service _I_ did was an act of mere

brutal instinct; YOUR defence of my cause, when you knew how

ill I thought of you, and how much I was disposed to be your

enemy, was an act of generous, manly, and considerate wisdom."



"Pshaw!" said the Lord Keeper, "each of us acted in his own way;

you as a gallant soldier, I as an upright judge and privy-

councillor.  We could not, perhaps, have changed parts; at least

I should have made a very sorry tauridor, and you, my good

Master, though your cause is so excellent, might have pleaded it

perhaps worse yourself than I who acted for you before the

council."



"My generous friend!" said Ravenswood; and with that brief word,

which the Keeper had often lavished upon him, but which he

himself now pronounced for the first time, he gave to his feudal

enemy the full confidence of an haughty but honourable heart.

The Master had been remarked among his contemporaries for sense

and acuteness, as well as for his reserved, pertinacious, and

irascible character.  His prepossessions accordingly, however

obstinate, were of a nature to give way before love and

gratitude; and the real charms of the daughter, joined to the

supposed services of the father, cancelled in his memory the vows

of vengeance which he had taken so deeply on the eve of his

father's funeral.  But they had been heard and registered in the

book of fate.



Caleb was present at this extraordinary scene, and he could

conceive no other reason for a proceeding so extraordinary than

an alliance betwixt the houses, and Ravenswood Castle assigned

for the young lady's dowry.  As for Lucy, when Ravenswood uttered

the most passionate excuses for his ungrateful negligence, she

could but smile through her tears, and, as she abandoned her hand

to him, assure him, in broken accents, of the delight with which

she beheld the complete reconciliation between her father and her

deliverer.  Even the statesman was moved and affected by the

fiery, unreserved, and generous self-abandonment with which the

Master of Ravenswood renounced his feudal enmity, and threw

himself without hesitation upon his forgiveness.  His eyes

glistened as he looked upon a couple who were obviously becoming

attached, and who seemed made for each other.   He thought how

high the proud and chivalrous character of Ravenswood might rise

under many circumstances in which HE found himself "overcrowed,"

to use a phrase of Spenser, and kept under, by his brief

pedigree, and timidity of disposition.  Then his daughter--his

favorite child--his constant playmate--seemed formed to live

happy in a union with such a commanding spirit as Ravenswood; and

even the fine, delicate, fragile form of Lucy Ashton seemed to

require the support of the Master's muscular strength and

masculine character.  And it was not merely during a few minutes

that Sir William Ashton looked upon their marriage as a probable

and even desirable event, for a full hour intervened ere his

imagination was crossed by recollection of the Master's poverty,

and the sure displeasure of Lady Ashton.   It is certain, that

the very unusual flow of kindly feeling with which the Lord

Keeper had been thus surprised, was one of the circumstances

which gave much tacit encouragement to the attachment between the

Master and his daughter, and led both the lovers distinctly to

believe that it was a connexion which would be most agreeable to

him.  He himself was supposed to have admitted this in effect,

when, long after the catastrophe of their love, he used to warn

his hearers against permitting their feelings to obtain an

ascendency over their judgment, and affirm, that the greatest

misfortunte of his life was owing to a very temporary

predominance of sensibility over self-interest.  It must be

owned, if such was the case, he was long and severely punished

for an offence of very brief duration.



After some pause, the Lord Keeper resumed the conversation.--



"In your surprise at finding me an honester man than you

expected, you have lost your curiosity about this Craigengelt, my

good Master; and yet your name was brought in, in the course of

that matter too."



"The scoundrel!" said Ravenswood.  "My connexion with him was of

the most temporary nature possible; and yet I was very foolish to

hold any communication with him at all.  What did he say of me?"



"Enough," said the Keeper, "to excite the very loyal terrors of

some of our sages, who are for proceeding against men on the

mere grounds of suspicion or mercenary information.  Some

nonsense about your proposing to enter into the service of

France, or of the Pretender, I don't recollect which, but which

the Marquis of A----, one of your best friends, and another

person, whom some call one of your worst and most interested

enemies, could not, somehow, be brought to listen to."



"I am obliged to my honourable friend; and yet," shaking the

Lord Keeper's hand--"and yet I am still more obliged to my

honourable enemy."



"Inimicus amicissimus," said the Lord Keeper, returning the

pressure; "but this gentleman--this Mr. Hayston of Bucklaw--I am

afraid the poor young man--I heard the fellow mention his name--

is under very bad guidance."



"He is old enough to govern himself," answered the Master.



"Old enough, perhaps, but scarce wise enough, if he has chosen

this fellow for his fidus Achates.  Why, he lodged an

information against him--that is, such a consequence might have

ensued from his examination, had we not looked rather at the

character of the witness than the tenor of his evidence."



"Mr. Hayston of Bucklaw," said the master, "is, I believe, a

most honourable man, and capable of nothing that is mean or

disgraceful."



"Capable of much that is unreasonable, though; that you must

needs allow, master.  Death will soon put him in possession of a

fair estate, if he hath it not already; old Lady Girnington--an

excellent person, excepting that her inveterate ill-nature

rendered her intolerable to the whole world--is probably dead by

this time.  Six heirs portioners have successively died to make

her wealthy.  I know the estates well; they march with my own--a

noble property."



"I am glad of it," said Ravenswood, "and should be more so, were

I confident that Bucklaw would change his company and habits

with his fortunes.  This appearance of Craigengelt, acting in the

capacity of his friend, is a most vile augury for his future

respectability."



"He is a bird of evil omen, to be sure," said the Keeper, "and

croaks of jail and gallows-tree.  But I see Mr. Caleb grows

impatient for our return to breakfast."

