





CHAPTER XXVI.



Why flames yon far summit--why shoot to the blast

Those embers, like stars from the firmament cast?

'Tis the fire-shower of  ruin, all dreadfully driven

From thine eyrie, that beacons the darkness of Heaven.



CAMPBELL.





THE circumstances announced in the conclusion of the last

chapter will account for the ready and cheerful reception of the

Marquis of A---- and the Master of Ravenswood in the village of

Wolf's Hope.  In fact, Caleb had no sooner announced the

conflagration of the tower than the whole hamlet were upon foot

to hasten to extinguish the flames.  And although that zealous

adherent diverted their zeal by intimating the formidable

contents of the subterranean apartments, yet the check only

turned their assiduity into another direction.  Never had there

been such slaughtering of capons, and fat geese, and barndoor

fowls; never such boiling of "reested" hams; never such making of

car-cakes and sweet scones, Selkirk bannocks, cookies, and

petticoat-tails--delicacies little known to the present

generation.  Never had there been such a tapping of barrels, and

such uncorking of greybeards, in the village of Wolf's Hope.  All

the inferior houses were thrown open for the reception of the

Marquis's  dependants, who came, it was thought, as precursors of

the shower of preferment which hereafter was to leave the rest of

Scotland dry, in order to distil its rich dews on the village of

Wolf's Hope under Lammermoor.  The minister put in his claim to

have the guests of distinction lodged at the manse, having his

eye, it was thought, upon a neighbouring preferment, where the

incumbent was sickly; but Mr. Balderstone destined that honour to

the cooper, his wife, and wife's mother, who danced for joy at

the preferences thus assigned them.



Many a beck and many a bow welcomed these noble guests to as

good entertainment as persons of such rank could set before such

visitors; and the old dame, who had formerly lived in Ravenswood

Castle, and knew, as she said, the ways of the nobility, was in

no whit wanting in arranging matters, as well as circumstances

permitted, according to the etiquette of the times.  The

cooper's house was so roomy that each guest had his separate

retiring-room, to which they were ushered with all due ceremony,

while the plentiful supper was in the act of being placed upon

the table.



Ravenswood no sooner found himself alone than, impelled by a

thousand feelings, he left the apartment, the house, and the

village, and hastily retraced his steps to the brow of the hill,

which rose betwixt the village and screened it from the tower, in

order to view the final fall of the house of his fathers.  Some

idle boys from the hamlet had taken the same direction out of

curiosity, having first witnessed the arrival of the coach and

six and its attendants.  As they ran one by one past the Master,

calling to each other to "Come and see the auld tower blaw up in

the lift like the peelings of an ingan," he could not but feel

himself moved with indignation.  "And these are the sons of my

father's vassals," he said--"of men bound, both by law and

gratitude, to follow our steps through battle, and fire, and

flood; and now the destruction of their liege lord's house is but

a holiday's sight to them"



These exasperating reflections were partly expresssed in the

acrimony with which he exclaimed, on feeling himself pulled by

the cloak: "What do you want, you dog?"



"I am a dog, and an auld dog too," answered Caleb, for it was he

who had taken the freedom, "and I am like to get a dog's wages;

but it does not signification a pinch of sneesing, for I am ower

auld a dog to learn new tricks, or to follow a new master."



As he spoke, Ravenswood attained the ridge of the hill from

which Wolf's Crag was visible; the flames had entirely sunk down,

and, to his great surprise, there was only a dusky reddening upon

the clouds immediately over the castle, which seemed the

reflection of the embers of the sunken fire.



"The place cannot have blown up," said the Master; "we must have

heard the report: if a quarter of the gunpowder was there you

tell me of, it would have been heard twenty miles off."



"It've very like it wad," said Balderstone, composedly.



"Then the fire cannot have reached the vaults?"



"It's like no," answered Caleb, with the same impenetrable

gravity.



"Hark ye, Caleb," said his master, "this grows a little too much

for my patience.  I must go and examine how matters stand at

Wolf's Crag myself."



"Your honour is ganging to gang nae sic gate," said Caleb,

firmly.



"And why not?" said Ravenswood, sharply; "who or what shall

prevent me?"



"Even I mysell," said Caleb, with the same determination.



"You, Balderstone!" replied the Master; "you are forgetting

yourself, I think."



"But I think no," said Balderstone; "for I can just tell ye a'

about the castle on this knowe-head as weel as if ye were at it.

Only dinna pit yoursell into a kippage, and expose yoursell

before the weans, or before the Marquis, when ye gang down-bye."



"Speak out, you old fool," replied his master, "and let me know

the best and the worst at once."



"Ou, the best and the warst is, just that the tower is standing

hail and feir, as safe and as empty as when ye left it."



"Indeed! and the fire?" said Ravenswood.

"Not a gleed of fire, then, except the bit kindling peat, and

maybe a spunk in Mysie's cutty-pipe," replied Caleb.



"But the flame?" demanded Ravenswood--"the broad blaze which

might have been seen ten miles off--what occasioned that?"



"Hout awa'! it's an auld saying and a true--



Little's the light

Will be seen far in a mirk night.



A wheen fern and horse little that I fired in the courtyard,

after sending back the loon of a footman; and, to speak Heaven's

truth, the next time that ye send or bring ony body here, let

them ge gentles allenarly, without ony fremd servants, like that

chield Lockhard, to be gledging and gleeing about, and looking

upon the wrang side of ane's housekeeping, to the discredit of

the family, and forcing ane to damn their souls wi' telling ae

lee after another faster than I can count them: I wad rather set

fire to the tower in gude earnest, and burn it ower my ain head

into the bargain, or I see the family dishonoured in the sort."



"Upon my word, I am infinitely obliged by the proposal, Caleb,"

said his master, scarce able to to restrain his laughter, though

rather angry at the same time.  "But the gunpowder--is there such

a thing in the tower?  The Marquis seemed to know of it."

"The pouther, ha! ha! ha!--the Marquis, ha! ha! ha!" replied

Caleb,--"if your honour were to brain me, I behooved to laugh,--

the Marquis--the pouther!  Was it there?  Ay, it was there.  Did

he ken o't?  My certie! the Marquis kenn'd o't, and it was the

best o' the game; for, when I couldna pacify your honour wi' a'

that I could say, I aye threw out a word mair about the

gunpouther, and garr'd the Marquis tak the job in his ain hand."



"But you have not answered my question," said the Master,

impatiently; "how came the powder there, and where is it now?"



"Ou, it came there, an ye maun needs ken," said Caleb, looking

mysteriously, and whispering, "when there was like to be a wee

bit rising here; and the Marquis, and a' the great lords of the

north, were a' in it, and mony a gudely gun and broadsword were

ferried ower frae Dunkirk forbye the pouther.  Awfu' work we had

getting them into the tower under cloud o' night, for ye maun

think it wasna everybody could be trusted wi' sic kittle jobs.

But if ye will gae hame to your supper, I will tell you a' about

it as ye gang down."



"And these wretched boys," said Ravenswood, "is it your pleasure

they are to sit there all night, to wait for the blowing up of a

tower that is not even on fire?"



"Surely not, if it is your honour's pleasure that they suld gang

hame; although," added Caleb, "it wadna do them a grain's

damage: they wad screigh less the next day, and sleep the

sounder at e'en.  But just as your honour likes."



Stepping accordingly towards the urchins who manned the knolls

near which they stood, Caleb informed them, in an

authoritative tone, that their honours Lord Ravenswood and the

Marquis of A---- had given orders that the tower was not to be

blow up till next day at noon.  The boys dispersed upon this

comfortable assurance.  One or two, however, followed Caleb for

more information, particularly the urchin whom he had cheated

while officiating as turnspit, who screamed, "Mr. Balderstone!--

Mr. Balderstone! then the castle's gane out like an auld wife's

spunk?"



"To be sure it is, callant," said the butler; "do ye think the

castle of as great a lord as Lord Ravenswood wad continue in a

bleeze, and him standing looking on wi' his ain very een?  It's

aye right," continued Caleb, shaking off his ragged page, and

closing in to his Master, "to train up weans, as the wise man

says, in the way they should go, and, aboon a', to teach them

respect to their superiors."



"But all this while, Caleb, you have never told me what became

of the arms and powder," said Ravenswood.



"Why, as for the arms," said Caleb, "it was just like the

bairn's rhyme--

Some gaed east and some gaed west,

And some gaed to the craw's nest.



And for the pouther, I e'en changed it, as occasion served, with

the skippers o' Dutch luggers and French vessels, for gin and

brandy, and is served the house mony a year--a gude swap too,

between what cheereth the soul of man and that which hingeth it

clean out of his body; forbye, I keepit a wheen pounds of it for

yoursell when ye wanted to take the pleasure o' shooting: whiles,

in these latter days, I wad hardly hae kenn'd else whar to get

pouther for your pleasure.  And now that your anger is ower, sir,

wasna that weel managed o' me, and arena ye far better sorted

doun yonder than ye could hae been in your ain auld ruins up-bye

yonder, as the case stands wi' us now? the mair's the pity!"



"I believe you may be right, Caleb; but, before burning down my

castle, either in jest or in earnest," said Ravenswood, "I think

I had a right to be in the secret."



"Fie for shame, your honour!" replied Caleb; "it fits an auld

carle like me weel eneugh to tell lees for the credit of the

family, but it wadna beseem the like o' your honour's sell;

besides, young folk are no judicious: they cannot make the maist

of a bit figment.  Now this fire--for a fire it sall be, if I

suld burn the auld stable to make it mair feasible--this fire,

besides that it will be an excuse for asking ony thing we want

through the country, or doun at the haven--this fire will settle

mony things on an honourable footing for the family's credit,

that cost me telling twenty daily lees to a wheen idle chaps and

queans, and, what's waur, without gaining credence."

"That was hard indeed, Caleb; but I do not see how this fire

should help your veracity or your credit."



"There it is now?" said Caleb; "wasna I saying that young folk

had a green judgment?  How suld it help me, quotha?  It will be a

creditable apology for the honour of the family for this score of

years to come, if it is weel guided.  'Where's the family

pictures?' says ae meddling body.  'The great fire at Wolf's

Crag,' answers I.  'Where's the family plate?' says another.

'The great fire,' says I; 'wha was to think of plate, when life

and limb were in danger?'  'Where's the wardrobe and the linens?-

-where's the tapestries and the decorements?--beds of state,

twilts, pands and testors, napery and broidered wark?'  'The

fire--the fire--the fire.'  Guide the fire weel, and it will

serve ye for a' that ye suld have and have not; and, in some

sort, a gude excuse is better than the things themselves; for

they maun crack and wear out, and be consumed by time, whereas a

gude offcome, prudently and creditably handled, may serve a

nobleman and his family, Lord kens how lang!"



Ravenswood was too well acquainted with his butler's

pertinacity and self-opinion to dispute the point with him any

farther.  Leaving Caleb, therefore, to the enjoyment of his own

successful ingenuity, he returned to the hamlet, where he found

the Marquis and the good women of the mansion under some anxiety-

-the former on account of his absence, the others for the

discredit their cookery might sustain by the delay of the supper.

All were now at ease, and heard with pleasure that the fire at

the castle had burned out of itself without reaching the vaults,

which was the only information that Ravenswood thought it proper

to give in public concerning the event of his butler's strategem.



They sat down to an excellent supper.  No invitation could

prevail on Mr. and Mrs. Girder, even in their own house, to sit

down at table with guests of such high quality.  They remained

standing in the apartment, and acted the part of respectful and

careful attendants on the company.  Such were the manners of the

time.  The elder dame, confident through her age and connexion

with the Ravenswood family, was less

scrupulously ceremonious.  She played a mixed part betwixt that

of the hostess of an inn and the mistress of a private house, who

receives guests above her own degree.  She recommended, and even

pressed, what she thought best, and was herself easily entreated

to take a moderate share of the good cheer, in order to encourage

her guests by her own example.  Often she interrupted herself, to

express her regret that "my lord did not eat; that the Master was

pyking a bare bane; that, to be sure, there was naething there

fit to set before their honours; that Lord Allan, rest his saul,

used to like a pouthered guse, and said it was Latin for a tass

o' brandy; that the brandy came frae France direct; for, for a'

the English laws and gaugers, the Wolf's Hope brigs hadna

forgotten the gate to Dunkirk."



Here the cooper admonished his mother-in-law with his elbow,

which procured him the following special notice in the progress

of her speech:



"Ye needna be dunshin that gate, John [Gibbie]," continued the

old lady; "naebody says that YE ken whar the brandy comes

frae; and it wadna be fitting ye should, and you the Queen's

cooper; and what signifies't," continued she, addressing Lord

Ravenswood, "to king, queen, or kaiser whar an auld wife like me

buys her pickle sneeshin, or her drap brandy-wine, to haud her

heart up?"



Having thus extricated herself from her supposed false step,

Dame Loup-the-Dyke proceeded, during the rest of the evening, to

supply, with great animation, and very little assistance from her

guests, the funds necessary for the support of the conversation,

until, declining any further circulation of their glass, her

guests requested her permission to retire to their apartments.



The Marquis occupied the chamber of dais, which, in every house

above the rank of a mere cottage, was kept sacred for such high

occasions as the present.  The modern finishing with plaster was

then unknown, and tapestry was confined to the houses of the

nobility and superior gentry.  The cooper, therefore, who was a

man of some vanity, as well as some wealth, had imitated the

fashion observed by the inferior landholders and clergy, who

usually ornamented their state apartments with hangings of a sort

of stamped leather, manufactured in the Netherlands, garnished

with trees and aminals executed in copper foil, and with many a

pithy sentence of morality, which, although couched in Low Dutch,

were perhaps as much attended to in

practice as if written in broad Scotch.  The whole had somewhat

of a gloomy aspect; but the fire, composed of old pitch-barrel

staves, blazed merrily up the chimney; the bed was decorated with

linen of most fresh and dazzling whiteness, which had never

before been used, and might, perhaps, have never been used at

all, but for this high occasion.  On the toilette beside, stood

an old-fashioned mirror, in a fillagree frame, part of the

dispersed finery of the neighbouring castle.  It was flanked by a

long-necked bottle of Florence wine, by which stood a glass

enarly as tall, resembling in shape that which Teniers usually

places in the hands of his own portrait, when he paints himself

as mingling in the revels of a country village.  To

counterbalance those foreign sentinels, there mounted guard on

the other side of the mirror two stout warders of Scottish

lineage; a jug, namely, of double ale, which held a Scotch pint,

and a quaigh, or bicker, of ivory and ebony, hooped with silver,

the work of John Girder's own hands, and the pride of his heart.

Besides these preparations against thirst, there was a goodly

diet-loaf, or sweet cake; so that, with such auxiliaries, the

apartment seemed victualled against a siege of two or three days.



It only remains to say, that the Marquis's valet was in

attendance, displaying his master's brocaded nightgown, and

richly embroidered velvet cap, lined and faced with Brussels

lace, upon a huge leathern easy-chair, wheeled round so as to

have the full advantage of the comfortable fire which we have

already mentioned.  We therefore commit that eminent person to

his night's repose, trusting he profited by the ample

preparations made for his accommodation--preparations which we

have mentioned in detail, as illustrative of ancient Scottish

manners.



It is not necessary we should be equally minute in

describing the sleeping apartment of the Master of Ravenswood,

which was that usually occupied by the goodman and goodwife

themselves.  It was comfortably hung with a sort of warm-coloured

worsted, manufactured in Scotland, approaching in trexture to

what is now called shalloon.  A staring picture of John [Gibbie]

Girder himself ornamented this dormiory, painted by a starving

Frenchman, who had, God knows how or why, strolled over from

Flushing or Dunkirk to Wolf's Hope in a smuggling dogger.  The

features were, indeed, those of the stubborn, opinionative, yet

sensible artisan, but Monsieur had contrived to throw a French

grace into the look and manner, so utterly inconsistent with the

dogged gravity of the original, that it was impossible to look at

it without laughing.  John and his family, however, piqued

themselves not a little upon this picture, and were

proportionably censured by the neighbourhood, who pronounced that

the cooper, in sitting for the same, and yet more in presuming to

hang it up in his bedchamber, had exceeded his privilege as the

richest man of the village; at once stept beyond the bounds of

his own rank, and encroached upon those of the superior orders;

and, in fine, had been guilty of a very overweening act of vanity

and presumption.  Respect for the memory of my deceased friend,

Mr. Richard Tinto, has obliged me to treat this matter at some

length; but I spare the reader his prolix though curious

observations, as well upon the character of the French school as

upon the state of painting in Scotland at the beginning of the

18th century.



The other preparations of the Master's sleeping apartment were

similar to those in the chamber of dais.



At the usual early hour of that period, the Marquis of A---- and

his kinsman prepared to resume their journey.  This could not be

done without an ample breakfast, in which cold meat and hot meat,

and oatmeal flummery, wine and spirits, and milk varied by every

possible mode of preparation, evinced the same desire to do

honour to their guests which had been shown by the hospitable

owners of the mansion upon the evening before.  All the bustle of

preparation for departure now resounded through Wolf's Hope.

There was paying of bills and shaking of hands, and saddling of

horses, and harnessing of carriages, and distributing of drink-

money.  The Marquis left a broad piece for the gratification of

John Girder's household, which he, the said John, was for some

time disposed to convert to his own use; Dingwall, the writer,

assuring him he was justified in so doing, seeing he was the

disburser of those expenses which were the occasion of the

gratification.  But, notwithstanding this legal authority, John

could not find in his heart to dim the splendour of his late

hospitality by picketing anything in the nature of a gratuity.

He only assured his menials he would consider them as a damned

ungrateful pack if they bought a gill of brandy elsewhere than

out of his own stores; and as the drink-money was likely to go to

its legitimate use, he comforted himself that, in this manner,

the Marquis's donative would, without any impeachment of credit

and character, come ultimately into his own exclusive possession.



While arrangements were making for departure, Ravenswood made

blythe the heart of his ancient butler by informing him,

cautiously however (for he knew Caleb's warmth of imagination),

of the probably change which was about to take place in his

fortunes.  He deposited with Balderstone, at the same time, the

greater part of his slender funds, with an assurance, which he

was obliged to reiterate more than once, that he himself had

sufficient supplies in certain prospect. He therefore enjoined

Caleb, as he valued his favour, to desist from all farther

maneouvres against the inhabitants of Wolf's Hope, their cellars,

poultry-yards, and substance whatsoever.  In this prohibition,

the old domestic acquiesced more readily than his master

expected.



"It was doubtless," he said, "a shame, a discredit, and a sin to

harry the puir creatures, when the family were in

circumstances to live honourably on their ain means; and there

might be wisdom," he added, "in giving them a while's breathing-

time at any rate, that they might be the more readily brougth

forward upon his honour's future occasions."



This matter being settled, and having taken an affectionate

farewell of his old domestic, the Master rejoined his noble

relative, who was now ready to enter his carriage.  The two

landladies, old and young, having received in all kindly greeting

a kiss from each of their noble guests, stood simpering at the

door of their house, as the coach and six, followed by its train

of clattering horsemen, thundered out of the village.  John

Girder also stood upon his threshold, now looking at his honoured

right hand, which had been so lately shaken by a marquis and a

lord, and now giving a glance into the interior of his mansion,

which manifested all the disarray of the late revel, as if

balancing the distinction which he had attained with the

expenses of the entertainment.



At length he opened his oracular jaws.  "Let every man and woman

here set about their ain business, as if there was nae sic thing

as marquis or master, duke or drake, laird or lord, in this

world.  Let the house be redd up, the broken meat set bye, and if

there is ony thing totally uneatable, let it be gien to the puir

folk; and, gude mother and wife, I hae just ae thing to entreat

ye, that ye will never speak to me a single word, good or bad,

anent a' this nonsense wark, but keep a' your cracks about it to

yoursells and your kimmers, for my head is weel-nigh dung donnart

wi' it already."



As John's authority was tolerably absolute, all departed to

their usual occupations, leaving him to build castles in the air,

if he had a mind, upon the court favour which he had acquired by

the expenditure of his worldly substance.

