





CHAPTER XXIII.



Such was our fallen father's fate,

Yet better than mine own;

He shared his exile with his mate,

I'm banish'd forth alone.



WALLER





I WILL not attempt to describe the mixture of indignation and

regret with which Ravenswood left the seat which had belonged to

his ancestors.  The terms in which Lady Ashton's billet was

couched rendered it impossible for him, without being deficient

in that spirit of which he perhaps had too much, to remain an

instant longer within its walls.  The Marquis, who had his share

in the affront, was, nevertheless, still willing to make some

efforts at conciliation.  He therefore suffered his kinsman to

depart alone, making him promise, however, that he would wait

for him at the small inn called the Tod's Hole, situated, as our

readers may be pleased to recollect, half-way betwixt Ravenswood

Castle and Wolf's Crag, and about five Scottish miles distant

from each.  Here the Marquis proposed to join the Master of

Ravenswood, either that night or the next morning.  His own

feelings would have induced him to have left the castle directly,

but he was loth to forfeit, without at least one effort, the

advantages which he had proposed from his visit to the Lord

Keeper; and the Master of Ravenswood was, even in the very heat

of his resentment, unwilling to foreclose any chance of

reconciliation which might arise out of the partiality which Sir

William Ashton had shown towards him, as well as the intercessory

arguments of his noble kinsman.  He himself departed without a

moment's delay, farther than was necessary to make this

arrangement.



At first he spurred his horse at a quick pace through an avenue

of the park, as if, by rapidity of motion, he could stupify the

confusion of feelings with which he was assailed.  But as the

road grew wilder and more sequestered, and when the trees had

hidden the turrets of the castle, he gradually

slackened his pace, as if to indulge the painful reflections

which he had in vain endeavoured to repress.  The path in which

he found himself led him to the Mermaiden's Fountain, and to the

cottage of Alice; and the fatal influence which superstitious

belief attached to the former spot, as well as the admonitions

which had been in vain offered to him by the inhabitant of the

latter, forced themselves upon his memory.  "Old saws speak

truth," he said to himself, "and the Mermaiden's Well has indeed

witnessed the last act of rashness of the heir of Ravenswood.

Alice spoke well," he continued, "and I am in the situation which

she foretold; or rather, I am more deeply dishonoured--not the

dependant and ally of the destroyer of my father's house, as the

old sibyl presaged, but the degraded wretch who has aspired to

hold that subordinate character, and has been rejected with

disdain."



We are bound to tell the tale as we have received it; and,

considering the distance of the time, and propensity of those

through whose mouths it has passed to the marvellous, this could

not be called a Scottish story unless it manifested a tinge of

Scottish superstition.  As Ravenswood approached the solitary

fountain, he is said to have met with the following singular

adventure: His horse, which was moving slowly forward, suddenly

interrupted its steady and composed pace, snorted, reared, and,

though urged by the spur, refused to proceed, as if some object

of terror had suddenly presented itself.  On looking to the

fountain, Ravenswood discerned a female figure, dressed in a

white, or rather greyish, mantle, placed on the very spot on

which Lucy Ashton had reclined while listening to the fatal tale

of love.  His immediate impression was that she had conjectured

by which path he would traverse the park on his departure, and

placed herself at this well-known and sequestered place of

rendezvous, to indulge her own sorrow and his parting interview.

In this belief he jumped from his horse, and, making its bridle

fast to a tree, walked hastily towards the fountain, pronouncing

eagerly, yet under his breath, the words, "Miss Ashton!--Lucy!"



The figure turned as he addressed it, and displayed to his

wondering eyes the features, not of Lucy Ashton, but of old blind

Alice.  The singularity of her dress, which rather resembled a

shroud than the garment of a living woman; the appearance of her

person, larger, as it struck him, than it usually seemed to be;

above all, the strange circumstance of a blind, infirm, and

decrepit person being found alone and at a distance from her

habitation (considerable, if her infirmities be taken into

account), combined to impress him with a feeling of wonder

approaching to fear.  As he approached, she arose slowly from her

seat, held her shrivelled hand up as if to prevent his coming

more near, and her withered lips moved fast, although no sound

issued from them.  Ravenswood stopped; and as, after a moment's

pause, he again advanced towards her, Alice, or her apparition,

moved or glided backwards towards the thicket, still keeping her

face turned towards him.  The trees soon hid the form from his

sight; and, yielding to the strong and terrific

impression that the being which he had seen was not of this

world, the Master of Ravenswood remained rooted to the ground

whereon he had stood when he caught his last view of her.  At

length, summoning up his courage, he advanced to the spot on

which the figure had seemed to be seated; but neither was there

pressure of the grass nor any other circumstance to induce him to

believe that what he had seen was real and substantial.



Full of those strange thoughts and confused apprehensions which

awake in the bosom of one who conceives he has witnessed some

preternatural appearance, the Master of Ravenswood walked back

towards his horse, frequently, however, looking behind him, not

without apprehension, as if expecting that the vision would

reappear.  But the apparition, whether it was real or whether it

was the creation of a heated and agitated imagination, returned

not again; and he found his horse sweating and terrified, as if

experiencing that agony of fear with which the presence of a

supernatural being is supposed to agitate the brute creation.

The Master mounted, and rode slowly forward, soothing his steed

from time to time, while the animal seemed internally to shrink

and shudder, as if expecting some new object of fear at the

opening of every glade.  The rider, after a moment's

consideration, resolved to investigate the matter further.  "Can

my eyes have deceived me," he said, "and deceived me for such a

space of time?   Or are this woman's infirmities but feigned, in

order to excite compassion?  And even then, her motion resembled

not that of a living and existing person.  Must I adopt the

popular creed, and think that the unhappy being has formed a

league with the powers of

darkness?  I am determined to be resolved; I will not brook

imposition even from my own eyes."



In this uncertainty he rode up to the little wicket of Alice's

garden.  Her seat beneath the birch-tree was vacant, though the

day was pleasant and the sun was high.  He approached the hut,

and heard from within the sobs and wailing of a female.  No

answer was returned when he knocked, so that, after a moment's

pause, he lifted the latch and entered.  It was indeed a house of

solitude and sorrow.  Stretched upon her miserable pallet lay the

corpse of the last retainer of the house of Ravenswood who still

abode on their paternal domains!  Life had but shortly departed;

and the little girl by whom she had been attended in her last

moments was wringing her hands and sobbing, betwixt childish fear

and sorrow, over the body of her mistress.



The Master of Ravenswood had some difficulty to compose the

terrors of the poor child, whom his unexpected appearance had at

first rather appalled than comforted; and when he succeeded, the

first expression which the girl used intimated that "he had come

too late."  Upon inquiring the meaning of this expression, he

learned that the deceased, upon the first attack of the mortal

agony, had sent a peasant to the castle to beseech an interview

of the Master of Ravenswood, and had expressed the utmost

impatience for his return.  But the messengers of the poor are

tardy and negligent: the fellow had not reached the castle, as

was afterwards learned, until Ravenswood had left it, and had

then found too much amusement maong the retinue of the strangers

to return in any haste to the cottage of Alice.  Meantime her

anxiety of mind seemed to increase with the agony of her body;

and, to use the phrase of Babie, her only attendant, "she prayed

powerfully that she might see her master's son once more, and

renew her warning."  She died just as the clock in the distant

village tolled one; and Ravenswood remembered, with internal

shuddering, that he had heard the chime sound through the wood

just before he had seen what he was now much disposed to consider

as the spectre of the deceased.



It was necessary, as well from his respect to the departed as in

common humanity to her terrified attendant, that he should take

some measures to relieve the girl from her distressing

situation.  The deceased, he understood, had expressed a desire

to be buried in a solitary churchyard, near the little inn of the

Tod's Hole, called the Hermitage, or more commonly Armitage, in

which lay interred some of the Ravenswood family, and many of

their followers.  Ravenswood conceived it his duty to gratify

this predilection, commonly found to exist among the Scottish

peasantry, and despatched Babie to the neighbouring village to

procure the assistance of some females, assuring her that, in the

mean while, he would himself remain with the dead body, which, as

in Thessaly of old, it is accounted highly unfit to leave without

a watch.



Thus, in the course of a quarter of an hour or little more, he

found himself sitting a solitary guard over the inanimate corpse

of her whose dismissed spirit, unless his eyes had

strangely deceived him, had so recently manifested itself before

him.  Notwithstanding his natural courage, the Master was

considerably affected by a concurrence of circumstances so

extraordinary.  "She died expressing her eager desire to see me.

Can it be, then," was his natural course of reflection--"can

strong and earnest wishes, formed during the last agony of

nature, survive its catastrophe, surmount the awful bounds of the

spiritual world, and place before us its inhabitants in the hues

and colouring of life?  And why was that manifested to the eye

which could not unfold its tale to the ear? and wherefore should

a breach be made in the laws of nature, yet its purpose remain

unknown?  Vain questions, which only death, when it shall make me

like the pale and withered form before me, can ever resolve."



He laid a cloth, as he spoke, over the lifeless face, upon whose

features he felt unwilling any longer to dwell.  He then took his

place in an old carved oaken chair, ornamented with his own

armorial bearings, which Alice had contrived to appropriate to

her own use in the pillage which took place among creditors,

officers, domestics, and messengers of the law when his father

left Ravenswood Castle for the last time.  Thus seated, he

banished, as much as he could, the superstitious feelings which

the late incident naturally inspired.  His own were sad enough,

without the exaggeration of supernatural terror, since he found

himself transferred from the situation of a successful lover of

Lucy Ashton, and an honoured and respected friend of her father,

into the melancholy and solitary guardian of the abandoned and

forsaken corpse of a common pauper.



He was relieved, however, from his sad office sooner that he

could reasonably have expected, considering the distance betwixt

the hut of the deceased and the village, and the age and

infirmities of three old women who came from thence, in military

phrase, to relieve guard upon the body of the defunct.  On any

other occasion the speed of these reverend sibyls would have been

much more moderate, for the first was eighty years of age and

upwards, the second was paralytic, and the third lame of a leg

from some accident.  But the burial duties rendered to the

deceased are, to the Scottish peasant of either sex, a labour of

love.  I know not whether it is from the temper of the people,

grave and enthusiastic as it certainly is, or from the

recollection of the ancient Catholic opinions, when the funeral

rites were always considered as a period of festival to the

living; but feasting, good cheeer, and even inebriety, were, and

are, the frequent accompaniments of a Scottish old-fashioned

burial.  What the funeral feast, or "dirgie," as it is called,

was to the men, the gloomy preparations of the dead body for the

coffin were to the women.  To straight the contorted limbs upon a

board used for that melancholy purpose, to array the corpse in

clean linen, and over that in its woollen shroad, were operations

committed always to the old matrons of the village, and in which

they found a singular and gloomy delight.



The old women paid the Master their salutations with a ghastly

smile, which reminded him of the meeting betwixt Macbeth and the

witches on the blasted heath of Forres.  He gave them some money,

and recommended to them the charge of the dead body of their

contemporary, an office which they willingly undertook;

intimating to him at the same time that he must leave the hut, in

order that they might begin their mournful duties.  Ravenswood

readily agreed to depart, only tarrying to recommend to them due

attention to the body, and to receive information where he was to

find the sexton, or beadle, who had in charge the deserted

churchyard of the Armitage, in order to prepare matters for the

reception of Old Alice in the place of repose which she had

selected for herself.



"Ye'll no be pinched to find out Johnie Mortsheugh," said the

elder sibyl, and still her withered cheek bore a grisly smile;

"he dwells near the Tod's Hole, an house of entertainment where

there has been mony a blythe birling, for death and drink-

draining are near neighbours to ane anither."



"Ay! and that's e'en true, cummer," said the lame hag, propping

herself with a crutch which supported the shortness of her left

leg, "for I mind when the father of this Master of Ravenswood

that is now standing before us sticked young Blackhall with his

whinger, for a wrang word said ower their wine, or brandy, or

what not: he gaed in as light as a lark, and he came out wi' his

feet foremost.  I was at the winding of the corpse; and when the

bluid was washed off, he was a bonny bouk of man's body."

It may be easily believed that this ill-timed anecdote hastened

the Master's purpose of quitting a company so evil-omened and so

odious.  Yet, while walking to the tree to which his horse was

tied, and busying himself with adjusting the girhts of the

saddle, he could not avoid hearing, through the hedge of the

little garden, a conversation respecting himself, betwixt the

lame woman and the octagenarian sibyl.  The pair had hobbled into

the garden to gather rosemary, southernwood, rue, and other

plants proper to be strewed upon the body, and burned by way of

fumigation in the chimney of the cottage.  The paralytic wretch,

almost exhausted by the journey, was left guard upon the corpse,

lest witches or fiends might play their sport with it.



The following law, croaking dialogue was necessarily

overheard by the Master of Ravenswood:



"That's a fresh and full-grown hemlock, Annie Winnie; mony a

cummer lang syne wad hae sought nae better horse to flee over

hill and how, through mist and moonlight, and light down in the

the King of France's cellar."



"Ay, cummer! but the very deil has turned as hard-hearted now as

the Lord Keeper and the grit folk, that hae breasts like

whinstane.  They prick us and they pine us, and they pit us on

the pinnywinkles for witches; and, if I say my prayers backwards

ten times ower, Satan will never gie me amends o' them."



"Did ye ever see the foul thief?" asked her neighbour.



"Na!" replied the other spokeswoman; "but I trow I hae dreamed

of him mony a time, and I think the day will come they will burn

me for't.  But ne'er mind, cummer! we hae this dollar of the

Master's, and we'll send doun for bread and for yill, and

tobacco, and a drap brandy to burn, and a wee pickle saft sugar;

and be there deil, or nae deil, lass, we'll hae a merry night

o't."



Here her leathern chops uttered a sort of cackling, ghastly

laugh, resembling, to a certain degree, the cry of the screech-

owl.



"He's a frank man, and a free-handed man, the Master," said

Annie Winnie, "and a comely personage--broad in the shouthers,

and narrow around the lunyies.  He wad mak a bonny corpse; I wad

like to hae the streiking and winding o' him."



"It is written on his brow, Annie Winnie," returned  the

octogenarian, her companion, "that hand of woman, or of man

either, will never straught him: dead-deal will never be laid on

his back, make you your market of that, for I hae it frae a sure

hand."



"Will it be his lot to die on the battle-ground then, Ailsie

Gourlay?  Will he die by the sword or the ball, as his forbears

had dune before him, mony ane o' them?"

"Ask nae mair questions about it--he'll no be graced sae far,"

replied the sage.



"I ken ye are wiser than ither folk, Aislie Gourlay.  But wha

tell'd ye this?"

"Fashna your thumb about that, Annie Winnie," answered the

sibyl, "I hae it frae a hand sure eneugh."



"But ye said ye never saw the foul thief," reiterated her

inquisitive companion.



"I hae it frae as sure a hand," said Ailsie, "and frae them that

spaed his fortune before the sark gaed ower his head."



"Hark! I hear his horse's feet riding aff," said the other;

"they dinna sound as if good luck was wi' them."



"Mak haste, sirs," cried the paralytic hag from the cottage,

"and let us do what is needfu', and say what is fitting; for, if

the dead corpse binna straughted, it will girn and thraw, and

that will fear the best o' us."



Ravenswood was now out of hearing.  He despised most of the

ordinary prejudices about witchcraft, omens, and vaticination, to

which his age and country still gave such implicit credit that to

express a doubt of them was accounted a crime equal to the

unbelief of Jews or Saracens; he knew also that the prevailing

belief, concerning witches, operating upon the hypochondriac

habits of those whom age, infirmity, and poverty rendered liable

to suspicion, and enforced by the fear of death and the pangs of

the most cruel tortures, often extorted those confessions which

encumber and disgrace the criminal records of Scotland during the

17th century.  But the vision of that morning, whether real or

imaginary, had impressed his mind with a superstitious feeling

which he in vain endeavoured to shake off.  The nature of the

business which awaited him at the little inn, called Tod's Hole,

where he soon after arrived, was not of a kind to restore his

spirits.



It was necessary he should see Mortsheugh, the sexton of the old

burial-ground at Armitage, to arrange matters for the funeral of

Alice; and, as the man dwelt near the place of her late

residence, the Master, after a slight refreshment, walked towards

the place where the body of Alice was to be deposited.  It was

situated in the nook formed by the eddying sweep of a stream,

which issued from the adjoining hills.  A rude cavern in an

adjacent rock, which, in the interior, was cut into the shape of

a cross, formed the hermitage, where some Saxon saint had in

ancient times done penance, and given name to the place.  The

rich Abbey of Coldinghame had, in latter days, established a

chapel in the neighbourhood, of which no vestige was now visible,

though the churchyard which surrounded it was still, as upon the

present occasion, used for the interment of particular persons.

One or two shattered yew-trees still grew within the precincts of

that which had once been holy ground.  Warriors and barons had

been buried there of old, but their names were forgotten, and

their monuments demolished.  The only sepulchral memorials which

remained were the upright headstonres which mark the graves of

persons of inferior rank.  The abode of the sexton was a solitary

cottage adjacent to the ruined wall of the cemetery, but so low

that, with its thatch, which nearly reached the ground, covered

with a thick crop of grass, fog, and house-leeks, it resembled an

overgrown grave.  On inquiry, however, Ravenswood found that the

man of the last mattock was absent at a bridal, being fiddler as

well as grave-digger to the vicinity.  He therefore retired to

the little inn, leaving a message that early next morning he

would again call for the person whose double occupation connected

him at once with the house of mourning and the house of feasting.



An outrider of the Marquis arrived at Tod's Hole shortly after,

with a message, intimating that his master would join Ravenswood

at that place on the following morning; and the Master, who would

otherwise have proceeded to his old retreat at Wolf's Crag,

remained there accordingy to give meeting to his noble kinsman.

