





CHAPTER XXXV.



Whose mind's so marbled, and his heart so hard,

That would not, when this huge mishap was heard,

To th' utmost note of sorrow set their song,

To see a gallant, with so great a grace,

So suddenly unthought on, so o'erthrown,

And so to perish, in so poor a place,

By too rash riding in a ground unknown!



POEM, IN NISBET'S Heraldry, vol. ii.





WE have anticipated the course of time to mention Bucklaw's

recovery and fate, that we might not interrupt the detail of

events which succeeded the funeral of the unfortunate Lucy

Ashton.  This melancholy ceremony was performed in the misty dawn

of an autumnal morning, with such moderate attendance and

ceremony as could not possibly be dispensed with.  A very few of

the nearest relations attended her body to the same churchyard to

which she had so lately been led as a bride, with as little free

will, perhaps, as could be now testified by her lifeless and

passive remains.  An aisle adjacent to the church had been fitted

up by Sir William Ashton as a family cemetery; and here, in a

coffin bearing neither name nor date, were consigned to dust the

remains of what was once lovely, beautiful, and innocent, though

exasperated to frenzy by a long tract of unremitting persecution.



While the mourners were busy in the vault, the three village

hags, who, notwithstanding the unwonted earliness of the hour,

had snuffed the carrion like vultures, were seated on the

"through-stane," and engaged in their wonted unhallowed

conference.



"Did not I say," said Dame Gourlay, "that the braw bridal would

be followed by as braw a funeral?"



"I think," answered Dame Winnie, "there's little bravery at it:

neither meat nor drink, and just a wheen silver tippences to the

poor folk; it was little worth while to come sae far a road for

sae sma' profit, and us sae frail."



"Out, wretch!" replied Dame Gourlay, "can a' the dainties they

could gie us be half sae sweet as this hour's vengeance?  There

they are that were capering on their prancing nags four days

since, and they are now ganging as dreigh and sober as oursells

the day.  They were a' glistening wi' gowd and silver; they're

now as black as the crook.  And Miss Lucy Ashton, that grudged

when an honest woman came near her--a taid may sit on her coffin

that day, and she can never scunner when he croaks.  And Lady

Ashton has hell-fire burning in her breast by this time; and Sir

William, wi' his gibbets, and his faggots, and his chains, how

likes he the witcheries of his ain dwelling-house?"



"And is it true, then," mumbled the paralytic wretch, "that the

bride was trailed out of her bed and up the chimly by evil

spirits, and that the bridegroom's face was wrung round ahint

him?"



"Ye needna care wha did it, or how it was done," said Aislie

Gourlay; "but I'll uphaud it for nae stickit job, and that the

lairds and leddies ken weel this day."



"And was it true," said Annie Winnie, "sin ye ken sae muckle

about it, that the picture of auld Sir Malise Ravenswood came

down on the ha' floor, and led out the brawl before them a'?"



"Na," said Ailsie; "but into the ha' came the picture--and I ken

weel how it came there--to gie them a warning that pride wad get

a fa'.  But there's as queer a ploy, cummers, as ony o' thae,

that's gaun on even now in the burial vault yonder: ye saw twall

mourners, wi' crape and cloak, gang down the steps pair and

pair!"



"What should ail us to see them?" said the one old woman.



"I counted them," said the other, with the eagerness of a person

to whom the spectacle had afforded too much interest to be

viewed with indifference.



"But ye did not see," said Ailsie, exulting in her superior

observation, "that there's a thirteenth amang them that they ken

naething about; and, if auld freits say true, there's ane o' that

company that'll no be lang for this warld.   But come awa'

cummers; if we bide here, I'se warrant we get the wyte o'

whatever ill comes of it, and that gude will come of it nane o'

them need ever think to see."



And thus, croaking like the ravens when they anticipate

pestilence, the ill-boding sibyls withdrew from the churchyard.



In fact, the mourners, when the service of interment was ended,

discovered that there was among them one more than the invited

number, and the remark was communicated in whispers to each

other.  The suspicion fell upon a figure which, muffled in the

same deep mourning with the others, was reclined, almost in a

state of insensibility, against one of the pillars of the

sepulchral vault.  The relatives of the Ashton family were

expressing in whispers their surprise and displeasure at the

intrusion, when they were interrupted by Colonel Ashton, who, in

his father's absence, acted as principal mourner.  "I know," he

said in a whisper, "who this person is, he has, or shall soon

have, as deep cause of mourning as ourselves; leave me to deal

with him, and do not disturb the ceremony by unnecessary

exposure."  So saying, he separated himself from the group of his

relations, and taking the unknown mourner by the cloak, he said

to him, in a tone of suppressed emotion, "Follow me."



The stranger, as if starting from a trance at the sound of his

voice, mechanically obeyed, and they ascended the broken ruinous

stair which led from the sepulchre into the churchyard.  The

other mourners followed, but remained grouped together at the

door of the vault, watching with anxiety the motions of Colonel

Ashton and the stranger, who now appeared to be in close

conference beneath the shade of a yew-tree, in the most remote

part of the burial-ground.



To this sequestered spot Colonel Ashton had guided the stranger,

and then turning round, addressed him in a stern and composed

tone.--"I cannot doubt that I speak to the Master of

Ravenswood?"  No answer was returned.  "I cannot doubt," resumed

the Colonel, trembling with rising passion, "that I speak to the

murderer of my sister!"



"You have named me but too truly," said Ravenswood, in a hollow

and tremulous voice.



"If you repent what you have done," said the Colonel, "may your

penitence avail you before God; with me it shall serve you

nothing.  Here," he said, giving a paper, "is the measure of my

sword, and a memorandum of the time and place of meeting.

Sunrise to-morrow morning, on the links to the east of Wolf's

Hope."



The Master of Ravenswood held the paper in his hand, and seemed

irresolute.  At length he spoke--"Do not," he said, "urge to

farther desperation a wretch who is already desperate.  Enjoy

your life while you can, and let me seek my death from another."



"That you never, never shall!" said Douglas Ashton.  "You shall

die by my hand, or you shall complete the ruin of my family by

taking my life.  If you refuse my open challenge, there is no

advantage I will not take of you, no indignity with which I will

not load you, until the very name of Ravenswood shall be the sign

of everything that is dishonourable, as it is already of all

that is villainous."



"That it shall never be," said Ravenswood, fiercely; "if I am

the last who must bear it, I owe it to those who once owned it

that the name shall be extinguished without infamy.  I accept

your challenge, time, and place of meeting.  We meet, I presume,

alone?"



"Alone we meet," said Colonel Ashton, "and alone will the

survivor of us return from that place of rendezvous."



"Then God have mercy on the soul of him who falls!" said

Ravenswood.



"So be it!" said Colonel Ashton; "so far can my charity reach

even for the man I hate most deadly, and with the deepest

reason.  Now, break off, for we shall be interrupted.  The links

by the sea-shore to the east of Wolf's Hope; the hour, sunrise;

our swords our only weapons."



"Enough," said the Master, "I will not fail you."



They separated; Colonel Ashton joining the rest of the mourners,

and the Master of Ravenswood taking his horse, which was tied to

a tree behind the church.  Colonel Ashton returned to the castle

with the funeral guests, but found a pretext for detaching

himself from them in the evening, when, changing his dress to a

riding-habit, he rode to Wolf's Hope, that night, and took up his

abode in the little inn, in order that he might be ready for his

rendezvous in the morning.



It is not known how the Master of Ravenswood disposed of the

rest of that unhappy day.  Late at night, however, he arrived at

Wolf's Crag, and aroused his old domestic, Caleb Balderstone, who

had ceased to expect his return.  Confused and flying rumours of

the late tragical death of Miss Ashton, and of its mysterious

cause, had already reached the old man, who was filled with the

utmost anxiety, on account of the probable effect these events

might produce upon the mind of his master.



The conduct of Ravenswood did not alleviate his

apprehensions.  To the butler's trembling entreaties that he

would take some refreshment, he at first returned no answer, and

then suddenly and fiercely demanding wine, he drank, contrary to

his habits, a very large draught.  Seeing that his master would

eat nothing, the old man affectionately entreated that he would

permit him to light him to his chamber.  It was not until the

request was three or four times repeated that Ravenswood made a

mute sign of compliance.  But when Balderstone conducted him to

an apartment which had been comfortably fitted up, and which,

since his return, he had usually occupied, Ravenswood stopped

short on the threshold.



"Not here," said he, sternly; "show me the room in which my

father died; the room in which SHE slept the night the were at

the castle."



"Who, sir?" said Caleb, too terrified to preserve his presence

of mind.



"SHE, Lucy Ashton!  Would you kill me, old man, by forcing me to

repeat her name?"



Caleb would have said something of the disrepair of the chamber,

but was silenced by the irritable impatience which was expressed

in his master's countenance; he lighted the way

trembling and in silence, placed the lamp on the table of the

deserted room, and was about to attempt some arrangement of the

bed, when his master big him begone in a tone that admitted of

no delay.  The old man retired, not to rest, but to prayer; and

from time to time crept to the door of the apartment, in order to

find out whether Ravenswood had gone to repose.  His measured

heavy step upon the floor was only interrupted by deep groans;

and the repeated stamps of the heel of his heavy boot intimated

too clearly that the wretched inmate was abandoning himself at

such moments to paroxysms of uncontrolled agony.  The old man

thought that the mroning, for which he longed, would never have

dawned; but time, whose course rolls on with equal current,

however it may seem more rapid or more slow to mortal

apprehension, brought the dawn at last, and spread a ruddy light

on the broad verge of the glistening ocean.  It was early in

November, and the weather was serene for the season of the year.

But an easterly wind had prevailed during the night, and the

advancing tide rolled nearer than usual to the foot of the crags

on which the castle was founded.



With the first peep of light, Caleb Balderstone again resorted

to the door of Ravenswood's sleeping apartment, through a chink

of which he observed him engaged in measuring the length of two

or three swords which lay in a closet adjoining to the apartment.

He muttered to himself, as he selected one of these weapons: "It

is shorter: let him have this advantage, as he has every other."



Caleb Balderstone knew too well, from what he witnessed, upon

what enterprise his master was bound, and how vain all

interference on his part must necessarily prove.  He had but

time to retreat from the door, so nearly was he surprised by his

master suddenly coming out and descending to the stables.  The

faithful domestic followed; and from the dishevelled appearance


of his master's dress, and his ghastly looks, was confirmed in

his conjecture that he had passed the night without sleep or

repose.  He found him busily engaged in saddling his horse, a

service from which Caleb, though with faltering voice and

trembling hands, offered to relieve him.  Ravenswood rejected his

assistance by a mute sign, and having led the animal into the

court, was just about to mount him, when the old domestic's fear

giving way to the strong attachment which was the principal

passion of his mind, he flung himself suddenly at Ravenswood's

feet, and clasped his knees, while he exclaimed: "Oh, sir! oh,

master! kill me if you will, but do not go out on this dreadful

errand!  Oh! my dear master, wait but this day; the Marquis of A-

--- comes to-morrow, and a' will be remedied."



"You have no longer a master, Caleb," said Ravenswood,

endeavouring to extricate himself; "why, old man, would you cling

to a falling tower?"



"But I HAVE a master," cried Caleb, still holding him fast,

"while the heir of Ravenswood breathes.  I am but a

servant; but I was born your father's--your grandfather's

servant.  I was born for the family--I have lived for them--I

would die for them!  Stay but at home, and all will be well!"



"Well, fool! well!" said Ravenswood.  "Vain old man, nothing

hereafter in life will be well with me, and happiest is the hour

that shall soonest close it!"



So saying, he extricated himself from the old man's hold, threw

himself on his horse, and rode out the gate; but instantly

turning back, he threw towards Caleb, who hastened to meet him, a

heavy purse of gold.



"Caleb!" he said, with a ghastly smile, "I make you my

executor"; and again turning his bridle, he resumed his course

down the hill.



The gold fell unheeded on the pavement, for the old man ran to

observe the course which was taken by his master, who turned to

the left down a small and broken path, which gained the sea-

shore through a cleft in the rock, and led to a sort of cove

where, in former times, the boats of the castle were wont to be

moored.  Observing him take this course, Caleb hastened to the

eastern battlement, which commanded the prospect of the whole

sands, very near as far as the village of Wolf's Hope.  He could

easily see his master riding in that direction, as fast as the

horse could carry him.  The prophecy at once rushed on

Balderstone's mind, that the Lord of Ravenswood should perish on

the Kelpie's flow, which lay half-way betwixt the Tower and the

links, or sand knolls, to the northward of Wolf's Hope.  He saw

him according reach the fatal spot; but he never saw him pass

further.







Colonel Ashton, frantic for revenge, was already in the field,

pacing the turf with eagerness, and looking with

impatience towards the Tower for the arrival of his antagonist.

The sun had now risen, and showed its broad disk above the

eastern sea, so that he could easily discern the horseman who

rode towards him with speed which argued impatience equal to his

own.  At once the figure became invisible, as if it had melted

into the air.  He rubbed his eyes, as if he had witnessed an

apparition, and then hastened to the spot, near which he was met

by Balderstone, who came from the opposite direction.  No trace

whatever o horse or rider could be discerned; it only appeared

that the late winds and high tides had greatly extended the usual

bounds of the quicksand, and that the unfortunate horseman, as

appeared from the hoof-tracks, in his precipitate haste, had not

attended to keep on the firm sands on the foot of the rock, but

had taken the shortest and most dangerous course.  One only

vestige of his fate appeared.  A large sable feather had been

detached from his hat, and the rippling waves of the rising tide

wafted it to Caleb's feet.  The old man took it up, dried it, and

placed it in his bosom.



The inhabitants of Wolf's Hope were now alarmed, and crowded to

the place, some on shore, and some in boats, but their search

availed nothing.  The tenacious depths of the quicksand, as is

usual in such cases, retained its prey.







Our tale draws to a conclusion.  The Marquis of A----, alarmed

at the frightful reports that were current, and anxious for his

kinsman's safety, arrived on the subsequent day to mourn his

loss; and, after renewing in vain a search for the body,

returned, to forget what had happened amid the bustle of politics

and state affairs.



Not so Caleb Balderstone.  If wordly profit could have consoled

the old man, his age was better provided for than his earlier

years had ever been; but life had lost to him its salt and its

savour.  His whole course of ideas, his feelings, whether of

pride or of apprehension, of pleasure or of pain, had all arisen

from its close connexion with the family which was now

extinguished.  He held up his head no longer, forsook all his

usual haunts and occupations, and seemed only to find pleasure in

moping about those apartments in the old castle which the Master

of Ravenswood had last inhabited.  He ate without refreshment,

and slumbered without repose; and, with a fidelity sometimes

displayed by the canine race,  but seldom by human beings, he

pined and died within a year after the catastrophe which we have

narrated.



The family of Ashton did not long survive that of

Ravenswood.  Sir William Ashton outlived his eldest son, the

Colonel, who was slain in a duel in Flanders; and Henry, by whom

he was succeeded, died unmarried.  Lady Ashton lived to the verge

of extreme old age, the only survivor of the group of unhappy

persons whose misfortunes were owing to her implacability.  That

she might internally feel compunction, and reconcile herself with

Heaven, whom she had offended, we will not, and we dare not,

deny; but to those around her she did not evince the slightest

symptom either of repentance or remorse.  In all external

appearance she bore the same bold, haughty, unbending character

which she had displayed before these unhappy events.  A splendid

marble monument records her name, titles, and virtues, while her

victims remain undistinguished by tomb or epitath.








END 
