





CHAPTER II.



Well, lord, we have not got that which we have;

'Tis not enough our foes are this time fled,

Being opposites of such repairing nature.



Henry VI. Part II.





IN the gorge of a pass or mountain glen, ascending from the

fertile plains of East Lothian, there stood in former times an

extensive castle, of which only the ruins are now visible.  Its

ancient proprietors were a race of powerful and warlike carons,

who bore the same name with the castle itself, which was

Ravenswood.  Their line extended to a remote period of antiquity,

and they had intermarried with the Douglasses, Humes, Swintons,

Hays, and other families of power and distinction in the same

country.  Their history was frequently involved in that of

Scotland itself, in whose annals their feats are recorded.  The

Castle of Ravenswood, occupying, and in some measure commanding,

a pass betweixt Berwickshire, or the Merse, as the southeastern

province of Scotland is termed, and the Lothians, was of

importance both in times of foreign war and domestic discord.  It

was frequently beseiged with ardour, and defended with obstinacy,

and, of course, its owners played a conspicuous part in story.

But their house had its revolutions, like all sublunary things:

it became greatly declined from its splendour about the middle of

the 17th century; and towards the period of the Revolution, the

last proprietor of Ravenswood Castle saw himself compelled to

part with the ancient family seat, and to remove himself to a

lonely and sea-beaten tower, which, situated on the bleak shores

between St. Abb's Head and the village of Eyemouth, looked out on

the lonely and boisterous German Ocean.  A black domain of wild

pasture-land surrounded their new residence,  and formed the

remains of their property.



Lord Ravenswood, the heir of this ruined family, was far from

bending his mind to his new condition of life.  In the civil war

of 1689 he had espoused the sinking side, and although he had

escaped without the forfeiture of life or land, his blood had

been attainted, and his title abolished.  He was now called Lord

Ravenswood only in courtesy.



This forfeited nobleman inherited the pride and turbulence,

though not the forture, of his house, and, as he imputed the

final declension of his family to a particular individual, he

honoured that person with his full portion of hatred.  This was

the very man who had now become, by purchase, proprietor of

Ravenswood, and the domains of which the heir of the house now

stood dispossessed.  He was descended of a family much less

ancient than that of Lord Ravenswood, and which had only risen to

wealth and political importance during the great civil wars.  He

himself had been bred to the bar, and had held high offices in

the state, maintaining through life the character of a skilful

fisher in the troubled waters of a state divided by factions, and

governed by delegated authority; and of one who contrived to

amass considerable sums of money in a country where there was but

little to be gathered, and who equally knew the value of wealth

and the various means of

augmenting it and using it as an engine of increasing his power

and influence.



Thus qualified and gifted, he was a dangerous antagonist to the

fierce and imprudent Ravenswood.  Whether he had given him good

cause for the enmity with which the Baron regarded him, was a

point on which men spoke differently.  Some said the quarrel

arose merely from the vicdictive spirit and envy of Lrod

Ravenswood, who could not patiently behold another, though by

just and fair purchase, become the proprietor of the estate and

castle of his forefathers.  But the greater part of the public,

prone to slander the wealthy in their absence as to flatter them

in their presence, held a less charitable opinion.  They said

that the Lord Keeper (for to this height Sir William Ashton had

ascended) had, previous to the final purchase of the estate of

Ravenswood, been concerned in extensive pecuniary transactions

with the former proprietor; and, rather intimating what was

probable than affirming anything positively, they asked which

party was likely to have the advantage in stating and enforcing

the claims arising out of these complicated affairs, and more

than hinted the advantages which the cool lawyer and able

politician must necessarily possess over the hot, fiery, and

imprudent character whom he had involved in legel toils and

pecuniary snares.



The character of the times aggravated these suspicions.  "In

those days there was no king in Israel."  Since the departure of

James VI. to assume the richer and more powerful crown of

England, there had existed in Scotland contending parties, formed

among the aristocracy, by whom, as their intrigues at the court

of St. James's chanced to prevail, the delegated powers of

sovereignty were alternately swayed.  The evils attending upon

this system of government resembled those which afflict the

tenants of an Irish estate, the property of an absentee.  There

was no supreme power, claiming and possessing a general interest

with the community at large, to whom the oppressed might appeal

from subordinate tyranny, either for justic or for mercy.  Let a

monarch be as indolent, as selfish, as much disposed to arbitrary

power as he will, still, in a free country, his own interests are

so clearly connected weith those of the public at large, and the

eveil consequences to his own authority are so obvious and

imminent when a different course is pursued, that common policy,

as well as ocmmon feeling, point to the equal distribution of

justice, and to the establishment of the throne in righteousness.

Thus, even sovereigns remarkable for usurpation and tyranny have

been found rigorous in the administration of justice among their

subjects, in cases where their own power and passions were not

compromised.



It is very different when the powers of sovereignty are

delegated to the head of an aristocratic faction, rivalled and

pressed closely in the race of ambition by an adverse leader.

His brief and precarious enjoyment of power must be employed in

rewarding his partizans, in extending his incluence, in

oppressing and crushing his adversaries.  Even Abou Hassan, the

most disinterested of all viceroys, forgot not, during his

caliphate of one day, to send a douceur of one thousand pieces

of gold to his own household; and the Scottish vicegerents,

raised to power by the strength of their faction, failed not to

embrace the same means of rewarding them.



The administration of justice, in particular, was infected by

the most gross partiality.  A case of importance scarcely

occurred in which there was not some ground for bias or

partiality on the part of the judges, who were so little able to

withstand the temptation that the adage, "Show me the man, and I

will show you the law," became as prevalent as it was scandalous.

One corruption led the way to others still mroe gross and

profligate.  The judge who lent his sacred authority in one case

to support a friend, and in another to crush an enemy, and who

decisions were founded on family connexions or political

relations, could not be supposed inaccessible to direct personal

motives; and the purse of the wealthy was too often believed to

be thrown into the scale to weigh down the cause of the poor

litigant.  The subordinate officers of the law affected little

scruple concerning bribery.  Pieces of plate and bags of money

were sent in presents to the king's counsel, to influence their

conduct, and poured forth, says a contemporary writer, like

billets of wood upon their floors, without even the decency of

concealment.



In such times, it was not over uncharitable to suppose that the

statesman, practised in courts of law, and a powerful member of a

triumphant cabal, might find and use means of advantage over his

less skilful and less favoured adversary; and if it had been

supposed that Sir William Ashton's conscience had been too

delicate to profit by these advantages, it was believed that his

ambition and desire of extending his wealth and consequence found

as strong a stimulus in the exhortations of his lady as the

daring aim of Macbeth in the days of yore.



Lady Ashton was of a family more distinguished than that of her

lord, an advantage which she did not fail to use to the

uttermost, in maintaining and extending her husband's influence

over others, and, unless she was greatly belied, her own over

him.  She had been beautiful, and was stately and majestic in her

appearance.  Endowed by nature with strong powers and violent

passions, experience had taught her to employ the one, and to

conceal, if not to moderate, the other.  She was a severe adn

strict observer of the external forms, at least, fo devotion; her

hospitality was splendid, even to ostentation; her address and

manners, agreeable to the pattern most valued in Scotland at the

period, were grave, dignified, and severely regulated by the

rules of etiquette.  Her character had always been beyond the

breath of slander.  And yet, with all these qualities to excite

respect, Lady Ashton was seldom mentioned in the terms of love or

affection.  Interest--the interest of her family, if not her own-

-seemed too obviously the motive of her actions; and where this

is the case, teh sharp-judging and malignant public are not

easily imposed upon by outward show.  It was seen and

ascertained that, in her most graceful courtesies and

compliments, Lady Ashton no more lost sight of her object than

the falcon in his airy wheel turns his quick eyes from his

destined quarry; and hence, somethign of doubt and suspicion

qualified the feelings with which her equals received her

attentions.  With her inferiors these feelings were mingled with

fear; an impression useful to her purposes, so far as it enforced

ready compliance with her requests and implicit obedience to her

commands, but detrimental, because it cannot exist with affection

or regard.



Even her husband, it is said, upon whose fortunes her talents

and address had produced such emphatic influence,

regarded her with respectful awe rather than confiding

attachment; and report said, there were times when he considered

his grandeur as dearly purchased at the expense of domestic

thraldom.  Of this, however, much might be suspected, but little

could be accurately known: Lady Ashton regarded the honour of her

husband as her own, and was well aware how much that would suffer

in the public eye should he appear a vassal to his wife.  In all

her arguments his opinion was quoted as infallible; his taste was

appealed to, and his sentiments received, with the air of

deference which a dutiful wife might seem to owe to a husband of

Sir William Ashton's rank adn character.  But there was something

under all this which rung false and hollow; and to those who

watched this couple with close, and perhaps malicious, scrutiny

it seemed evident that, in the haughtiness of a firmer character,

higher birth, and more decided views of aggrandisement, the lady

looked with some contempt on her husband, and that he regarded

her with jealous fear, rather than with love or admiration.



Still, however, the leading and favourite interests of Sir

William Ashton and his lady were the same, and they failed not to

work in concert, although without cordiality, and to testify, in

all exterior circumstances, that respect for each other which

they were aware was necessary to secure that of the public.



Their union was crowned with several children, of whom three

survived.  One, the eldest son, was absent on his travels; the

second, a girl of seventeen, adn the third, a boy about three

years younger, resided with their parents in

Edinburgh during the sessions of the Scottish Parliament and

Privy Council, at other times in the old Gothic castle of

Ravenswood, to which the Lord Keeper had made large additions in

the style of the 17th century.



Allan Lord Ravenswood, the late proprietor of that ancient

mansion adn the large estate annexed to it, continued for some

time to wage ineffectual war with his successor concerning

various points to which their former transactions had given rise,

and which were successively determined in favour of the wealthy

and powerful competitor, until death closed the litigation, by

summoning Ravenswood to a higher bar.  The thread of life, which

had been long wasting, gave way during a fit of violent and

impotent fury with which he was assailed on receiving the news of

the loss of a cause, founded, perhaps, rather in equity than in

law, the last which he had maintained against his powerful

antagonist.  His son witnessed his dying agonies, and heard the

curses which he breathed against his adversary, as if they had

conveyed to him a legacy of vengeance.  Other circumstances

happened to exasperate a passion which was, and had long been, a

prevalent vice in the Scottish disposition.



It was a November morning, and the cliffs which overlooked the

ocean were hung with thick and heavy mist, when the portals of

the ancient and half-ruinous tower, in which Lord Ravenswood had

spent the last and troubled years of his life, opened, that his

mortal remains might pass forward to an abode yet more dreary

and lonely.  The pomp of attendance, to which the deceased had,

in his latter years, been a stranger, was revived as he was about

to be consigned to the realms of forgetfulness.



Banner after banner, with the various devices and coats of this

ancient family and its connexions, followed each other in

mournful procession from under the low-browed archway of the

courtyard.  The principal gentry of the country attended in the

deepest mourning, and tempered the pace of their long train of

horses to the solemn march befitting the occasion. Trumpets, with

banners of crape attached to them, sent forth their long and

melancholy notes to regulate the movements of the procession.  An

immense train of inferior mourners and menials closed the rear,

which had not yet issued from the castle gate when the van had

reached the chapel where the body was to be deposited.



Contrary to the custom, and even to the law, of  the time, the

body was met by a priest of the Scottish Episcopal communion,

arrayed in his surplice, and prepared to read over the coffin of

the deceased the funeral service of the church.  Such had been

the desire of Lord Ravenswood in his last illness, and it was

readily complied with by the Tory gentlemen, or Cavaliers, as

they affected to style themselves, in which faction most of his

kinsmen were enrolled.  The Presbyterian Church judicatory of the

bounds, considering the ceremony as a bravading insult upon their

authority, had applied to the Lord Keeper, as the nearest privy

councillor, for a warrant to prevent its being carried into

effect; so that, when the clergyman had opened his prayer-book,

an officer of the law, supported by some armed men, commanded him

to be silent.  An insult which fired the whol assembly with

indignation was particularly and instantly resented by the only

son of the deceased, Edgar, popularly called the Master of

Ravenswood, a youth of about twenty years of age.  He clapped his

hand on his sword, and bidding the official person to desist at

his peril from farther interruption, commanded the clergyman to

proceed.  The man attempted to enforce his commission; but as an

hundred swords at once glittered in the air, he contented himself

with protesting against the violence which had been offered to

him in the execution of his duty, and stood aloof, a sullen adn

moody spectator of the ceremonial, muttering as one who should

say: "You'll rue the day that clogs me with this answer."



The scene was worthy of an artist's pencil.  Under the very arch

of the house of death, the clergyman, affrighted at the scene,

and trembling for his own safety, hastily and unwillingly

rehearsed the solemn service of the church, and spoke "dust to

dust and ashes to ashes," over ruined pride and decayed

prosperity.  Around stood the relations of the deceased, their

countenances more in anger than in sorrow, and the drawn swords

which they brandished forming a violent contrast with their deep

mourning habits.  In the countenance of the young man alone,

resentment seemed for the moment overpowered by the deep agony

with which he beheld his nearest, and almost his only, friend

consigned to the tomb of his ancestry.  A relative

observed him turn deadly pale, when, all rites being now duly

observed, it became the duty of the chief mourner to lower down

into the charnel vault, where mouldering coffins showed their

tattered velvet and decayed plating, the head of the corpse which

was to be their partner in corruption.  He stept to the youth and

offered his assistance, which, by a mute motion, Edgar Ravenswood

rejected.  Firmly, and without a tear, he performed that last

duty.  The stone was laid on the sepulchre, the door of the aisle

was locked, and the youth took possession of its massive key.



As the crowd left the chapel, he paused on the steps which led

to its Gothic chancel.  "Gentlemen and friends," he said, "you

have this day done no common duty to the body of your deceaesd

kinsman.  The rites of due observance, which, in other

countries, are allowed as the due of the meanest Christian, would

this day have been denied to the body of your relative--not

certainly sprung of the meanest house in Scotland--had it not

been assured to him by your courage.  Others bury their dead in

sorrow and tears, in silence and in reverence; our funeral rites

are marred by the intrusion of bailiffs and ruffians, and our

grief--the grief due to our departed friend--is chased from our

cheeks by the glow of just indignation.  But it is well that I

know from what quiver this arrow has come forth.  It was only he

that dug the drave who could have the mean cruelty to disturb the

obsequies; and Heaven do as much to me and more, if I requite not

to this man and his house the ruin and disgrace he has brought on

me and mine!"



A numerous part of the assembly applauded this speech, as the

spirited expression of just resentment; but the more cool and

judicious regretted that it had been uttered.  The fortunes of

the heir of Ravenswood were too low to brave the farther

hostility which they imagined these open expressions of

resentment must necessarily provoke.  Their apprehensions,

however, proved groundless, at least in the immediate

consequences of this affair.



The mourners returned to the tower, there, according to a custom

but recently abolished in Scotland, to carouse deep healths to

the memory of the deceased, to make the house of sorrow ring with

sounds of joviality and debauch, and to

diminish, by the expense of a large and profuse entertainment,

the limited revenues of ther heir of him whose funeral they thus

strangely honoured.  It was the custom, however, and on the

present occasion it was fully observed.  The tables swam in wine,

the populace feasted in the courtyard, the yeomen in the kitchen

and buttery; and two years' rent of Ravenswood's remaining

property hardly defrayed the charge of the funeral revel.  The

wine did its office on all but the Master of Ravenswood, a title

which he still retained, though forfeiture had attached to that

of his father.  He, while passing around the cup which he himself

did not taste, soon listened to a thousand exclamations against

the Lord Keeper, and passionate protestations of attachment to

himself, and to the honour of his house.  He listened with dark

and sullen brow to ebullitions which he considered justly as

equally evanescent with the crimson bubbles on the brink of the

goblet, or at least with the vapours which its contents excited

in the brains of the revellers around him.



When the last flask was emptied, they took their leave with deep

protestations--to be forgotten on the morrow, if, indeed, those

who made them should not think it necessary for their safety to

make a more solemn retractation.



Accepting theri adieus with an air of contempt which he could

scarce conceal, Ravenswood at length beheld his ruinous

habitation cleared of their confluence of riotous guests, and

returned to the deserted hall, which now appeared doubly lonely

from the cessation of that clamour to which it had so lately

echoed.  But its space was peopled by phantoms which the

imagination of the young heir conjured up before him--the

tarnished honour and degraded fortunes of his house, the

destruction of his own hopes, and the triumph of that family by

whom they had been ruined.  To a mind naturally of a gloomy cast

here was ample room for meditation, and the musings of young

Ravenswood were deep and unwitnessed.



The peasant who shows the ruins of the tower, which still crown

the beetling cliff and behold the war of the waves, though no

mroe tenanted saved by the sea-mew and cormorant, even yet

affirms that on this fatal night the Master of Ravenswood, by the

bitter exclamations of his despair, evoked some evil fiend, under

whose malignant influence the future tissue of incidents was

woven.   Alas! what fiend can suggest more desperate counsels

than those adopted under the guidance of our own violent and

unresisted passions?

