





CHAPTER XV.



We worldly men, when we see friends and kinsmen

Past hope sunk in their fortunes, lend no hand

To lift them up, but rather set our feet

Upon their heads to press them to the bottom,

As I must yield with you I practised it;

But now I see you in a way to rise,

I can and will assist you.



New Way to Pay Old Debts.





THE Lord Keeper carried with him, to a couch harder than he was

accustomed to stretch himself upon, the same ambitious thoughts

and political perplexities which drive sleep from the softest

down that ever spread a bed of state.  He had sailed long enough

amid the contending tides and currents of the time to be

sensible of their peril, and of the necessity of trimming his

vessel to the prevailing wind, if he would have her escape

shipwreck in the storm.  The nature of his talents, and the

timorousness of disposition connected with them, had made him

assume the pliability of the versatile old Earl of Northampton,

who explained the art by which he kept his ground during all the

changes of state, from the reign of Henry VIII. to that of

Elizabeth, by the frank avowal, that he was born of the willow,

not of the oak.  It had accordingly been Sir William Ashton's

policy, on all occasions, to watch the changes in the political

horizon, and, ere yet the conflict was decided, to negotiate some

interest for himself with the party most likely to prove

victorious.  His time-serving disposition was well-known, and

excited the contempt of the more daring leaders of both factions

in the state.  But his talents were of a useful and practical

kind, and his legal knowledge held in high estimation; and they

so far counterbalanced other deficiencies that those in power

were glad to use and to reward, though without absolutely

trusting or greating respecting, him.



The Marquis of A---- had used his utmost influence to effect a

change in the Scottish cabinet, and his schemes had been of late

so well laid and so ably supported, that there appeared a very

great chance of his proving ultimately

successful.  He did not, however, feel so strong or so confident

as to neglect any means of drawing recruits to his standard.  The

acquisition of the Lord Keeper was deemed of some importance, and

a friend, perfectly acquainted with his circumstances and

character, became responsible for his political conversion.



When this gentleman arrived at Ravenswood Castle upon a visit,

the real purpose of which was disguised under general courtesy,

he found the prevailing fear which at present beset the Lord

Keeper was that of danger to his own person from the Master of

Ravenswood.  The language which the blind sibyl, Old Alice, had

used; the sudden appearance of the Master, armed, and within his

precincts, immediately after he had been warned against danger

from him; the cold and haughty return received in exchange for

the acknowledgments with which he loaded him for his timely

protection, had all made a strong impression on his imagination.



So soon as the Marquis's political agent found how the wind

sate, he began to insinuate fears and doubts of another kind,

scarce less calculated to affect the Lord Keeper.  He inquired

with seeming interest, whether the proceedings in Sir William's

complicated litigation with the Ravenswood family were out of

court, and settled without the possibility of appeal.  The Lord

Keeper answered in the affirmative; but his interrogator was too

well informed to be imposed upon.  He pointed out to him, by

unanswerable arguments, that some of the most important points

which had been decided in his favour against the house of

Ravenswood were liable, under the Treaty of Union, to be reviewed

by the British House of Peers, a court of equity of which the

Lord Keeper felt an instinctive dread.  This course came instead

of an appeal  to the old Scottish Parliament, or, as it was

technically termed, "a protestation for remeid in law."



The Lord Keeper, after he had for some time disputed the

legality of such a proceeding, was compelled, at length, to

comfort himself with the improbability of the young Master of

Ravenswood's finding friends in parliament capable of stirring

in so weighty an affair.



"Do not comfort yourself with that false hope," said his wily

friend; "it is possible that, in the next session of

Parliament, young Ravenswood may find more friends and favour

even than your lordship."



"That would be a sight worth seeing," said the Keeper,

scornfully.



"And yet," said his friend, "such things have been seen ere now,

and in our own time.  There are many at the head of affairs even

now that a few years ago were under hiding for their lives; and

many a man now dines on plate of silver that was fain to eat his

crowdy without a bicker; and many a high head has been brought

full low among us in as short a space.  Scott of Scotsarvet's

Staggering State of Scots Statesmen, of which curious memoir you

showed me a manuscript, has been outstaggered in our time."



The Lord Keeper answered with a deep sigh, "That these mutations

were no new sights in Scotland, and had been witnessed long

before the time of the satirical author he had quoted.  It was

many a long year," he said, "since Fordun had quoted as an

ancient proverb, 'Neque dives, neque fortis, sed nec sapiens

Scotus, praedominante invidia, diu durabit in terra.'"



"And be assured, my esteemed friend," was the answer, "that even

your long services to the state, or deep legal knowledge, will

not save you, or render your estate stable, if the Marquis of A--

-- comes in with a party in the British Parliament.  You know

that the deceased Lord Ravenswood was his near ally, his lady

being fifth in descent from the Knight of Tillibardine; and I am

well assured that he will take young Ravenswood by the hand, and

be his very good lord and kinsman.  Why should he not?  The

Master is an active and stirring young fellow, able to help

himself with tongue and hands; and it is such as he that finds

friends among their kindred, and not those unarmed and unable

Mephibosheths that are sure to be a burden to every one that

takes them up.  And so, if these Ravenswood cases be called over

the coals in the House of Peers, you will find that the Marquis

will have a crow to pluck with you."



"That would be an evil requital," said the Lord Keeper, "for my

long services to the state, and the ancient respect in which I

have held his lordship's honourable family and person."



"Ay, but," rejoined the agent of the Marquis, "it is in vain to

look back on past service and auld respect, my lord; it will be

present service and immediate proofs of regard which, in these

sliddery times, will be expected by a man like the Marquis."



The Lord Keeper now saw the full drift of his friend's argument,

but he was too cautious to return any positive answer.



"He knew not," he said, "the service which the Lord Marquis

could expect from one of his limited abilities, that had not

always stood at his command, still saving and reserving his duty

to his king and country."



Having thus said nothing, while he seemed to say everything, for

the exception was calculated to cover whatever he might

afterwards think proper to bring under it, Sir William Ashton

changed the conversation, nor did he again permit the same topic

to be introduced.  His guest departed, without having brought the

wily old statesman the length of committing himself, or of

pledging himself to any future line of conduct, but with the

certainty that he had alarmed his fears in a most sensible point,

and laid a foundation for future and farther treaty.



When he rendered an account of his negotiation to the Marquis,

they both agreed that the Keeper ought not to be

permitted to relapse into security, and that he should be plied

with new subjects of alarm, especially during the absence of his

lady.  They were well aware that her proud, vindictive, and

predominating spirit would be likely to supply him with the

courage in which he was deficient; that she was immovably

attached to the party now in power, with whom she maintained a

close correspondence and alliance; and that she hated, without

fearing, the Ravenswood family (whose more ancient dignity threw

discredit on the newly acquired grandeur of her husband) to such

a degree that she would have perilled the interest of her own

house to have the prospect of altogether crushing that of her

enemy.



But Lady Ashton was now absent.  The business which had long

detained her in Edinburgh had afterwards induced her to travel to

London, not without the hope that she might contribute her share

to disconcert the intrigues of the Marquis at court; for she

stood high in favour with the celebrated Sarah Duchesss of

Marlborough, to whom, in point of character, she bore

considerable resemblance.  It was necessary to press her husband

hard before her return; and, as a preparatory step, the Marquis

wrote to the Master of Ravenswood the letter which we rehearsed

in a former chapter.  It was cautiously worded, so as to leave it

in the power of the writer hereafter to take as deep or as slight

an interest in the fortunes of his kinsmen as the progress of his

own schemes might require.  But however unwilling, as a

statesman, the Marquis might be to commit himself, or assume the

character of a patron, while he had nothing to give away, it must

be said to his honour that he felt a strong inclination

effectually to befriend the Master of Ravenswood, as well as to

use his name as a means of alarming the terrors of the Lord

Keeper.



As the messenger who carried this letter was to pass near the

house of the Lord Keeper, he had it in direction that, in the

village adjoining to the park-gate of the castle, his horse

should lose a shoe, and that, while it was replaced by the smith

of the place, he should express the utmost regret for the

necessary loss of time, and in the vehemence of his impatience

give it to be understood that he was bearing a message from the

Marquis of A---- to the Master of Ravenswood upon a matter of

life and death.



This news, with exaggerations, was speedily carried from various

quarters to the ears of the Lord Keeper, and each

reporter dwelt upon the extreme impatience of the courier, and

the surprising short time in which he had executed his journey.

The anxious statesman heard in silence; but in private Lockhard

received orders to watch the courier on his return, to waylay him

in the village, to ply him with liquor, if possible, and to use

all means, fair or foul, to learn the contents of the letter of

which he was the bearer.  But as this plot had been foreseen, the

messenger returned by a different and distant road, and thus

escaped the snare that was laid for him.



After he had been in vain expected for some time, Mr. Dingwall

had orders to made especial inquiry among his clients of Wolf's

Hope, whether such a domestic belonging to the Marquis of A----

had actually arrived at the neighbouring castle.  This was

easily ascertained; for Caleb had been in the village one morning

by five o'clock, to borrow "twa chappins of ale and a kipper" for

the messenger's refreshment, and the poor fellow had been ill for

twenty-four hours at Luckie Sma'trash's, in consequence of dining

upon "saut saumon and sour drink."  So that the existence of a

correspondence betwixt the Marquis and his distressed kinsman,

which Sir William Ashton had sometimes treated as a bugbear, was

proved beyond the possibility of further doubt.



The alarm of the Lord Keeper became very serious; since the

Claim of Right, the power of appealing from the decisions of the

civil court to the Estates of Parliament, which had formerly

been held incompetent, had in many instances been claimed, and in

some allowed, and he had no small reason to apprehend the issue,

if the English House of Lords should be disposed to act upon an

appeal from the Master of Ravenswood "for remeid in law."  It

would resolve into an equitable claim, and be decided, perhaps,

upon the broad principles of justice, which were not quite so

favourable to the Lord Keeper as those of strict law.  Besides,

judging, though most inaccurately, from courts which he had

himself known in the unhappy times preceding the Scottish Union,

the Keeper might have too much right to think that, in the House

to which his lawsuits were to be transferred, the old maxim might

prevail which was too well recognised in Scotland in former

times:  "Show me the man, and I'll show you the law."  The high

and unbiassed character of English judicial proceedings was then

little known in Scotland, and the extension of them to that

country was one of the most valuable advantages which it gained

by the Union.  But this was a blessing which the Lord Keeper, who

had lived under another system, could not have the means of

foreseeing.  In the loss of his political

consequence, he anticipated the loss of his lawsuit.  Meanwhile,

every report which reached him served to render the success of

the Marquis's intrigues the more probable, and the Lord Keeper

began to think it indispensable that he should look round for

some kind of protection against the coming storm.  The timidity

of his temper induced him to adopt measures of compromise and

conciliation.  The affair of the wild bull, properly managed,

might, he thought, be made to facilitate a personal communication

and reconciliation betwixt the Master and himself.  He would then

learn, if possible, what his own ideas were of the extent of his

rights, and the means of enforcing them; and perhaps matters

might be brought to a compromise, where one party was wealthy and

the other so very poor.  A reconciliation with Ravenswood was

likely to give him an opportunity to play his own game with the

Marquis of A----.  "And besides," said he to himself, "it will be

an act of generosity to raise up the heir of this distressed

family; and if he is to be warmly and effectually befriended by

the new government, who knows but my virtue may prove its own

reward?"



Thus thought Sir William Ashton, covering with no unusual self-

delusion his interested views with a hue of virtue; and having

attained this point, his fancy strayed still farther.  He began

to bethink himself, "That if Ravenswood was to have a

distinguished place of power and trust, and if such a union would

sopite the heavier part of his unadjusted claims, there might be

worse matches for his daughter Lucy: the Master might be reponed

against the attainder.  Lord Ravenswood was an ancient title, and

the alliance would, in some measure, legitimate his own

possession of the greater part of the Master's spoils, and make

the surrender of the rest a subject of less bitter regret."



With these mingled and multifarious plans occupying his head,

the Lord Keeper availed himself of my Lord Bittlebrains's

repeated invitation to his residence, and thus came within a very

few miles of Wolf's Crag.  Here he found the lord of the mansion

absent, but was couteously received by the lady, who expected her

husband's immediate return.  She expressed her particular delight

at seeing Miss Ashton, and appointed the hounds to be taken out

for the Lord Keeper's special amusement. He readily entered into

the proposal, as giving him an

opportunity to reconnoitre Wolf's Crag, and perhaps to make some

acquaintance with the owner, if he should be tempted from his

desolate mansion by the chase.  Lockhard had his orders to

endeavour on his part to make some acquaintance with the inmates

of the castle, and we have seen how he played his part.



The accidental storm did more to further the Lord Keeper's plan

of forming a personal acquaintance with young Ravenswood than his

most sanguine expectations could have anticipated.  His fear of

the young nobleman's personal resentment had greatly decreased

since he considered him as formidable from his legal claims and

the means he might have of enforcing them.  But although he

thought, not unreasonably, that only desperate circumstances

drove men on desperate measures, it was not without a secret

terror, which shook his heart within him, that he first felt

himself inclosed within the desolate Tower of Wolf's Crag; a

place so well fitted, from solitude and strength, to be a scene

of violence and vengeance.  The stern reception at first given to

them by the Master of Ravenswood, and the difficulty he felt in

explaining to that injured nobleman what guests were under the

shelter of his roof, did not soothe these alarms; so that when

Sir William Ashton heard the door of the courtyard shut behind

him with violence, the words of Alice rung in his ears, "That he

had drawn on matters too hardly with so fierce a race as those of

Ravenswood, and that they would bide their time to be avenged."



The subsequent frankness of the Master's hospitality, as their

acquaintance increased, abated the apprehensions these

recollections were calculated to excite; and it did not escape

Sir William Ashton, that it was to Lucy's grace and beauty he

owed the change in their host's behavior.



All these thoughts thronged upon him when he took possession of

the secret chamber.  The iron lamp, the unfurnished apartment,

more resembling a prison than a place of ordinary repose, the

hoarse and ceaseless sound of the waves rushing against the base

of the rock on which the castle was founded, saddened and

perplexed his mind.  To his own successful

machinations, the ruin of the family had been in a great measure

owing, but his disposition was crafty, and not cruel; so that

actually to witness the desolation and distress he had himself

occasioned was as painful to him as it would be to the humane

mistress of a family to superintend in person the execution of

the lambs and poultry which are killed by her own directions.  At

the same time, when he thought of the alternative of restoring to

Ravenswood a large proportion of his spoils, or of adopting, as

an ally and member of his own family, the heir of this

impoverished house, he felt as the spider may be supposed to do

when his whole web, the intricacies of whyich had been planned

with so much art, is destroyed by the chance sweep of a broom.

And then, if he should commit himself too far in this matter, it

gave rise to a perilous question, which many a good husband, when

under temptation to act as a free agent, has asked himself

without being able to return a satisfactory answer:  "What will

my wife--what will Lady Ashton say?"  On the whole, he came at

length to the resolution in which minds of a weaker cast so often

take refuge.  He resolved to watch events, to take advantage of

circumstances as they occurred, and regulate his conduct

accordingly.  In this spirit of temporising policy, he at length

composed his mind to rest.



