





CHAPTER XXV.



True love, an thou be true,

Thou has ane kittle part to play;

For fortune, fashion, fancy, and thou,

Maun strive for many a day.



I've kend by mony a friend's tale,

Far better by this heart of mine,

What time and change of fancy avail

A true-love knot to untwine.



HENDERSOUN.





"I WISHED to tell you, my good kinsman," said the Marquis, "now

that we are quit of that impertinent fiddler, that I had tried to

discuss this love affair of yours with Sir William Ashton's

daughter.  I never saw the young lady but for a few minutes to-

day; so, being a stranger to her personal merits, I pay a

compliment to you, and offer her no offence, in saying you might

do better."



"My lord, I am much indebted for the interest you have taken in

my affairs," said Ravenswood.  "I did not intend to have

troubled you in any matter concerning Miss Ashton.  As my

engagement with that young lady has reached your lordship, I can

only say, that you must necessarily suppose that I was aware of

the objections to my marrying into her father's family, and of

course must have been completely satisfied with the reasons by

which these objections are overbalanced, since I have proceeded

so far in the matter."



"Nay, Master, if you had heard me out," said his noble relation,

"you might have spared that observation; for, withotu

questioning that you had reasons which seemed to you to

counterbalance every other obstacle, I set myself, by every means

that it became me to use towards the Ashtons, to persuade them to

meet your views."



"I am obliged to your lordship for your unsolicited

intercession," said Ravenswood; "especially as I am sure your

lordship would never carry it beyond the bounds which it became

me to use."



"Of that," said the Marquis, "you may be confident; I myself

felt the delicacy of the matter too much to place a gentleman

nearly connected with my house in a degrading or dubious

situation with these Ashtons.  But I pointed out all the

advantages of their marrying their daughter into a house so

honourable, and so nearly related with the first of Scotland; I

explained the exact degree of relationship in which the

Ravenswoods stand to ourselves; and I even hinted how political

matters were like to turn, and what cards would be trumps next

Parliament.  I said I regarded you as a son--or a nephew, or so--

rather than as a more distant relation; and that I made your

affair entirely my own."



"And what was the issue of your lordship's explanation?" said

Ravenswood, in some doubt whether he should resent or express

gratitude for his interference.



"Why, the Lord Keeper would have listened to reason," said the

Marquis; "he is rather unwilling to leave his place, which, in

the present view of a change, must be vacated; and, to say

truth, he seemed to have a liking for you, and to be sensible of

the general advantages to be attained by such a match.  But his

lady, who is tongue of the trump, Master----"



"What of Lady Ashton, my lord?" said Ravenswood; "let me know

the issue of this extraordinary conference: I can bear it."



"I am glad of that, kinsman," said the Marquis, "for I am

ashamed to tell you half what she said.  It is enough--her mind

is made up, and the mistress of a first-rate boarding-school

could not have rejected with more haughty indifference the suit

of a half-pay Irish officer, beseeching permission to wait upon

the heiress of a West India planter, than Lady Ashton spurned

every proposal of mediation which it could at all become me to

offer in behalf of you, my good kinsman.  I cannot guess what she

means.  A more honourable connexion she could not form, that's

certain.  As for money and land, that used to be her husband's

business rather than hers; I really think she hates you for

having the rank which her husband has not, and perhaps for not

having the lands that her goodman has.  But I should only vex you

to say more about it--here we are at the change-house."



The Master of Ravenswood paused as he entered the cottage, which

reeked through all its crevices, and they were not few, from the

exertions of the Marquis's travelling-cooks to supply good cheer,

and spread, as it were, a table in the wilderness.



"My Lord Marquis," said Ravenswood, "I already mentioned that

accident has put your lordship in possession of a secret which,

with my consent, should have remained one even to you, my

kinsman, for some time.  Since the secret was to part from my own

custody, and that of the only person besides who was interested

in it, I am not sorry it should have reached your lordship's

ears, as being fully aware that you are my noble kinsman and

friend."



"You may believe it is safely lodged with me, Master of

Ravenswood," said the Marquis; "but I should like well to hear

you say that you renounced the idea of an alliance which you can

hardly pursue without a certain degree of degradation."



"Of that, my lord, I shall judge," answered Ravenswood, "and I

hope with delicacy as sensitive as any of my friends.  But I

have no engagement with Sir William and Lady Ashton.  It is with

Miss Ashton alone that I have entered upon the subject, and my

conduct in the matter shall be entirely ruled by hers.  If she

continues to prefer me in my poverty to the wealthier suitors

whom her friends recommend, I may well make some sacrifice to her

sincere affection: I may well surrender to her the less tangible

and less palpable advantages of birth, and the deep-rooted

prejudices of family hatred.  If Miss Lucy Ashton should change

her mind on a subject of such delicacy, I trust my friends will

be silent on my disappointment, and I shall know how to make my

enemies so."



"Spoke like a gallant young nobleman," said the Marquis; "for my

part, I have that regard for you, that I should be sorry the

thing went on.  This Sir William Ashton was a pretty enough

pettifogging kind of a lawyer twenty years ago, and betwixt

battling at the bar and leading in committees of Parliament he

has got well on; the Darien matter lent him a lift, for he had

good intelligence and sound views, and sold out in time; but the

best work is had out of him.  No government will take him at his

own, or rather his wife's extravagant, valuation; and betwixt his

indecision and her insolence, from all I can guess, he will

outsit his market, and be had cheap when no one will bid for him.

I say nothing of Miss Ashton; but I assure you, a connexion with

her father will be neither useful nor ornamental, beyond that

part of your father's spoils which he may be prevailed upon to

disgorge by way of tocher-good; and take my word for it, you will

get more if you have spirit to bell the cat with him in the House

of Peers.  And I will be the man, cousin," continued his

lordship, "will course the fox for you, and make him rue the day

that ever he refused a composition too honourable for him, and

proposed by me on the behalf of a kinsman."



There was something in all this that, as it were, overshot the

mark.  Ravenswood could not disguise from himself that his noble

kinsman had more reasons for taking offence at the

reception of his suit than regarded his interest and honour, yet

he could neither complain nor be surprised that it should be so.

He contented himself, therefore, with repeating, that his

attachment was to Miss Ashton personally; that he desired neither

wealth nor aggrandisement from her father's means and influence;

and that nothing should prevent his keeping his engagement,

excepting her own express desire that it should be relinquished;

and he requested as a favour that the matter might be no more

mentioned betwixt them at present, assuring the Marquis of A----

that he should be his confidant or its interruption.



The Marquis soon had more agreeable, as well as more

interesting, subjects on which to converse.  A foot-post, who had

followed him from Edinburgh to Ravenswood Castle, and had traced

his steps to the Tod's Hole, brought him a packet laden with good

news.  The political calculations of the Marquis had proved just,

both in London and at Edinburgh, and he saw almost within his

grasp the pre-eminence for which he had panted.  The refreshments

which the servants had prepared were now put on the table, and an

epicure would perhaps have enjoyed them with additional zest from

the contrast which such fare afforded to the miserable cabin in

which it was served up.



The turn of conversation corresponded with and added to the

social feelings of the company.  The Marquis expanded with

pleasure on the power which probably incidents were likely to

assign to him, and on the use which eh hoped to make of it in

serving his kinsman Ravenswood.  Ravenswood could but repeat the

gratitude which he really felt, even when he considered the topic

as too long dwelt upon.  The wine was excellent, notwithstanding

its having been brought in a runlet from Edinburgh; and the

habits of the Marquis, when engaged with such good cheer, were

somewhat sedentary.  And so it fell out that they delayed their

journey two hours later than was their original purpose.



"But what of that, my good young friend?" said the Marquis.

"Your Castle of Wolf's Crag is at but five or six miles'

distance, and will afford the same hospitality to your kinsman of

A----that it gave to this same Sir William Ashton."



"Sir William took the castle by storm," said Ravenswood, "and,

like many a victor, had little reason to congratulate himself on

his conquest."

"Well--well!" said Lord A----, whose dignity was something

relaxed by the wine he had drunk, "I see I must bribe you to

harbour me.  Come, pledge me in a bumper health to the last

young lady that slept at Wolf's Crag, and liked her quarters.  My

bones are not so tender as hers, and I am resolved to occupy her

apartment to-night, that I may judge how hard the couch is that

love can soften."



"Your lordship may choose what penance you please," said

Ravenswood; "but I assure you, I should expect my old servant to

hang himself, or throw himself from the battlements, should your

lordship visit him so unexpectedly.  I do assure you, we are

totally and literally unprovided."



But his declaration only brought from his noble patron an

assurance of his own total indifference as to every species of

accommodation, and his determination to see the Tower of Wolf's

Crag.  His ancestor, he said, had been feasted there, when he

went forward with the then Lord Ravenswood to the fatal battle of

Flodden, in which they both fell.  Thus hard pressed, the Master

offered to ride forward to get matters put in such preparation as

time and circumstances admitted; but the Marquis protested his

kinsman must afford him his company, and would only consent that

an avant-courier should carry to the desinted seneschal, Caleb

Balderstone, the unexpected news of this invasion.



The Master of Ravenswood soon after accompanied the Marquis in

his carriage, as the latter had proposed; and when they became

better acquainted in the progress of the journey, his noble

relation explained the very liberal views which he entertained

for his relation's preferment, in case of the success of his own

political schemes.  They related to a secret and highly important

commission beyond sea, which could only be entrusted to a person

of rank, talent, and perfect confidence, and which, as it

required great trust and reliance on the envoy employed, could

but not prove both honourable and advantageous to him.  We need

not enter into the nature and purpose of this commission, farther

than to acquaint our readers that the charge was in prospect

highly acceptable to the Master of Ravenswood, who hailed with

pleasure the hope of emerging from his present state of indigence

and inaction into independence and honourable exertion.



While he listened thus eagerly to the details with which the

Marquis now thought it necessary to entrust him, the messenger

who had been despatched to the Tower of Wolf's Crag returned with

Caleb Balderstone's humble duty, and an assurance that "a' should

be in seemly order, sic as the hurry of time permitted, to

receive their lordships as it behoved."



Ravenswood was too well accustomed to his seneschal's mode of

acting and speaking to hope much from this confident

assurance.  He knew that Caleb acted upon the principle of the

Spanish geenrals, in the campaign of ----, who, much to the

perplexity of the Prince of Orange, their commander-in-chief,

used to report their troops as full in number, and possessed of

all necessary points of equipment, not considering it consistent

with their dignity, or the honour of Spain, to confess any

deficiency either in men or munition, until the want of both was

unavoidably discovered in the day of battle.  Accordingly,

Ravenswood thought it necessary to give the Marquis some hint

that the fair assurance which they had just received from Caleb

did not by any means ensure them against a very indifferent

reception.



"You do yourself injustice, Master," said the Marquis, "or you

wish to surprise me agreeably.  From this window I see a great

light in the direction where, if I remember aright, Wolf's Crag

lies; and, to judge from the splendour which the old Tower sheds

around it, the preparations for our reception must be of no

ordinary description.  I remember your father putting the same

deception on me, when we went to the Tower for afew days'

hawking, about twenty years since, and yet we spent our time as

jollily at Wolf's Crag as we could have done at my own hunting

seat at B----."



"Your lordship, I fear, will experience that the faculty of the

present proprietor to entertain his friends is greatly

abridged," said Ravenswood; "the will, I need hardly say, remains

the same.  But I am as much at a loss as your lordship to account

for so strong and brilliant a light as is now above Wolf's Crag;

the windows of the Tower are few and narrow, and those of the

lower story are hidden from us by the walls of the court.  I

cannot conceive that any illumination of an ordinary nature could

afford such a blaze of light."



The mystery was soon explained; for the cavalcade almost

instantly halted, and the voice of Caleb Balderstone was heard

p278

at the coach window, exclaiming, in accents broken by grief and

fear, "Och, gentlemen!  Och, my gude lords!  Och, haud to the

right!  Wolf's Crag is burning, bower and ha'--a' the rich

plenishing outside and inside--a' the fine graith, pictures,

tapestries, needle-wark, hangings, and other decorements--a' in a

bleeze, as if they were nae mair than sae mony peats, or as

muckle pease-strae!  Haud to the right, gentlemen, I implore ye;

there is some sma' provision making at Luckie Sma'trash's; but

oh, wae for this night, and wae for me that lives to see it!"



Ravenswood was first stunned by this new and unexpected

calamity; but after a moment's recollection he sprang from the

carriage, and hastily bidding his noble kinsman goodnight, was

about to ascend the hill towards the castle, the broad and full

conflagration of which now flung forth a high column of red

light, that flickered far to seaward upon the dashing waves of

the ocean.



"Take a horse, Master," exclaimed the Marquis, greatly affected

by this additional misfortune, so unexpectedly heaped upon his

young protege; "and give me my ambling palfrey; and haste

forward, you knaves, to see what can be done to save the

furniture, or to extinguish the fire--ride, you knaves, for your

lives!"



The attendants bustled together, and began to strike their

horses with the spur, and call upon Caleb to show them the road.

But the voice of that careful seneschal was heard above the

tumult, "Oh, stop sirs, stop--turn bridle, for the luve of Mercy;

add not loss of lives to the loss of warld's gean!  Thirty

barrels of powther, landed out of a Dunkirk dogger in the auld

lord's time--a' in the vau'ts of the auld tower,--the fire canna

be far off it, I trow.  Lord's sake, to the right, lads--to the

right; let's pit the hill atween us and peril,--a wap wi' a

corner-stane o' Wolf's Crag wad defy the doctor!"



It will readily be supposed that this annunciation hurried the

Marquis and his attendants into the route which Caleb

prescribed, dragging Ravenswood along with them, although there

was much in the matter which he could not possibly comprehend.

"Gunpowder!" he exclaimed, laying hold of Caleb, who in vain

endeavoured to escape from him; "what

gunpowder?  How any quantity of powder could be in Wolf's Crag

without my knowledge, I cannot possibly comprehend."



"But I can," interrupted the Marquis, whispering him, "I can

comprehend it thoroughly; for God's sake, ask him no more

questions at present."



"There it is, now," said Caleb, extricating himself from his

master, and adjusting his dress, "your honour will believe his

lordship's honourable testimony.  His lordship minds weel how, in

the year that him they ca'd King Willie died----"



"Hush! hush, my good friend!" said the Marquis; "I shall satisfy

your master upon that subject."



"And the people at Wolf's Hope," said Ravenswood, "did none of

them come to your assistance before the flame got so high?"



"Ay did they, mony ane of them, the rapscallions!" said Caleb;

"but truly I was in nae hurry to let them into the Tower, where

there were so much plate and valuables."



"Confound you for an impudent liar!" said Ravenswood, in

uncontrollable ire, "there was not a single ounce of----"



"Forbye," said the butler, most irreverently raising his voice

to a pitch which drowned his master's, "the fire made fast on us,

owing to the store of tapestry and carved timmer in the

banqueting-ha', and the loons ran like scaulded rats sae sune as

they heard of the gunpouther."



"I do entreat," said the Marquis to Ravenswood, "you will ask

him no more questions."



"Only one, my lord.  What has become of poor Mysie?"



"Mysie!" said Caleb, "I had nae time to look about ony Mysie;

she's in the Tower, I'se warrant, biding her awful doom."

"By heaven," said Ravenswood, "I do not understand all this !

The life of a faithful old creature is at stake; my lord, I will

be withheld no longer; I will at least ride up, and see whether

the danger is as imminent as this old fool pretends."



"Weel, then, as I live by bread," said Caleb, "Mysie is weel and

safe.  I saw her out of the castle before I left it mysell.  Was

I ganging to forget an auld fellow-servant?"



"What made you tell me the contrary this moment?" said his

master.



"Did I tell you the contrary?" said Caleb; "then I maun hae been

dreaming surely, or this awsome night has turned my

judgment; but safe she is, and ne'er a living soul in the castle,

a' the better for them: they wau have gotten an unco heezy."



The Master of Ravenswood, upon this assurance being solemnly

reiterated, and notwithstanding his extreme wish to witness the

last explosion, which was to ruin to the ground the mansion of

his fathers, suffered himself to be dragged onward towards the

village of Wolf's Hope, where not only the change-house, but that

of our well-known friend the cooper, were all prepared for

reception of himself and his noble guest, with a liberality of

provision which requires some explanation.



We omitted to mention in its place, that Lockhard having fished

out the truth concerning the mode by which Caleb had obtained the

supplies for his banquet, the Lord Keeper, amused with the

incident, and desirous at the time to gratify

Ravenswood, had recommended the cooper of Wolf''s Hope to the

official situation under government the prospect of which had

reconciled him to the loss of his wild-fowl.  Mr. Girder's

preferment had occasioned a pleasing surprise to old Caleb; for

when, some days after his master's departure, he found himself

absolutely compelled, by some necessary business, to visit the

fishing hamlet, and was gliding like a ghost past the door of the

cooper, for fear of being summoned to give some account of the

progress of the solicitation in his favour, or, more probably

that the inmates might upbraid him with the false hope he had

held out upon the subject, he heard himself, not without some

apprehension, summoned at once in treble, tenor, and bass--a trio

performed by the voices of Mrs. Girder, old Dame Loup-the-Dyke,

and the goodman of the dwelling--"Mr. Caleb!--Mr. Caleb

Balderstone!  I hope ye arena ganging dry-lipped by our door, and

we sae muckle indebted to you?"



This might be said ironically as well as in earnest.  Caleb

augured the worst, turned a deaf ear to the trio aforesaid, and

was moving doggedly on, his ancient castor pulled over his brows,

and his eyes bent on the ground, as if to count the flinty

pebbles with which the rude pathway was causewayed.  But on a

sudden he found himself surrounded in his progress, like a

stately merchantman in the Gut of Gibraltar (I hope the ladies

will excuse the tarpaulin phrase) by three Algerine galleys.

"Gude guide us, Mr. Balderstone!" said Mrs. Girder.

"Wha wad hae thought it of an auld and kenn'd friend!" said the

mother.



"And no sae muckle as stay to receive our thanks," said the

cooper himself, "and frae the like o' me that seldom offers them!

I am sure I hope there's nae ill seed sawn between us, Mr.

Balderstone.  Ony man that has said to ye I am no gratefu' for

the situation of Queen's cooper, let me hae a whample at him wi'

mine eatche, that's a'."



"My good friends--my dear friends," said Caleb, still doubting

how the certainty of the matter might stand, "what needs a' this

ceremony?  Ane tries to serve their friends, and

sometimes they may happen to prosper, and sometimes to misgie.

Naething I care to be fashed wi' less than thanks; I never could

bide them."



"Faith, Mr. Balderstone, ye suld hae been fashed wi' few o'

mine," said the downright man of staves and hoops, "if I had only

your gude-will to thank ye for: I suld e'en hae set the guse, and

the wild deukes, adn the runlet of sack to balance that account.

Gude-will, man, is a geizen'd tub, that hauds in nae liquor; but

gude deed's like the cask, tight, round, and sound, that will

haud liquor for the king."



"Have ye no heard of our letter," said the mother-in-law,

"making our John [Gibbie] the Queen's cooper for certain? and

scarce a chield that had ever hammered gird upon tub but was

applying for it?"



"Have I heard!!!" said Caleb, who now found how the wind set,

with an accent of exceeding contempt, at the doubt

expressed--"have I heard, quo'she!!!" and as he spoke he changed

his shambling, skulking, dodging pace into a manly and

authoritative step, readjusted his cocked hat, and suffered his

brow to emerge from under it in all the pride of aristocracy,

like the sun from behind a cloud.



"To be sure, he canna but hae heard," said the good woman.



"Ay, to be sure it's impossible but I should," said Caleb; "and

sae I'll be the first to kiss ye, joe, and wish you, cooper,

much joy of your preferment, naething doubting but ye ken wha are

your friends, and HAVE helped ye, and CAN help ye.  I thought

it right to look a wee strange upon it at first," added Caleb,

"just to see if ye were made of the right mettle; but ye ring

true, lad--ye ring true!"



So saying, with a most lordly air he kissed the women, and

abandoned his hand, with an air of serene patronage, to the

hearty shake of Mr. Girder's horn-hard palm.  Upon this complete,

and to Caleb most satisfactory, information he did not, it may

readily be believed, hesitate to accept an invitation to a solemn

feast, to which were invited, not only all the NOTABLES of the

village, but even his ancient antagonist, Mr. Dingwall, himself.

At this festivity he was, of course, the most welcome and most

honoured guest; and so well did he ply the company with stories

of what he could do with his master, his master with the Lord

Keeper, the Lord Keeper with the council, and the council with

the king [queen], that before the company dismissed (which was,

indeed, rather at an early hour than a late one), every man of

note in the village was ascending to the top-gallant of some

ideal preferment by the ladder of ropes which Caleb had presented

to their imagination.  Nay, the cunning butler regained in that

moment not only all the influence he possessed formerly over the

villagers, when the baronial family which he served were at the

proudest, but acquired even an accession of importance.  The

writer--the very attorney himself, such is the thirst of

preferment--felt the force of the attraction, and taking an

opportunity to draw Caleb into a corner, spoke, with affectionate

regret, of the declining health of the sheriff-clerk of the

county.



"An excellent man--a most valuable man, Mr. Caleb; but fat sall

I say! we are peer feckless bodies, here the day and awa' by

cock-screech the morn; and if he failyies, there maun be somebody

in his place; and gif that ye could airt it my way, I sall be

thankful, man--a gluve stuffed wi gowd nobles; an' hark ye, man

something canny till yoursell, and the Wolf's Hope carles to

settle kindly wi' the Master of Ravenswood--that is, Lord

Ravenswood--God bless his lordship!"



A smile, and a hearty squeeze by the hand, was the suitable

answer to this overture; and Caleb made his escape from the

jovial party, in order to avoid committing himself by any special

promises.



"The Lord be gude to me," said Caleb, when he found himself in

the open air, and at liberty to give vent to the self-

exultation with which he was, as it were, distended; "did ever

ony man see sic a set of green-gaislings?  The very pickmaws and

solan-geese out-bye yonder at the Bass hae ten times their sense!

God, an I had been the Lord High Commissioner to the Estates o'

Parliament, they couldna hae beflumm'd me mair; and, to speak

Heaven's truth, I could hardly hae beflumm'd them better neither!

But the writer--ha! ha! ha!--ah, ha! ha! ha! mercy on me, that I

suld live in my auld days to gie the ganag-bye to the very

writer!  Sheriff-clerk!!!  But I hae an auld account to settle

wi' the carle; and to make amends for bye-ganes, the office shall

just cost him as much time-serving and tide-serving as if he were

to get it in gude earnest, of whilk there is sma' appearance,

unless the Master learns mair the ways of this warld, whilk it is

muckle to be doubted that he never will do."

