





CHAPTER X.



With throat unslaked, with black lips baked,

Agape they heard him call;

Gramercy they for joy did grin,

And all at once their breath drew in,

As they had been drinking all!



COLERIDGE'S Rime of the Ancient Mariner.





HAYSTON of Bucklaw was one of the thoughtless class who never

hesitate between their friend and their jest.  When it was

announced that the principal persons of the chase had taken

their route towards Wolf's Crag, the huntsmen, as a point of

civility, offered to transfer the venison to that mansion; a

proffer which was readily accepted by Bucklaw, who thought much

of the astonishment which their arrival in full body would

occasion poor old Caleb Balderstone, and very little of the

dilemma to which he was about to expose his friend the Master, so

ill circumstanced to receive such a party. But in old Caleb he

had to do with a crafty and alert antagonist, prompt at

supplying, upon all emergencies, evasions and excuses suitable,

as he thought, to the dignity of the family.



"Praise be blest!" said Caleb to himself, "ae leaf of the muckle

gate has been swung to wi' yestreen's wind, and I think I can

manage to shut the ither."



But he was desirous, like a prudent governor, at the same time

to get rid, if possible, of the internal enemy, in which light he

considered almost every one who eat and drank, ere he took

measures to exclude those whom their jocund noise now pronounced

to be near at hand.  He waited, therefore, with impatience until

his master had shown his two principal guests into the Tower, and

then commenced his operations.



"I think," he said to the stranger menials, "that, as they are

bringing the stag's head to the castle in all honour, we, who

are indwellers, should receive them at the gate."



The unwary grooms had no sooner hurried out, in compliance with

this insidous hint, than, one folding-door of the ancient gate

being already closed by the wind, as has been already intimated,

hoenst Caleb lost no time in shutting the other with a clang,

which resounded from donjon-vault to battlement.  Having thus

secured the pass, he forthwith indulged the excluded

huntsmen in brief parley, from a small projecting window, or

shot-hole, through which, in former days, the warders were wont

to reconnoitre those who presented themselves before the gates.

He gave them to udnerstand, in a short and pity speech, that the

gate of the castle was never on any account opened during meal-

times; that his honour, the Master of Ravenswood, and some guests

of quality, had just sat down to dinner; that there was excellent

brandy at the hostler-wife's at Wolf's Hope down below; and he

held out some obscure hint that the reckoning would be

discharged by the Master; but this was uttered in a very dubious

and oracular strain, for, like Louis XIV., Caleb Balderstone

hesitated to carry finesse so far as direct falsehood, and was

content to deceive, if possible, without directly lying.



This annunciation was received with surprise by some, with

laughter by others, and with dismay by the expelled lackeys, who

endeavoured to demonstrate that their right of readmission, for

the purpose of waiting upon their master and mistress, was at

least indisputable.  But Caleb was not in a humour to understand

or admit any distinctions.  He stuck to his original proposition

with that dogged but convenient pertinacity which is armed

against all conviction, and deaf to all reasoning.  Bucklaw now

came from the rear of the party, and demanded admittance in a

very angry tone.  But the resolution of Caleb was immovable.



"If the king on the throne were at the gate," he declared, "his

ten fingers should never open it contrair to the established use

and wont of the family of Ravenswood, and his duty as their

head-servant."



Bucklaw was now extremely incensed, and with more oaths and

curses than we care to repeat, declared himself most unworthily

treated, and demanded peremptorily to speak with the Master of

Ravenswood himself.



But to this also Caleb turned a deaf ear.  "He's as soon a-

bleeze as a tap of tow, the lad Bucklaw," he said; "but the deil

of ony master's face he shall see till he has sleepit and waken'd

on't.  He'll ken himsell better the morn's morning.  It sets the

like o' him, to be bringing a crew of drunken hunters here, when

he kens there is but little preparation to sloken his ain

drought."  And he disappeared from the window, leaving them all

to digest their exclusion as they best might.



But another person, of whose presence Caleb, in the

animation of the debate, was not aware, had listened in silence

to its progress.  This was the principal domestic of the

stranger--a man of trust and consequence--the same who, in the

hunting-field, had accommodated Bucklaw with the use of his

horse.  He was in the stable when Caleb had contrived the

expulsion of his fellow-servants, and thus avoided sharing the

same fate, from which his personal importance would certainly not

have otherwise saved him.



This personage perceived the manoeuvre of Caleb, easily

appreciated the motive of his conduct, and knowing his master's

intentions towards the family of Ravenswood, had no difficulty as

to the line of conduct he ought to adopt.  He took the place of

Caleb (unperceived by the latter) at the post of audience which

he had just left, and announced to the assembled domestics, "That

it was his master's pleasure that Lord Bittlebrain's retinue and

his own should go down to the adjacent change-house and call for

what refreshments they might have occasion for, and he should

take care to discharge the lawing."



The jolly troop of huntsmen retired from the inhospitable gate

of Wolf's Crag, execrating, as they descended the steep pathway,

the niggard and unworthy disposition of the proprietor, and

damning, with more than silvan license, both the castle and its

inhabitants.  Bucklaw, with many qualities which would have made

him a man of worth and judgment in more favourable

circumstances, had been so utterly neglected in point of

education, that he was apt to think and feel according to the

ideas of the companions of his pleasures.  The praises which had

recently been heaped upon himself he contrasted with the general

abuse now levelled against Ravenswood; he recalled to his mind

the dull and monotonous days he had spent in the Tower of Wolf's

Crag, compared with the joviality of his usual life; he felt with

great indignation his exclusion from the castle, which he

considered as a gross affront, and every mingled feeling led him

to break off the union which he had formed with the Master of

Ravenswood.



On arriving at the change-house of the village of Wolf's Hope,

he unexpectedly met with an acquaintance just alighting from his

horse.  This was no other than the very respectable Captain

Craigengelt, who immediately came up to him, and, without

appearing to retain any recollection of the indifferent terms on

which they had parted, shook him by the hand in the warmest

manner possible.  A warm grasp of the hand was what Bucklaw could

never help returning with cordiality, and no sooner had

Craigengelt felt the pressure of his fingers than he knew the

terms on which he stood with him.



"Long life to you, Bucklaw!" he exclaimed; "there's life for

honest folk in this bad world yet!"



The Jacobites at this period, with what propriety I know not,

used, it must be noticed, the term of HONEST MEN as peculiarly

descriptive of their own party.



"Ay, and for others besides, it seems," answered Bucklaw;

"otherways, how came you to venture hither, noble Captain?"



"Who--I?  I am as free as the wind at Martinmas, that pays

neither land-rent nor annual; all is explained--all settled with

the honest old drivellers yonder of Auld Reekie.  Pooh! pooh!

they dared not keep me a week of days in durance.  A certain

person has better friends among them than you wot of, and can

serve a friend when it is least likely."



"Pshaw!" answered Hayston, who perfectly knew and thoroughly

despised the character of this man, "none of your cogging

gibberish; tell me truly, are you at liberty and in safety?"



"Free and safe as a Whig bailie on the causeway of his own

borough, or a canting Presbyterian minister in his own pulpit;

and I came to tell you that you need not remain in hiding any

longer."



"Then I suppose you call yourself my friend, Captain

Craigengelt?" said Bucklaw.



"Friend!" replied Craigengelt, "my cock of the pit! why, I am

thy very Achates, man, as I have heard scholars say--hand and

glove--bark and tree--thine to life and death!"



"I'll try that in a moment," answered Bucklaw.  "Thou art never

without money, however thou comest by it.  Lend me two pieces to

wash the dust out of these honest fellows' throats in the first

place, and then----"



"Two pieces!  Twenty are at thy service, my lad, and twenty to

back them."



"Ay, say you so?" said Bucklaw, pausing, for his natural

penetration led him to susprect some extraordinary motive lay

couched under an excess of generosity.  "Craigengelt, you are

either an honest fellow in right good earnest, and I scarce know

how to believe that; or you are cleverer than I took you for, and

I scarce know how to believe that either."



"L'un n'empeche pas l'autre," said Craigengelt.  "Touch and

try; the gold is good as ever was weighed."



He put a quantity of gold pieces into Bucklaw's hand, which he

thrust into his pocket without either counting or looking at

them, only observing, "That he was so circumstanced that he must

enlist, though the devil offered the press-money"; and then

turning to the huntsmen, he called out, "Come along, my lads; all

is at my cost."



"Long life to Bucklaw!" shouted the men of the chase.



"And confusion to him that takes his share of the sport, and

leaves the hunters as dry as a drumhead," added another, by way

of corollary.



"The house of Ravenswood was ance a gude and an honourable house

in this land," said an old man; "but it's lost its credit this

day, and the Master has shown himself no better than a greedy

cullion."



And with this conclusion, which was unanimously agreed to by all

who heard it, they rushed tumultuously into the house of

entertainment, where they revelled till a late hour.  The jovial

temper of Bucklaw seldom permitted him to be nice in the choice

of his associates; and on the present occasion, when his joyous

debauch received additional zest from the intervention of an

unusual space of sobriety, and almost abstinence, he was as happy

in leading the revels as if his comrades had been sons of

princes.  Craigengelt had his own purposes in fooling him up to

the top of his bent; and having some low humour, much impudence,

and the power of singing a good song, understanding besides

thoroughly the disposition of his regained associate, he headily

succeeded in involving him bumper-deep in the festivity of the

meeting.







A very different scene was in the mean time passing in the Tower

of Wolf's Crag.  When the Master of Ravenswood left the

courtyard, too much busied with his own perplexed reflections to

pay attention to the manoeuvre of Caleb, he ushered his guests

into the great hall of the castle.



The indefatigable Balderstone, who, from choice or habit, worked

on from morning to night, had by degrees cleared this desolate

apartment of the confused relics of the funeral banquet, and

restored it to some order.  But not all his skill and labour, in

disposing to advantage the little furniture which remained,

could remove the dark and disconsolate appearance of those

ancient and disfurnished walls.  The narrow windows, flanked by

deep indentures into the walls, seemed formed rather to exclude

than to admit the cheerful light; and the heavy and gloomy

appearance of the thunder-sky added still farther to the

obscurity.



As Ravenswood, with the grace of a gallant of that period, but

not without a certain stiffness and embarrassment of manner,

handed the young lady to the upper end of the apartment, her

father remained standing more near to the door, as if about to

disengage himself from his hat and cloak.  At this moment the

clang of the portal was heard, a sound at which the stranger

started, stepped hastily to the window, and looked with an air of

alarm at Ravenswood, when he saw that the gate of the court was

shut, and his domestics excluded.



"You have nothing to fear, sir," said Ravenswood, gravely; "this

roof retains the means of giving protection, though not welcome.

Methinks," he added, "it is time that I should know who they are

that have thus highly honoured my ruined dwelling!"

The young lady remained silent and motionless, and the father,

to whom the question was more directly addressed, seemed in the

situation of a performer who has ventured to take upon himself a

part which he finds himself unable to present, and who comes to a

pause when it is most to be expected that he should speak. While

he endeavoured to cover his embarrassent with the exterior

ceremonials of a well-bred demeanour, it was obvious that, in

making his bow, one foot shuffled forward, as if to advance, the

other backward, as if with the purpose of escape; and as he undid

the cape of his coat, and raised his beaver from his face, his

fingers fumbled as if the one had been linked with rusted iron,

or the other had weighed equal with a stone of lead.  The

darkness of the sky seemed to increase, as if to supply the want

of those mufflings which he laid aside with such evident

reluctance.  The impatience of Ravenswood increased also in

proportion to the delay of the stranger, and he appeared to

struggle under

agitation, though probably from a very different cause.  He

laboured to restrain his desire to speak, while the stranger, to

all appearance, was at a loss for words to express what he felt

necessary to say.



At length Ravenswood's impatience broke the bounds he had

imposed upon it.  "I perceive," he said, "that Sir William Ashton

is unwilling to announced himself in the Castle of Wolf's Crag."



"I had hoped it was unnecessary," said the Lord Keeper, relieved

from his silence, as a spectre by the voice of the exorcist, "and

I am obliged to you, Master of Ravenswood, for breaking the ice

at once, where circumstances--unhappy

circumstances, let me call them--rendered self-introduction

peculiarly awkward."



"And I am not then," said the Master of Ravenswood, gravely, "to

consider the honour of this visit as purely accidental?"



"Let us distinguish a little," said the Keeper, assuming an

appearance of ease which perhaps his heart was a stranger to;

"this is an honour which I have eagerly desired for some time,

but which I might never have obtained, save for the accident of

the storm.  My daughter and I are alike grateful for this

opportunity of thanking the brave man to whom she owes her life

and I mine."



The hatred which divided the great families in the feudal times

had lost little of its bitterness, though it no longer expressed

itself in deeds of open violence.  Not the feelings which

Ravenswood had begun to entertain towards Lucy Ashton, not the

hospitality due to his guests, were able entirely to subdue,

though they warmly combated, the deep passions which arose within

him at beholding his father's foe standing in the hall of the

family of which he had in a great measure accelerated the ruin.

His looks glanced from the father to the daughter with an

irresolution of which Sir William Ashton did not think it proper

to await the conclusion.  He had now disembarrassed himself of

his riding-dress, and walking up to his daughter, he undid the

fastening of her mask.



"Lucy, my love," he said, raising her and leading her towards

Ravenswood, "lay aside your mask, and let us express our

gratitude to the Master openly and barefaced."



"If he will condescend to accept it," was all that Lucy uttered;

but in a tone so sweetly modulated, and which seemed to imply at

once a feeling and a forgiving of the cold reception to which

they were exposed, that, coming from a creature so innocent

andso beautiful, her words cut Ravenswood to the very heart for

his harshness.  He muttered something of surprise, something of

confusion, and, ending with a warm and eager expression of his

happiness at being able to afford her shelter under his roof, he

saluted her, as the ceremonial of the time enjoined upon such

occasions.  Their cheeks had touched and were withdrawn from each

other; Ravenswood had not quitted the hand which he had taken in

kindly courtesy; a blush, which attached more consequence by far

than was usual to such ceremony, still mantled on Lucy Ashton's

beautiful cheek, when the apartment was suddenly illuminated by a

flash of lightning, which seemed absolutely to swallow the

darkness of the hall.  Every object might have been for an

instant seen distinctly.  The slight and half-sinking form of

Lucy Ashton; the well-proportioned and stately figure of

Ravenswood, his dark features, and the fiery yet irresolute

expression of his eyes; the old arms and scutcheons which hung on

the walls of the apartment, were for an instant distinctly

visible to the Keeper by a strong red brilliant glare of light.

Its disappearance was almost instantly followed by a burst of

thunder, for the storm-cloud was very near the castle; and the

peal was so sudden and dreadful, that the old tower rocked to its

foundation, and every inmate concluded it was falling upon them.

The soot, which had not been disturbed for centuries, showered

down the huge tunnelled chimneys; lime and dust flew in clouds

from the wall; and, whether the lightning had actually struck the

castle or whether through the violent concussion of the air,

several heavy stones were hurled from the mouldering battlements

into the roaring sea beneath.  It might seem as if the ancient

founder of the castle were bestriding the thunderstorm, and

proclaiming his displeasure at the reconciliation of his

descendant with the enemy of his house.



The consternation was general, and it required the efforts of

both the Lord Keeper and Ravenswood to keep Lucy from

fainting.  Thus was the Master a second time engaged in the most

delicate and dangerous of all tasks, that of affording support

and assistance to a beautiful and helpless being, who, as seen

before in a similar situation, had already become a favourite of

his imagination, both when awake and when slumbering.  If the

genius of the house really condemned a union betwixt the Master

and his fair guest, the means by which he expressed his

sentiments were as unhappily chosen as if he had been a mere

mortal.  The train of little attentions, absolutely necessary to

soothe the young lady's mind, and aid her in composing her

spirits, necessarily threw the Master of Ravenswood into such an

itnercourse with her father as was calculated, for the moment at

least, to break down the barrier of feudal enemity which divided

them.  To express himself churlishly, or even coldly, towards

anold man whose daughter (and SUCH a daughter) lay before them,

overpowered with natural terror--and all this under his own roof,

the thing was impossible; and by the time that Lucy, extending a

hand to each, was able to thank them for their kindness, the

Master felt that his sentiments of hostility towards the Lord

Keeper were by no means those most predominant in his bosom.



The weather, her state of health, the absence of her

attendants, all prevented the possibility of Lucy Ashton renewing

her journey to Bittlebrains House, which was full five miles

distant; and the Master of Ravenswood could not but, in common

courtesy, offer the shelter of his roof for the rest of the day

and for the night.  But a flush of less soft expression, a look

much more habitual to his features, resumed predominance when he

mentioned how meanly he was provided for the entertainment of his

guests.



"Do not mention deficiencies," said the Lord Keeper, eager to

interrupt him and prevent his resuming an alarming topic; "you

are preparing to set out for the Continent, and your house is

probably for the present unfurnished.  All this we understand;

but if you mention inconvenience, you will oblige us to seek

accommodations in the hamlet."



As the Master of Ravenswood was about to reply, the door of the

hall opened, and Caleb Balderstone rushed in.

