





CHAPTER XIV.



As, to the Autumn breeze's bugle sound,

Various and vague the dry leaves dance their round;

Or, from the garner-door, on ether borne,

The chaff flies devious from the winnow'd corn;                  

So vague, so devious, at the breath of heaven,

From their fix'd aim are mortal counsels driv'n.



Anonymous.





WE left Caleb Balderstone in the extremity of triumph at the

success of his various achievements for the honour of the house

of Ravenswood.  When he had mustered and marshalled his dishes of

divers kinds, a more royal provision had not been seen in Wolf's

Crag since the funeral feast of its deceased lord.  Great was the

glory of the serving-man, as he "decored" the old oaken table

with a clean cloth, and arranged upon it carbonaded venison and

roasted wild-fowl, with a glance, every now and then, as if to

upbraid the incredulity of his master and his guests; and with

many a story, more or less true, was Lockhard that evening

regaled concerning the ancient grandeur of Wolf's Crag, and the

sway of its barons over the country in their

neighbourhood.



"A vassal scarce held a calf or a lamb his ain, till he had

first asked if the Lord of Ravenswood was pleased to accept it;

and they were obliged to ask the lord's consent before they

married in these days, and mony a merry tale they tell about that

right as weel as others.  And although," said Caleb, "these times

are not like the gude auld times, when authority had its right,

yet true it is, Mr. Lockhard, and you yoursell may partly have

remarked, that we of the house of Ravenswood do our endeavour  in

keeping up, by all just and lawful exertion of our baronial

authority, that due and fitting connexion betwixt superior and

vassal, whilk is in some danger of falling into desuetude, owing

to the general license and misrule of these present unhappy

times."



"Umph!" said Mr. Lockhard; "and if I may inquire, Mr.

Balderstone, pray do you find your people at the village yonder

amenable? for I must needs say, that at Ravenswood Castle, now

pertaining to my master the Lord Keeper, ye have not left behind

ye the most compliant set of tenantry."



"Ah! but Mr. Lockhard," replied Caleb, "ye must consider there

has been a change of hands, and the auld lord might expect twa

turns frae them, when the new-comer canna get ane.  A dour and

fractious set they were, thae tenants of Ravenswood, and ill to

live wi' when they dinna ken their master; and if your master

put them mad ance, the whole country will not put them down."



"Troth," said Mr. Lockhard, "an such be the case, I think the

wisest thing for us a ' wad be to hammer up a match between your

young lord and our winsome young leddy up-bye there; and Sir

William might just stitch your auld barony to her gown-sleeve,

and he wad sune cuitle another out o' somebody else, sic a lang

head as he has."



Caleb shook his head.  "I wish," he said--"I wish that may

answer, Mr. Lockhard.  There are auld prophecies about this house

I wad like ill to see fulfilled wi' my auld een, that has seen

evil eneugh already."



"Pshaw! never mind freits," said his brother butler; "if the

young folk liked ane anither, they wad make a winsome couple.

But, to say truth, there is a leddy sits in our hall-neuk, maun

have her hand in that as weel as in every other job.  But there's

no harm in drinking to their healths, and I will fill Mrs. Mysie

a cup of Mr. Girder's canary."







While they thus enjoyed themselves in the kitchen, the company

in the hall were not less pleasantly engaged.  So soon as

Ravenswood had determined upon giving the Lord Keeper such

hospitality as he had to offer, he deemed it incumbent on him to

assume the open and courteous brow of a well-pleased host.  It

has been often remarked, that when a man commences by acting a

character, he frequently ends by adopting it in good earnest.  In

the course of an hour or two, Ravenswood, to his own surprise,

found himself in the situation of one who frankly does his best

to entertain welcome and honoured guests.  How much of this

change in his disposition was to be ascribed to the beauty and

simplicity of Miss Ashton, to the readiness with which she

accommodated herself to the inconveniences of her situation; how

much to the smooth and plausible conversation of the Lord Keeper,

remarkably gifted with those words which win the ear, must be

left to the reader's ingenuity to conjecture.  But Ravenswood was

insensible to neither.



The Lord Keeper was a veteran statesman, well acquainted with

courts and cabinets, and intimate with all the various turns of

public affairs during the last eventful years of the 17th

century.  He could talk, from his own knowledge, of men and

events, in a way which failed not to win attention, and had the

peculiar art, while he never said a word which committed himself,

at the same time to persuade the hearer that he was speaking

without the least shadow of scrupulous caution or reserve.

Ravenswood, in spite of his prejudices and real grounds of

resentment, felt himself at once amused and instructed in

listening to him, while the statesman, whose inward feelings had

at first so much impeded his efforts to make himself known, had

now regained all the ease and fluency of a silver-tongued lawyer

of the very highest order.



His daughter did not speak much, but she smiled; and what she

did say argued a submissive gentleness, and a desire to give

pleasure, which, to a proud man like Ravenswood, was more

fascinating than the most brilliant wit.  Above all, he could not

be observe that, whether from gratitude or from some other

motive, he himself, in his deserted and unprovided hall, was as

much the object of respectful attention to his guests as he would

have been when surrounded by all the appliances and means of

hospitality proper to his high birth.  All deficiencies passed

unobserved, or, if they did not escape notice, it was to praise

the substitutes which Caleb had contrived to supply the want of

the usual accommodations.  Where a smile was unavoidable, it was

a very good-humoured one, and often coupled with some well-turned

compliment, to show how much the guests esteemed the merits of

their noble host, how little they thought of the inconveniences

with which they were surrounded.  I am not sure whether the pride

of being found to outbalance, in virtue of his own personal

merit, all the disadvantages of fortune, did not make as

favourable an impression upon the haughty heart of the Master of

Ravenswood as the conversation of the father and the beauty of

Lucy Ashton.



The hour of repose arrived.  The Keeper and his daughter retired

to their apartments, which were "decored" more properly than

could have been anticipated.  In making the necessary

arrangements, Mysie had indeed enjoyed the assistance of a gossip

who had arrived from the village upon an exploratory expedition,

but had been arrested by Caleb, and impressed into the domestic

drudgery of the evening; so that, instead of returning home to

describe the dress and person of the grand young lady, she found

herself compelled to be active in the domestic economy of Wolf's

Crag.



According to the custom of the time, the Master of

Ravenswood attended the Lord Keeper to his apartment, followed by

Caleb, who placed on the table, with all the ceremonials due to

torches of wax, two rudely-framed tallow-candles, such as in

those days were only used by the peasantry, hooped in paltry

clasps of wire, which served for candlesticks.  He then

disappeared, and presently entered with two earthen flagons (the

china, he said, had been little used since my lady's time), one

filled with canary wine, the other with brandy.  The canary sack,

unheeding all probabilities of detection, he declared had been

twenty years in the cellars of Wolf's Crag, "though it was not

for him to speak before their honours; the brandy--it was weel-

kenn'd liquor, as mild as mead and as strong as Sampson; it had

been in the house ever since the memorable revel, in which auld

Micklestob had been slain at the head of the stair by Jamie of

Jenklebrae, on account of the honour of the worshipful Lady

Muirend, wha was in some sort an ally of the family; natheless---

-"



"But to cut that matter short, Mr. Caleb," said the Keeper,

"perhaps you will favour me with a ewer of water."



"God forbid your lordship should drink water in this

family," replied Caleb, "to the disgrace of so honourable an

house!"



"Nevertheless, if his lordship have a fancy," said the Master,

smiling, "I think you might indulge him; for, if I mistake not,

there has been water drank here at no distant date, and with good

relish too."



"To be sure, if his lordship has a fancy," said Caleb; and re-

entering with a jug of pure element--"He will scarce find such

water onywhere as is drawn frae the well at Wolf's Crag;

nevertheless----"



"Nevertheless, we must leave the Lord Keeper to his repose in

this poor chamber of ours," said the Master of Ravenswood,

interrupting his talkative domestic, who immediately turning to

the doorway, with a profound reverence, prepared to usher his

master from the secret chamber.



But the Lord Keeper prevented his host's departure.--"I have but

one word to say to the Master of Ravenswood, Mr. Caleb, and I

fancy he will excuse your waiting."



With a second reverence, lower than the former, Caleb withdrew;

and his master stood motionless, expecting, with considerable

embarrassment, what was to close the events of a day fraught with

unexpected incidents.



"Master of Ravenswood," said Sir William Ashton, with some

embarrassment, "I hope you understand the Christian law too well

to suffer the sun to set upon your anger."



The Master blushed and replied, "He had no occasion that evening

to exercise the duty enjoined upon him by his Christian faith."



"I should have thought otherwise," said his guest,

"considering the various subjects of dispute and litigation which

have unhappily occurred more frequently than was desirable or

necessary betwixt the late honourable lord, your father, and

myself."



"I could wish, my lord," said Ravenswood, agitated by suppressed

emotion, "that reference to these circumstances should be made

anywhere rather than under my father's roof."



"I should have felt the delicacy of this appeal at another

time," said Sir William Ashton, "but now I must proceed with what

I mean to say.  I have suffered too much in my own mind, from the

false delicacy which prevented my soliciting with earnestness,

what indeed I frequently requested, a personal communing with

your father: much distress of mind to him and to me might have

been prevented."



"It is true," said Ravenswood, after a moment's reflection, "I

have heard my father say your lordship had proposed a personal

interview."



"Proposed, my dear Master?  I did indeed propose it; but I ought

to have begged, entreated, beseeched it.  I ought to have torn

away the veil, which interested persons had stretched betwixt us,

and shown myself as I was, willing to sacrifice a considerable

part even of my legal rights, in order to conciliate feelings so

natural as his must be allowed to have been.  Let me say for

myself, my young friend, for so I will call you, that had your

father and I spent the same time together which my good fortune

has allowed me to-day to pass in your company, it is possible the

land might yet have enjoyed one of the most

respectable of its ancient nobility, and I should have been

spared the pain of parting in enmity from a person whose general

character I so much admired and honoured."



He put his handkerchief to his eyes.  Ravenswood also was moved,

but awaited in silence the progress of this extraordinary

communication.



"It is necessary," continued the Lord Keeper, "and proper that

you should understand, that there have been many points betwixt

us, in which, although I judged it proper that there should be an

exact ascertainment of my legal rights by the decree of a court

of justice, yet it was never my intention to press them beyond

the verge of equity."



"My lord," said the Master of Ravenswood, "it is unnecessary to

pursue this topic farther.  What the law will give you, or has

given you, you enjoy--or you shall enjoy; neither my father nor

I myself would have received anything on the footing of favour."



"Favour!  No, you misunderstand me," resumed the Keeper; "or

rather you are no lawyer.  A right may be good in law, and

ascertained to be so, which yet a man of honour may not in every

case care to avail himself of."



"I am sorry for it, my lord," said the Master.



"Nay, nay," retorted his guest, "you speak like a young

counsellor; your spirit goes before your wit.  There are many

things still open for decision betwixt us.  Can you blame me, an

old man desirous of peace, and in the castle of a young nobleman

who has saved my daughter's life and my own, that I am desirous,

anxiously desirous, that these should be settled on the most

liberal principles?"

The old man kept fast hold of the Master's passive hand as he

spoke, and made it impossible for him, be his predetermination

what it would, to return any other than an acquiescent reply; and

wishing his guest good-night, he postponed farther conference

until the next morning.



Ravenswood hurried into the hall, where he was to spend the

night, and for a time traversed its pavement with a

disordered and rapid pace.  His mortal foe was under his roof,

yet his sentiments towards him were neither those of a feudal

enemy nor of a true Christian.  He felt as if he could neither

forgive him in the one character, nor follow forth his vengeance

in the other, but that he was making a base and dishonourable

composition betwixt his resentment against the father and his

affection for his daughter.  He cursed himself, as he hurried to

and fro in the pale moonlight, and more ruddy gleams of the

expiring wood-fire.  He threw open and shut the latticed windows

with violence, as if alike impatient of the admission and

exclusion of free air.  At length, however, the torrent of

passion foamed off its madness, and he flung himself into the

chair which he proposed as his place of repose for the night.



"If, in reality," such were the calmer thoughts that

followed the first tempest of his pasion--"if, in reality, this

man desires no more than the law allows him--if he is willing to

adjust even his acknowledged rights upon an equitable footing,

what could be my father's cause of complaint?--what is mine?

Those from who we won our ancient possessions fell under the

sword of my ancestors, and left lands and livings to the

conquerors; we sink under the force of the law, now too powerful

for the Scottish cavalry.  Let us parley with the victors of the

day, as if we had been besieged in our fortress, and without hope

of relief.  This man may be other than I have thought him; and

his daughter--but I have resolved not to think of her."



He wrapt his cloak around him, fell asleep, and dreamed of Lucy

Ashton till daylight gleamed through the lattices.
