





CHAPTER XXXIV.



Who comes from the bridal chamber?

It is Azrael, the angel of death.



Thalaba.





AFTER the dreadful scene that had taken place at the castle,

Lucy was transported to her own chamber, where she remained for

some time in a state of absolute stupor.  Yet afterwards, in the

course of the ensuing day, she seemed to have recovered, not

merely her spirits and resolution, but a sort of flighty levity,

that was foreign to her character and situation, and which was at

times chequered by fits of deep silence and melancholy and of

capricious pettishness.  Lady Ashton became much alarmed and

consulted the family physicians.  But as her pulse indicated no

change, they could only say that the disease was on the spirits,

and recommended gentle exercise and

amusement.  Miss Ashton never alluded to what had passed in the

state-room.  It seemed doubtful even if she was conscious of it,

for she was often observed to raise her hands to her neck, as if

in search of the ribbon that had been taken from it, and mutter,

in surprise and discontent, when she could not find it, "It was

the link that bound me to life."



Notwithstanding all these remarkable symptoms, Lady Ashton was

too deeply pledged to delay her daughter's marriage even in her

present state of health.  It cost her much trouble to keep up the

fair side of appearances towards Bucklaw.  She was well aware,

that if he once saw any reluctance on her daughter's part, he

would break off the treaty, to her great personal shame and

dishonour.  She therefore resolved that, if Lucy continued

passive, the marriage should take place upon the day that had

been previously fixed, trusting that a change of place, of

situation, and of character would operate a more speedy and

effectual cure upon the unsettled spirits of her daughter than

could be attained by the slow measures which the medical men

recommended.  Sir William Ashton's views of family

aggrandisement, and his desire to strengthen himself against the

measures of the Marquis of A----, readily induced him to

acquiesce in what he could not have perhaps resisted if willing

to do so.  As for the young men, Bucklaw and Colonel Ashton, they

protested that, after what had happened, it would be most

dishonourable to postpone for a single hour the time appointed

for the marriage, as it would be generally ascribed to their

being intimidated by the intrusive visit and threats of

Ravenswood.



Bucklaw would indeed have been incapable of such

precipitation, had he been aware of the state of Miss Ashton's

health, or rather of her mind.  But custom, upon these occasions,

permitted only brief and sparing intercourse between the

bridegroom and the betrothed; a circumstance so well improved by

Lady Ashton, that Bucklaw neither saw nor suspected the real

state of the health and feelings of his unhappy bride.



On the eve of the bridal day, Lucy appeared to have one of her

fits of levity, and surveyed with a degree of girlish

interest the various preparations of dress, etc., etc., which the

different members of the family had prepared for the occasion.



The morning dawned bright and cheerily.  The bridal guests

assembled in gallant troops from distant quarters.  Not only the

relations of Sir William Ashton, and the still more dignified

connexions of his lady, together with the numerous kinsmen and

allies of the bridegroom, were present upon this joyful ceremony,

gallantly mounted, arrayed, and caparisoned, but almost every

Presbyterian family of distinction within fifty miles made a

point of attendance upon an occasion which was considered as

giving a sort of triumph over the Marquis of A----, in the person

of his kinsman.  Splendid refreshments awaited the guests on

their arrival, and after these were finished, the cray was "To

horse."  The bride was led forth betwixt her brother Henry and

her mother.  Her gaiety of the preceding day had given rise

[place] to a deep shade of melancholy, which, however, did not

misbecome an occasion so momentous.  There was a light in her

eyes and a colour in her cheek which had not been kindled for

many a day, and which, joined to her great beauty, and the

splendour of her dress, occasioned her entrance to be greeted

with an universal murmur of applause, in which even the ladies

could not refrain from joining.  While the cavalcade were

getting to horse, Sir William Ashton, a man of peace and of form,

censured his son Henry for having begirt himself with a military

sword of preposterous length, belonging to his brother, Colonel

Ashton.



"If you must have a weapon," he said, "upon such a peaceful

occasion, why did you not use the short poniard sent from

Edinburgh on purpose?"



The boy vindicated himself by saying it was lost.



"You put it out of the way yourself, I suppose," said his

father, "out of ambition to wear that preposterous thing, which

might have served Sir William Wallace.  But never mind, get to

horse now, and take care of your sister."



The boy did so, and was placed in the centre of the gallant

train.  At the time, he was too full of his own appearance, his

sword, his laced cloak, his feathered hat, and his managed horse,

to pay much regard to anything else; but he afterwards remembered

to the hour of his death, that when the hand of his sister, by

which she supported hersel on the pillion behind him, touched his

own, it felt as wet and cold as sepulchral marble.



Glancing wide over hill and dale, the fair bridal procession at

last reached the parish church, which they nearly filled; for,

besides domestics, above a hundred gentlemen and ladies were

present upon the occasion.  The marriage ceremony was performed

according to the rites of the Presbyterian persuasion, to which

Bucklaw of late had judged it proper to conform.



On the outside of the church, a liberal dole was distributed to

the poor of the neighbouring parishes, under the direction of

Johnie Mortheuch [Mortsheugh], who had lately been promoted from

his desolate quarters at the Hermitage to fill the more eligible

situation of sexton at the parish church of Ravenswood.  Dame

Gourlay, with two of her contemporaries, the same who assisted at

Alice's late-wake, seated apart upon a flat monument, or

"through-stane," sate enviously comparing the shares which had

been allotted to them in dividing the dole.



"Johnie Mortheuch," said Annie Winnie, "might hae minded auld

lang syne, and thought of his auld kimmers, for as braw as he is

with his new black coat.  I hae gotten but five herring instead

o' sax, and this disna look like a gude saxpennys, and I dare say

this bit morsel o' beef is an unce lighter than ony that's been

dealt round; and it's a bit o' the tenony hough, mair by token

that yours, Maggie, is out o' the back-sey."



"Mine, quo' she!" mumbled the paralytic hag--"mine is half

banes, I trow.  If grit folk gie poor bodies ony thing for coming

to their weddings and burials, it suld be something that wad do

them gude, I think."



"Their gifts," said Ailsie Gourlay, "are dealt for nae love of

us, nor out of respect for whether we feed or starve.  They wad

gie us whinstanes for loaves, if it would serve their ain vanity,

and yet they expect us to be as gratefu', as they ca' it, as if

they served us for true love and liking."



"And that's truly said," answered her companion.



"But, Aislie Gourlay, ye're the auldest o' us three--did ye ever

see a mair grand bridal?"



"I winna say that I have," answered the hag; "but I think soon

to see as braw a burial."



"And that wad please me as weel," said Annie Winnie; "for

there's as large a dole, and folk are no obliged to girn and

laugh, and mak murgeons, and wish joy to these hellicat quality,

that lord it ower us like brute beasts.  I like to pack the dead-

dole in my lap and rin ower my auld rhyme--



My loaf in my lap, my penny in my purse,

Thou art ne'er the better, and I'm ne'er the worse."



"That's right, Annie," said the paralytic woman; "God send us a

green Yule and a fat kirkyard!"



"But I wad like to ken, Luckie Gourlay, for ye're the auldest

and wisest amang us, whilk o' these revellers' turn it will be to

be streikit first?"



"D'ye see yon dandilly maiden," said Dame Gourlay, "a'

glistenin' wi' gowd and jewels, that they are lifting up on the

white horse behind that hare-brained callant in scarlet, wi' the

lang sword at his side?"



"But that's the bride!" said her companion, her cold heart

touched with some sort of compassion--"that's the very bride

hersell!  Eh, whow! sae young, sae braw, and sae bonny--and is

her time sae short?"



"I tell ye," said the sibyl, "her winding sheet is up as high as

her throat already, believe it wha list.  Her sand has but few

grains to rin out; and nae wonder--they've been weel shaken.  The

leaves are withering fast on the trees, but she'll never see the

Martinmas wind gar them dance in swirls like the fairy rings."

"Ye waited on her for a quarter," said the paralytic woman, "and

got twa red pieces, or I am far beguiled?"



"Ay, ay," answered Ailsie, with a bitter grin; "and Sir William

Ashton promised me a bonny red gown to the boot o' that--a stake,

and a chain, and a tar-barrel, lass! what think ye o' that for a

propine?--for being up early and doun late for

fourscore nights and mair wi' his dwining daughter.  But he may

keep it for his ain leddy, cummers."



"I hae heard a sough," said Annie Winnie, "as if Leddy Ashton

was nae canny body."



"D'ye see her yonder," said Dame Gourlay, "as she prances on her

grey gelding out at the kirkyard?  There's mair o' utter

deevilry in that woman, as brave and fair-fashioned as she rides

yonder, than in a' the Scotch withces that ever flew by moonlight

ower North Berwick Law."



"What's that ye say about witches, ye damned hags?" said Johnie

Mortheuch [Mortsheugh]; "are ye casting yer cantrips in the very

kirkyard, to mischieve the bride and bridegroom?  Get awa' hame,

for if I tak my souple t'ye, I'll gar ye find the road faster

than ye wad like."



"Hegh, sirs!" answered Ailsie Gourlay; "how bra' are we wi' our

new black coat and our weel-pouthered head, as if we had never

kenn'd hunger nor thirst oursells! and we'll be screwing up our

bit fiddle, doubtless, in the ha' the night, amang a' the other

elbo'-jiggers for miles round.  Let's see if the pins haud,

Johnie--that's a', lad."



"I take ye a' to witness, gude people," said Morheuch, "that she

threatens me wi' mischief, and forespeaks me.  If ony thing but

gude happens to me or my fiddle this night, I'll make it the

blackest night's job she ever stirred in.  I'll hae her before

presbytery and synod: I'm half a minister mysell, now that I'm a

bedral in an inhabited parish."



Although the mutual hatred betwixt these hags and the rest of

mankind had steeled their hearts against all impressions of

festivity, this was by no means the case with the multitude at

large.  The splendour of the bridal retinue, the gay dresses, the

spirited horses, the blythesome appearance of the handsome women

and gallant gentlemen assembled upon the occasion, had the usual

effect upon the minds of the populace.  The repeated shouts of

"Ashton and Bucklaw for ever!" the discharge of pistols, guns,

and musketoons, to give what was called the bridal shot, evinced

the interest the people took in the occasion of the cavalcade, as

they accompanied it upon their return to the castle.  If there

was here and there an elder peasant or his wife who sneered at

the pomp of the upstart family, and remembered the days of the

long-descended Ravenswoods, even they, attracted by the plentiful

cheer which the castle that day afforded to rich and poor, held

their way thither, and acknowledged, notwithstanding their

prejudices, the influence of l'Amphitrion ou l'on dine.



Thus accompanied with the attendance both of rich and poor, Lucy

returned to her father's house.  Bucklaw used his privilege of

riding next to the bride, but, new to such a situation, rather

endeavoured to attract attention by the display of his person and

horsemanship, than by any attempt to address her in private.

They reached the castle in safety, amid a thousand joyous

acclamations.



It is well known that the weddings of ancient days were

celebrated with a festive publicity rejected by the delicacy of

modern times.  The marriage guests, on the present occasion, were

regaled with a banquet of unbounded profusion, the relics of

which, after the domestics had feasted in their turn, were

distributed among the shouting crowd, with as many barrels of ale

as made the hilarity without correspond to that within the

castle.  The gentlemen, according to the fashion of the times,

indulged, for the most part, in deep draughts of the richest

wines, while the ladies, prepared for the ball which always

closed a bridal entertainment, impatiently expected their

arrival in the state gallery.  At length the social party broke

up at a late hour, and the gentlemen crowded into the saloon,

where, enlivened by wine and the joyful occasion, they laid aside

their swords and handed their impatient partners to the floor.

The music already rung from the gallery, along the fretted roof

of the ancient state apartment.  According to strict etiquette,

the bride ought to have opened the ball; but Lady Ashton, making

an apology on account of her daughter's health, offered her own

hand to Bucklaw as substitute for her daughter's.

But as Lady Ashton raised her head gracefully, expecting the

strain at which she was to begin the dance, she was so much

struck by an unexpected alteration in the ornaments of the

apartment that she was surprised into an exclamation, "Who has

dared to change the pictures?"



All looked up, and those who knew the usual state of the

apartment observed, with surprise, that the picture of Sir

William Ashton's father was removed from its place, and in its

stead that of old Sir Malise Ravenswood seemed to frown wrath and

vengeance upon the party assembled below.  The exchange must have

been made while the apartments were empty, but had not been

observed until the torches and lights in the sconces were kindled

for the ball.  The haughty and heated spirits of the gentlemen

led them to demand an immediate inquiry into the cause of what

they deemed an affront to their host and to themselves; but Lady

Ashton, recovering herself, passed it over as the freak of a

crazy wench who was maintained about the castle, and whose

susceptible imagination had been observed to be much affected by

the stories which Dame Gourlay delighted to tell concerning "the

former family," so Lady Ashton named the Ravenswoods.  The

obnoxious picture was immediately removed, and the ball was

opened by Lady Ashton, with a grace and dignity which supplied

the charms of youth, and almost verified the extravagant

encomiums of the elder part of the company, who extolled her

performance as far exceeding the dancing of the rising

generation.



When Lady Ashton sat down, she was not surprised to find that

her daughter had left the apartment, and she herself

followed, eager to obviate any impression which might have been

made upon her nerves by an incident so likely to affect them as

the mysterious transposition of the portraits.  Apparently she

found her apprehensions groundless, for she returned in about an

hour, and whispered the bridegroom, who extricated himself from

the dancers, and vanished from the apartment.  The instrumets now

played their loudest strains; the dancers pursued their exercise

with all the enthusiasm inspired by youth, mirth, and high

spirits, when a cry was heard so shrill and piercing as at once

to arrest the dance and the music.  All stood motionless; but

when the yell was again repeated, Colonel Ashton snatched a torch

from the sconce, and demanding the key of the bridal-chamber from

Henry, to whom, as bride's-man, it had been entrusted, rushed

thither, followed by Sir William Ashton and Lady Ashton, and one

or two others, near relations of the family.  The bridal guests

waited their return in stupified amazement.



Arrived at the door of the apartment, Colonel Ashton knocked and

called, but received no answer except stifled groans.  He

hesitated no longer to open the door of the apartment, in which

he found opposition from something which lay against it.  When he

had succeeded in opening it, the body of the bridegroom was found

lying on the threshold of the bridal chamber, and all around was

flooded with blood.  A cry of surprise and horror was raised by

all present; and the company, excited by this new alarm, began to

rush tumultuously towards the sleeping apartment.  Colonel

Ashton, first whispering to his mother, "Search for her; she has

murdered him!" drew his sword, planted himself in the passage,

and declared he would suffer no man to pass excepting the

clergyman and a medical person present.  By their assistance,

Bucklaw, who still breathed, was raised from the ground, and

transported to another apartment, where his friends, full of

suspicion and murmuring, assembled round him to learn the opinion

of the surgeon.



In the mean while, Lady Ashton, her husband, and their

assistants in vain sought Lucy in the bridal bed and in the

chamber.  There was no private passage from the room, and they

began to think that she must have thrown herself from the window,

when one of  the company, holding his torch lower than the rest,

discovered something white in the corner of the great old-

fashioned chimney of the apartment.  Here they found the

unfortunate girl seated, or rather couched like a hare upon its

form--her head-gear dishevelled, her night-clothes torn and

dabbled with blood, her eyes glazed, and her features convulsed

into a wild paroxysm of insanity.  When she saw herself

discovered, she gibbered, made mouths, and pointed at them with

her bloody fingers, with the frantic gestures of an exulting

demoniac.



Female assistance was now hastily summoned; the unhappy bride

was overpowered, not without the use of some force.  As they

carried her over the threshold, she looked down, and

uttered the only articulate words that she had yet spoken,

saying, with a sort of grinning exultation, "So, you have ta'en

up your bonny bridegroom?"  She was, by the shuddering

assistants, conveyed to another and more retired apartment, where

she was secured as her situation required, and closely watched.

The unutterable agony of the parents, the horror and confusion of

all who were in the castle, the fury of contending passions

between the friends of the different parties--passions augmented

by previous intemperance--surpass description.



The surgeon was the first who obtained something like a patient

hearing; he pronounced that the wound of Bucklaw, though severe

and dangerous, was by no means fatal, but might readily be

rendered so by disturbance and hasty removal.  This silenced the

numerous party of Bucklaw's friends, who had previously insisted

that he should, at all rates, be transported from the castle to

the nearest of their houses.  They still demanded, however, that,

in consideration of what had happened, four of their number

should remain to watch over the sick-bed of their friend, and

that a suitable number of their domestics, well armed, should

also remain in the castle.  This condition being acceded to on

the part of Colonel Ashton and his father, the rest of the

bridegroom's friends left the castle, notwithstanding the hour

and the darkness of  the night.  The cares of the medical man

were next employed in behalf of Miss Ashton, whom he pronounced

to be in a very dangerous state.  Farther medical assistance was

immediately summoned.  All night she remained delirious.  On the

morning, she fell into a state of absolute insensibility.  The

next evening, the physicians said, would be the crisis of her

malady.  It proved so; for although she awoke from her trance

with some appearance of calmness, and suffered her night-

clothes to be changed, or put in order, yet so soon as she put

her hand to her neck, as if to search for the for the fatal flue

ribbon, a tide of recollections seemed to rush upon her, which

her mind and body were alike incapable of bearing.  Convulsion

followed convulsion, till they closed in death, without her being

able to utter a word explanatory of the fatal scene.



The provincial judge of the district arrived the day after the

young lady had expired, and executed, though with all

possible delicacy to the afflicted family, the painful duty of

inquiring into this fatal transaction.  But there occurred

nothing to explain the general hypothesis that the bride, in a

sudden fit of insanity, had stabbed the bridegroom at the

threshold of the apartment.  The fatal weapon was found in the

chamber smeared with blood.  It was the same piniard which Henry

should have worn on the widding-day, and the unhappy sister had

probably contrived to secrete on the preceding evening, when it

had been shown to her among other articles of preparation for the

wedding.



The friends of Bucklaw expected that on his recovery he would

throw some light upon this dark story, and eagerly pressed him

with inquiries, which for some time he evaded under pretext of

weakness.  When, however, he had been transported to his own

house, and was considered in a state of convalescence, he

assembled those persons, both male and female, who had considered

themselves as entitled to press him on this subject, and returned

them thanks for the interest they had exhibited in his behalf,

and their offers of adherence and support.  "I wish you all," he

said, "my friends, to understand, however, that I have neither

story to tell nor injuries to avenge.  If a lady shall question

me henceforward upon the incident of that unhappy night, I shall

remain silent, and in future consider her as one who has shown

herself desirous to break of her friendship with me; in a word, I

will never speak to her again.  But if a gentleman shall ask me

the same question, I shall regard the incivility as equivalent to

an invitation to meet him in the Duke's Walk, and I expect that

he will rule himself accordingly."



A declaration so decisive admitted no commentary; and it was

soon after seen that Bucklaw had arisen from the bed of sickness

a sadder and a wiser man than he had hitherto shown himself.  He

dismissed Craigengelt from his society, but not without such a

provision as, if well employed, might secure him against

indigence and against temptation.

Bucklaw afterwards went abroad, and never returned to Scotland;

nor was he known ever to hint at the circumstances attending his

fatal marriage.  By many readers this may be deemed overstrained,

romantic, and composed by the wild imagination of an author

desirous of gratifying the popular appetite for the horrible; but

those who are read in the private family history of Scotland

during the period in which the scene is laid, will readily

discover, through the disguise of borrowed names and added

incidents, the leading particulars of AN OWER TRUE TALE.

