





CHAPTER XXXII.



How fair these names, how much unlike they look

To all the blurr'd subscriptions in my book!

The bridegroom's letters stand in row above,

Tapering, yet straight, like pine-trees in his grove;

While free and fine the bride's appear below,

As light and slender as her jessamines grow.



CRABBE.





ST. JUDE's day came, the term assigned by Lucy herself as the

furthest date of expectation, and, as we have already said,

there were neither letters from nor news of Ravenswood.  But

there were news of Bucklaw, and of his trusty associate

Craigengelt, who arrived early in the morning for the completion

of the proposed espousals, and for signing the necessary deeds.



These had been carefully prepared under the revisal of Sir

William Ashton himself, it having been resolved, on account of

the state of Miss Ashton's health, as it was said, that none

save the parties immediately interested should be present when

the parchments were subscribed.  It was further determined that

the marriage should be solemnised upon the fourth day after

signing the articles, a masure adopted by Lady Ashton, in order

that Lucy might have as little time as possible to recede or

relapse into intractability.  There was no appearance, however,

of her doing either.  She heard the proposed arrangement with the

calm indifference of despair, or rather with an apathy arising

from the oppressed and stupified state of her feelings.  To an

eye so unobserving as that of Bucklaw, her demeanour had little

more of reluctance than might suit the character of a bashful

young lady, who, however, he could not disguise from himself, was

complying with the choice of her friends rather than exercising

any personal predilection in his favour.



When the morning compliment of the bridegroom had been paid,

Miss Ashton was left for some time to herself; her mother

remarking, that the deeds must be signed before the hour of noon,

in order that the marriage might be happy.  Lucy suffered herself

to be attired for the occasion as the taste of her attendants

suggested, and was of course splendidly arrayed.  Her dress was

composed of white satin and Brussels lace, and her hair arranged

with a profusion of jewels, whose lustre made a strange contrast

to the deadly paleness of her complexion, and to the trouble

which dwelt in her unsettled eye.



Her toilette was hardly finished ere Henry appeared, to conduct

the passive bride to the state apartment, where all was prepared

for signing the contract.  "Do you know, sister," he said, "I am

glad you are to have Bucklaw after all, instead of Ravenswood,

who looked like a Spanish grandee come to cute our throats and

trample our bodies under foot.  And I am glad the broad seas are

between us this day, for I shall never forget how frightened I

was when I took him for the picture of old Sir Malise walked out

of the canvas.  Tell me true, are you not glad to be fairly shot

of him?"



"Ask me no questions, dear Henry," said his unfortunate sister;

"there is little more can happen to make me either glad or sorry

in this world."



"And that's what all young brides say," said Henry; "and so do

not be cast down, Lucy, for you'll tell another tale a

twelvemonth hence; and I am to be bride's-man, and ride before

you to the kirk; and all our kith, kin, and allies, and all

Bucklaw's, are to be mounted and in order; and I am to have a

scarlet laced coat, and a feathered hat, and a swordbelt, double

bordered with gold, and point d'Espagne, and a dagger instead

of a sword; and I should like a sword much better, but my father

won't hear of it.  All my things, and a hundred besides, are to

come out from Edinburgh to-night with old Gilbert and the sumpter

mules; and I will bring them and show them to you the instant

they come."



The boy's chatter was here interrupted by the arrival of Lady

Ashton, somewhat alarmed at her daughter's stay.  With one of her

sweetest smiles, she took Lucy's arm under her own.



There were only present, Sir William Ashton and Colonel Douglas

Ashton, the last in full regimentals; Bucklaw, in bridegroom

trim; Craigengelt, freshly equipt from top to toe by the bounty

of his patron, and bedizened with as much lace as might have

become the dress of the Copper Captain; together with the Rev.

Mr. Bide-the-Bent; the presence of a minister being, in strict

Presbyterian families, an indispensable requisite upon all

occasions of unusual solemnity.



Wines and refreshments were placed on a table, on which the

writings were displayed, ready for signature.



But before proceeding either to business or refreshment, Mr.

Bide-the-Bent, at a signal from Sir William Ashton, invited the

company to join him in a short extemporary prayer, in which he

implored a blessing upon the contract now to be solemnised

between the honourable parties then present.  With the simplicity

of his times and profession, which permitted strong personal

allusions, he petitioned that the wounded mind of one of these

noble parties might be healed, in reward of her compliance with

the advice of her right honourable parents; and that, as she had

proved herself a child after God's commandment, by honouring her

father and mother, she and hers might enjoy the promised

blessing--length of days in the land here, and a happy portion

hereafter in a better country.  He prayed farther, that the

bridegroom might be weaned from those follies which seduced youth

from the path of knowledge; that he might cease to take delight

in vain and unprofitable company, scoffers, rioters, and those

who sit late at the wine (here Bucklaw winked at Craigengelt),

and cease from the society that causeth to err.  A suitable

supplication in behalf of Sir William and Lady Ashton and their

family concluded this religious address, which thus embraced

every individual present excepting Craigengelt, whom the worthy

divine probably considered as past all hopes of grace.



The business of the day now went forward:  Sir William Ashton

signed the contract with legal solemnity and precision; his son,

with military nonchalance; and Bucklaw, having

subscribed as rapidly as Craigengelt could manage to turn the

leaves, concluded by wiping his pen on that worthy's new laced

cravat.  It was now Miss Ashton's turn to sign the writings, and

she was guided by her watchful mother to the table for that

purpose.  At her first attempt, she began to write with a dry

pen, and when the circumstance was pointed out, seemed unable,

after several attempts, to dip it in the massive silver ink-

standish, which stood full before her.  Lady Ashton's vigilance

hastened to supply the deficiency.  I have myself seen the fatal

deed, and in the distinct characters in which the name of Lucy

Ashton is traced on each page there is only a very slight

tremulous

irregularity, indicative of her state of mind at the time of the

subscription.  But the last signature is incomplete, defaced, and

blotted; for, while her hand was employed in tracing it, the

hasty tramp of a horse was heard at the gate, succeeded by a step

in the outer gallery, and a voice which, in a commanding tone,

bore down the opposition of the menials.  The pen dropped from

Lucy's fingers, as she exclaimed with a faint shriek: "He is

come--he is come!"

