





CHAPTER VIII.



The hearth in hall was black and dead,

No board was dight in bower within,

Nor merry bowl nor welcome bed;

"Here's sorry cheer," quoth the Heir of Linne.



Old Ballad





THE feelings of the prodigal Heir of Linne, as expressed in that

excellent old song, when, after dissipating his whole fortune, he

found himself the deserted inhabitant of "the lonely lodge,"

might perhaps have some resemblance to those of the Master of

Ravenswood in his deserted mansion of Wolf's Crag.  The Master,

however, had this advantage over the spendthrift in the legend,

that, if he was in similar distress, he could not impute it to

his own imprudence.  His misery had been bequeathed to him by his

father, and, joined to his high blood, and to a title which the

courteous might give or the churlish withhold at their pleasure,

it was the whole inheritance he had derived from his ancestry.

Perhaps this melancholy yet consolatory reflection crossed the

mind of the unfortunate young nobleman with a breathing of

comfort.  Favourable to calm reflection, as well as to the

Muses, the morning, while it dispelled the shades of night, had a

composing and sedative effect upon the stormy passions by which

the Master of Ravenswood had been agitated on the preceding day.

He now felt himself able to analyse the different feelings by

which he was agitated, and much resolved to combat and to subdue

them.  The morning, which had arisen calm and bright, gave a

pleasant effect even to the waste moorland view which was seen

from the castle on looking to the landward; and the glorious

ocean, crisped with a thousand rippling waves of silver,

extended on the other side, in awful yet complacent majesty, to

the verge of the horizon.  With such scenes of calm sublimity the

human heart sympathises even in its most disturbed moods, and

deeds of honour and virtue are inspired by their majestic

influence.

To seek out Bucklaw in the retreat which he had afforded him,

was the first occupation of the Master, after he had

performed, with a scrutiny unusually severe, the important task

of self-examination.  "How now, Bucklaw?" was his morning's

salutation--"how like you the couch in which the exiled Earl of

Angus once slept in security, when he was pursued by the full

energy of a king's resentment?"



"Umph!" returned the sleeper awakened; "I have little to

complain of where so great a man was quartered before me, only

the mattress was of the hardest, the vault somewhat damp, the

rats rather more mutinous than I would have expected from the

state of Caleb's larder; and if there had been shutters to that

grated window, or a curtain to the bed, I should think it, upon

the whole, an improvement in your accommodations."



"It is, to be sure, forlorn enough," said the Master, looking

around the small vault; "but if you will rise and leave it, Caleb

will endeavour to find you a better breakfast than your supper of

last night."



"Pray, let it be no better," said Bucklaw, getting up, and

endeavouring to dress himself as well as the obscurity of the

place would permit--"let it, I say, be no better, if you mean me

to preserve in my proposed reformation.  The very recollection of

Caleb's beverage has done more to suppress my longing to open the

day with a morning draught than twenty sermons would have done.

And you, master, have you been able to give battle valiantly to

your bosom-snake?  You see I am in the way of smothering my

vipers one by one."



"I have commenced the battle, at least, Bucklaw, adn I have had

a fair vision of an angel who descended to my assistance,"

replied the Master.



"Woe's me!" said his guest, "no vision can I expect, unless my

aunt, Lady Grinington, should betake herself to the tomb; and

then it would be the substance of her heritage rather than the

appearance of her phantom that I should consider as the support

of my good resolutions.  But this same breakfast, Master--does

the deer that is to make the pasty run yet on foot, as the

ballad has it?"



"I will inquire into that matter," said his entertainer; and,

leaving the apartment, he went in search of Caleb, whom, after

some difficulty, he found in an obscure sort of dungeon, which

had been in former times the buttery of the castle.  Here the old

man was employed busily in the doubtful task of

burnishing a pewter flagon until it should take the hue and

semblance of silver-plate.  "I think it may do--I think it might

pass, if they winna bring it ower muckle in the light o' the

window!" were the ejaculations which he muttered from time to

time, as if to encourage himself in his undertaking, when he was

interrupted by the voice of his master.



"Take this," said the Master of Ravenswood, "and get what is

necessary for the family."  And with these words he gave to the

old butler the purse which had on the preceding evening so

narrowly escaped the fangs of Craigengelt.



The old man shook his silvery and thin locks, and looked with an

expression of the most heartfelt anguish at his master as he

weighed in his hand the slender treasure, and said in a

sorrowful voice, "And is this a' that's left?"



"All that is left at present," said the Master, affecting more

cheerfulness than perhaps he really felt, "is just the green

purse and the wee pickle gowd, as the old song says; but we shall

do better one day, Caleb."



"Before that day domes," said Caleb, "I doubt there will be an

end of an auld sang, and an auld serving-man to boot.  But it

disna become me to speak that gate to your honour, adn you

looking sae pale.  Tak back the purse, and keep it to be making a

show before company; for if your honour would just take a

bidding, adn be whiles taking it out afore folk and putting it up

again, there's naebody would refuse us trust, for a' that's come

and gane yet."



"But, Caleb," said the Master, "I still intend to leave this

country very soon, and desire to do so with the reputation of an

honest man, leaving no debty behind me, at last of my own

contracting."



"And gude right ye suld gang away as a true man, and so ye

shall; for auld Caleb can tak the wyte of whatever is taen on for

the house, and then it will be a' just ae man's burden; and I

will live just as weel in the tolbooth as out of it, and the

credit of the family will be a' safe and sound."



The Master endeavoured, in vain, to make Caleb comprehend that

the butler's incurring the responsibility of debts in his own

person would rather add to than remove the objections which he

had to their being contracted.  He spoke to a premier too busy

in devising ways and means to puzzle himself with refuting the

arguments offered against their justice or expediency.



"There's Eppie Sma'trash will trust us for ale," said Caleb to

himself--"she has lived a' her life under the family--and maybe

wi' a soup brandy; I canna say for wine--she is but a lone

woman, and gets her claret by a runlet at a time; but I'll work a

wee drap out o' her by fair means or foul.  For doos, there's the

doocot; there will be poultry amang the tenants, though Luckie

Chirnside says she has paid the kain twice ower.  We'll mak

shift, an it like your honour--we'll mak shift; keep your heart

abune, for the house sall haud its credit as lang as auld Caleb

is to the fore."



The entertainment which the old man's exertions of various kinds

enabled him to present to the young gentlemen for three or four

days was certainly of no splendid description, but it may

readily be believed it was set before no critical guests; and

even the distresses, excuses, evasions, and shifts of Caleb

afforded amusement to the young men, and added a sort fo interest

to the scrambling and irregular style of their table.  They had

indeed occasion to seize on every circumstance that might serve

to diversify or enliven time, which otherwise passed away so

heavily.



Bucklaw, shut out from his usual field-sports and joyous

carouses by the necessity of remaining concealed within the walls

of the castle, became a joyless and uninteresting companion.

When the Master of Ravenswood would no longer fence or play at

shovel-board; when he himself had polished to the extremity the

coat of hsi palfrey with brush, curry comb, and hair-cloth; when

he had seen him eat his provender, and gently lie down in his

stall, he could hardly help envying the animal's apparent

acquiescence in a life so monotonous.  "The stupid brute," he

said, "thinks neither of the race-ground or the hunting-field, or

his green paddock at Bucklaw, but enjoys himself as comfortably

when haltered to the rack in this ruinous vault, as if he had

been foaled in it; "and, I who have the freedom of a prisoner at

large, to range through the dungeons of this wretched old tower,

can hardly, betwixt whistling and sleeping, contrive to pass away

the hour till dinner-time."



And with this disconsolate reflection, he wended his way to the

bartizan or battlements of the tower, to watch what objects

might appear on the distant moor, or to pelt, with pebbles and

pieces of lime, the sea-mews and cormorants which established

themselves incautiously within  the reach of an idle young man.



Ravenswood, with a mind incalculably deeper and more

powerful than that of his companion, had his own anxious subjects

of reflection, which wrought for him the same unhappiness that

sheer enui and want of occupation inflicted on his companion.

The first sight of Lucy Ashton had been less impressive than her

image proved to be upon reflection.  As the depth and violence of

that revengeful passion by which he had been actuated in seeking

an interview with the father began to abate by degrees, he looked

back on his conduct towards the daughter as harsh and unworthy

towards a female of rank and beauty.  Her looks of grateful

acknowledgment, her words of affectionate courtesy, had been

repelled with something which approached to disdain; and if the

Master of Ravenswood had sustained wrongs at the hand of Sir

William Ashton, his conscience told him they had been

unhandsomely resented towards his daughter.  When his thoughts

took this turn of self-reproach, the recollection of Lucy

Ashton's beautiful features, rendered yet more interesting by the

circumstances in which their meeting had taken place, made an

impression upon his mind at once soothing and painful.  The

sweetness of her voice, the delicacy of her expressions, the

vivid glow of her filial affection, embittered his regret at

having repulsed her gratitude with rudeness, while, at the same

time, they placed before his imagination a picture of the most

seducing sweetness.



Even young Ravenswood's strength of moral feeling and rectitude

of purpose at once increased the danger of cherishing these

recollections, and the propensity to entertain them.  Firmly

resolved as he was to subdue, if possible, the

predominating vice in his character, he admitted with

willingness--nay, he summoned up in his imagination--the ideas by

which it could be most powerfully counteracted; and, while he did

so, a sense of his own harsh conduct towards the daughter of his

enemy naturally induced him, as if by way of recompense, to

invest her with more of grace and beauty than perhaps she could

actually claim.



Had any one at this period told the Master of Ravenswood that he

had so lately vowed vengeance against the whole lineage of him

whom he considered, not unjustly, as author of his

father's ruin and death, he might at first have repelled the

charge as a foul calumny; yet, upon serious self-examination, he

would have been compelled to admit that it had, at one period,

some foundation in truth, though, according to the present tone

of his sentiments, it was difficult to believe that this had

really been the case.



There already existed in his bosom two contradictory

passions--a desire to revenge the death of his father, strangely

qualified by admiration of his enemy's daughter.  Against the

former feeling he had struggled, until it seemed to him upon the

wane; against the latter he used no means of resistance, for he

did not suspect its existence.  That this was actually the case

was chiefly evinced by his resuming his resolution to leave

Scotland.  Yet, though such was his purpose, he remained day

after day at Wolf's Crag, without taking measures for carrying it

into execution.  It is true, that he had written to one or two

kinsmen who resided in a distant quarter of Scotland, and

particularly to the Marquis of A----, intimating his purpose; and

when pressed upon the subject by Bucklaw, he was wont to allege

the necessity of waiting for their reply, especially that of the

Marquis, before taking so decisive a measure.



The Marquis was rich and powerful; and although he was suspected

to entertain sentiments unfavourable to the government

established at the Revolution, he had nevertheless address enough

to head a party in the Scottish privy council, connected with the

High Church faction in England, and powerful enough to menace

those to whom the Lord Keeper adhered with a probable subversion

of their power.  The consulting with a personage of such

importance was a plausible excise, which Ravenswood used to

Bucklaw, and probably to himself, for continuing his residence at

Wolf's Crag; and it was rendered yet more so by a general report

which began to be current of a probable change of ministers and

measures in the Scottish administration.  The rumours, strongly

asserted by some, and as resolutely denied by others, as their

wishes or interest dictated, found their way even to the ruinous

Tower of Wolf's Crag, chiefly through the medium of Caleb, the

butler, who, among his other excellences, was an ardent

politician, and seldom made an excursion from the old fortress to

the neighbouring village of Wolf's Hope without bringing back

what tidings were current in the vicinity.



But if Bucklaw could not offer any satisfactory objections to

the delay of the Master in leaving Scotland, he did not the less

suffer with impatience the state of inaction to which it

confined him; and it was only the ascendency which his new

companion had acquired over him that induced him to submit to a

course of life so alien to his habits and inclinations.



"You were wont to be thought a stirring active young fellow,

Master," was his frequent remonstrance; "yet here you seem

determined to live on and on like a rat in a hole, with this

trifling difference, that the wiser vermin chooses a hermitage

where he can find food at least; but as for us, Caleb's excuses

become longer as his diet turns more spare, and I fear we shall

realise the stories they tell of the slother: we have almost eat

up the last green leaf on the plant, and have nothing left for it

but to drop from the tree and break our necks."



"Do not fear it," said Ravenswood; "there is a fate watches for

us, and we too have a stake in the revolution that is now

impending, and which already has alarmed many a bosom."



"What fate--what revolution?" inquired his compation.  "We have

had one revolution too much already, I think."



Ravenswood interrupted him by putting into his hands a letter.



"Oh," answered Bucklaw, "my dream's out.  I thought I heard

Caleb this morning pressing some unfortunate fellow to a drink of

cold water, and assuring him it was better for his stomach in

the morning than ale or brandy."



"It was my Lord of A----'s courier," said Ravenswood, "who was

doomed to experience his ostentatious hospitality, which I

believe ended in sour beer and herrings.  Read, and you will see

the news he has brought us."

"I will as fast as I can," said Bucklaw; "but I am no great

clerk, nor does his lordship seem to be the first of scribes."



The reader will peruse in, a few seconds, by the aid our friend

Ballantyne's types, what took Bucklaw a good half hour in

perusal, though assisted by the Master of Ravenswood.  The tenor

was as follows:



"RIGHT HONOURABLE OUR COUSIN:

"Our hearty commendations premised, these come to assure you of

the interest which we take in your welfare, and in your purpose

towards its augmentation.   If we have been less active in

showing forth our effective good-will towards you than, as a

loving kinsman and blood-relative, we would willingly have

desired, we request that you will impute it to lack fo

opportunity to show our good-liking, not to any coldness of our

will.  Touching your resolution to travel in foreign parts, as at

this time we hold the same little advisable, in respect that your

ill-willers may, according to the custom of such persons, impute

motives for your journey, whereof, although we know and believe

you to be as clear as ourselves, yet natheless their words may

find credence in places where the belief in them may much

prejudice you, and which we should see with more unwillingness

and displeasure than with means of remedy



"Having thus, as becometh our kindred, given you our poor mind

on the subject of your journeying forth of Scotland, we would

willingly add reasons of weight, which might materially

advantage you and your father's house, thereby to determine you

to abide at Wolf's Crag, until this harvest season shall be

passed over.  But what sayeth the proverb, verbum sapienti--a

word is more to him that hath wisdom than a sermon to a fool.

And albeit we have written this poor scroll with our own hand,

and are well assured of the fidelity of our messenger, as him

that is many ways bounden to us, yet so it is, that sliddery ways

crave wary walking, and that we may not peril upon paper matters

which we would gladly impart to you by word of mouth.  Wherefore,

it was our purpose to have prayed you heartily to come to this

our barren Highland country to kill a stag, and to treat of the

matters which we are now more painfully inditing to you anent.

But commodity does not serve at present for such our meeting,

which, therefore, shall be deferred until sic time as we may in

all mirth rehearse those things whereof we now keep silence.

Meantime, we pray you to think that we are, and will still be,

your good kinsman and well-wisher, waiting but for times of

whilk we do, as it were, entertain a twilight prospect, and

appear and hope to be also your effectual well-doer.  And in

which hope we heartily write ourself,



"Right Honourable,

"Your loving cousin,

"A----.

"Given from our poor house of B----," etc.



Superscribed--"For the right honourable, and our honoured

kinsman, the Master of Ravenswood--These, with haste, haste, post

haste--ride and run until these be delivered."



"What think you of this epistle, Bucklaw?" said the Master, when

his companion had hammered out all the sense, and almost all the

words of which it consisted.



"Truly, that the Marquis's meaning is as great a riddle as his

manuscript.  He is really in much need of Wit's Interpreter, or

the *Complete Letter-Writer*, and were I you, I would send him a

copy by the bearer.  He writes you very kindly to remain wasting

your time and your money in this vile, stupid, oppressed country,

without so much as offering you the countenance and shelter of

his house.  In my opinion, he has some scheme in view in which he

supposes you can be useful, and he wishes to keep you at hand, to

make use of you when it ripens, reserving the power of turning

you adrift, should his plot fail in the concoction."



"His plot!  Then you suppose it is a treasonable business,"

answered Ravenswood.



"What else can it be?"  replied Bucklaw; "the Marquis has been

long suspected to have an eye to Saint Germains."



"He should not engage me rashly in such an adventure," said

Ravenswood; "when I recollect the times of the first and second

Charles, and of the last James, truly I see little reason that,

as a man or a patriot, I should draw my sword for their

descendants."



"Humph!" replied Bucklaw; "so you have set yourself down to

mourn over the crop-eared dogs whom honest Claver'se treated as

they deserved?"



"They first gave the dogs an ill name, and then hanged them,"

replied Ravenswood.  "I hope to see the day when justice shall be

open to Whig and Tory, and when these nicknames shall only be

used among coffee-house politicians, as 'slut' and 'jade' are

among apple-women, as cant terms of idle spite and rancour."



"That will nto be in our days, Master: the iron has entered too

deeply into our sides and our souls."



"It will be, however, one day," replied the Master; "men will

not always start at these nicknames as at a trumpet-sound.  As

social life is better protected, its comforts will become too

dear to be hazarded without some better reasons than speculative

politics."



"It is fine talking," answered Bucklaw; "but my heart is with

the old song--



To see good corn upon the rigs,

And a gallow built to hang the Whigs,

And the right restored where the right should be.

Oh, that is the thing that would wanton me."



"You may sing as loudly as you will, cantabit vacuus----,"

answered the Master; "but I believe the Marquis is too wise, at

least too wary, to join you in such a burden.  I suspect he

alludes to a revolution in the Scottish privy council, rather

than in the British kingdoms."



"Oh, confusion to your state tricks!" exclaimed Bucklaw--"your

cold calculating manoeuvres, which old gentlemen in wrought

nightcaps and furred gowns execute like so many games at chess,

and displace a treasurer or lord commissioner as they would take

a rook or a pawn.  Tennis for my sport, and battle for my

earnest!  And you, Master, so dep and considerate as you would

seem, you have that within you makes the blood boil faster than

suits your present hmour of moralising on political truths.  You

are one of those wise men who see everything with great composure

till their blood is up, and then--woe to any one who should put

them in mind of their own prudential maxims!"

"Perhaps," said Ravenswood, "you read me more rightly than I can

myself.  But to think justly will certainly go some length in

helping me to act so.  But hark!  I hear Caleb tolling the

dinner-bell."



"Which he always does with the more sonorous grace in proportion

to the meagreness of the cheer which he has provided," said

Bucklaw; "as if that infernal clang and jangle, which will one

day bring the belfry down the cliff, could convert a starved hen

into a fat capon, and a blade-bone of mutton into a haunch of

venison."



"I wish we may be so well off as your worst conjectures surmise,

Bucklaw, from the extreme solemnity and ceremony with which Caleb

seems to place on the table that solitary covered dish."



"Uncover, Caleb! uncover, for Heaven's sake!" said Bucklaw; "let

us have what you can give us without preface.  Why, it stands

well enough, man," he continued, addressing impatiently the

ancient butler, who, without reply, kept shifting the dish,

until he had at length placed it with mathematical precision in

the very midst of the table.



"What have we got here, Caleb?" inquired the Master in his turn.



"Ahem! sir, ye suld have known before; but his honour the Laird

of Bucklaw is so impatient," answered Caleb, still holding the

dish with one hand and the cover with the other, with

evident reluctance to disclose the contents.



"But what is it, a God's name--not a pair of clean spurs, I

hope, in the Border fashion of old times?"



"Ahem! ahem!" reiterated Caleb, "your honour is pleased to be

facetious; natheless, I might presume to say it was a

convenient fashion, and used, as I have heard, in an honourable

and thriving family.  But touching your present dinner, I judged

that this being St. Magdalen's [Margaret's] Eve, who was a worthy

queen of Scotland in her day, your honours might judge it

decorous, if not altogether to fast, yet only to sustain nature

with some slight refection, as ane saulted herring or the like."

And, uncovering the dish, he displayed four of the savoury fishes

which he mentioned, adding, in a subdued tone, "that they were no

just common herring neither, being every ane melters, and sauted

with uncommon care by the housekeeper (poor Mysie) for his

honour's especial use."



"Out upon all apologies!" said the Master, "let us eat the

herrings, since there is nothing better to be had; but I begin to

think with you, Bucklaw, that we are consuming the last green

leaf, and that, in spite of the Marquis's political machinations,

we must positively shift camp for want of forage, without waiting

the issue of them."

