





CHAPTER XXIX.



It was the copy of our conference.

In bed she slept not, for my urging it;

At board she fed not, for my urging it;

Alone, it was the subject of my theme;

In company I often glanced at it.



Comedy of Errors.





THE next morning saw Bucklaw and his faithful Achates,

Craigengelt, at Ravenswood Castle.  They were most courteously

received by the knight and his lady, as well, as by their son

and heir, Colonel Ashton.  After a good deal of stammering and

blushing--for Bucklaw, notwithstanding his audacity in other

matters, had all the sheepish bashfulness common to those who

have lived little in respectable society--he contrived at length

to explain his wish to be admitted to a conference with Miss

Ashton upon the subject of their approaching union.  Sir William

and his son looked at Lady Ashton, who replied with the greatest

composure, "That Lucy would wait upon Mr. Hayston directly.  I

hope," she added with a smile, "that as Lucy is very young, and

has been lately trepanned into an engagement of which she is now

heartily ashamed, our dear Bucklaw will excuse her wish that I

should be present at their interview?"



"In truth, my dear lady," said Bucklaw, "it is the very thing

that I would have desired on my own account; for I have been so

little accustomed to what is called gallantry, that I shall

certainly fall into some cursed mistake unless I have the

advantage of your ladyship as an interpreter."



It was thus that Bucklaw, in the perturbation of his

embarrassment upon this critical occasion, forgot the just

apprehensions he had entertained of Lady Ashton's overbearing

ascendency over her daughter's mind, and lost an opportunity of

ascertaining, by his own investigation, the real state of Lucy's

feelings.



The other gentlemen left the room, and in a shrot time Lady

Ashton, followed by her daughter, entered the apartment.  She

appeared, as he had seen her on former occasions, rather

composed than agitated; but a nicer judge than he could scarce

have determined whether her calmness was that of despair or of

indifference.  Bucklaw was too much agitated by his own feelings

minutely to scrutinise those of the lady.  He stammered out an

unconnected address, confounding together the two or three topics

to which it related, and stopt short before he brought it to any

regular conclusion.  Miss Ashton listened, or looked as if she

listened, but returned not a single word in answer, continuing to

fix her eyes on a small piece of embroidery on which, as if by

instinct or habit, her fingers were busily employed.  Lady Ashton

sat at some distance, almost screened from notice by the deep

embrasure of the window in which she had placed her chair.  From

this she whispered, in a tone of voice which, though soft and

sweet, had something in it of admonition, if not command: "Lucy,

my dear, remember--have you heard what Bucklaw has been saying?"



The idea of her mother's presence seemed to have slipped from

the unhappy girl's recollection.  She started, dropped her

needle, and repeated hastily, and almost in the same breath, the

contradictory answers: "Yes, madam--no, my lady--I beg pardon, I

did not hear."



"You need not blush, my love, and still less need you look so

pale and frightened," said Lady Ashton, coming forward; "we know

that maiden's ears must be slow in receiving a gentleman's

language; but you must remember Mr. Hayston speaks on a subject

on which you have long since agreed to give him a favourable

hearing.  You know how much your father and I have our hearts set

upon an event so extremely desirable."



In Lady Ashton's voice, a tone of impressive, and even stern,

innuendo was  sedulously and skilfully concealed under an

appearance of the most affectionate maternal tenderness.  The

manner was for Bucklaw, who was easily enough imposed upon; the

matter of the exhortation was for the terrified Lucy, who well

knew how to interpret her mother's hints, however skilfully their

real purport might be veiled from general observation.



Miss Ashton sat upright in her chair, cast round her a glance in

which fear was mingled with a still wilder expression, but

remained perfectly silent.  Bucklaw, who had in the mean time

paced the room to and fro, until he had recovered his composure,

now stopped within two or three yards of her chair, and broke out

as follows: "I believe I have been a d--d fool, Miss Ashton; I

have tried to speak to you as people tell me young ladies like to

be talked to, and I don't think you comprehend what I have been

saying; and no wonder, for d--n me if I understand it myself!

But, however, once for all, and in broad Scotch, your father and

mother like what is proposed, and if you can take a plain young

fellow for your husband, who will never cross you in anything you

have a mind to, I will place you at the head of the best

establishment in the three Lothians; you shall have Lady

Girnington's lodging in the Canongate of Edinburgh, go where you

please, do what you please, and see what you please--and that's

fair.  Only I must have a corner at the board-end for a worthless

old playfellow of mine, whose company I would rather want than

have, if it were not that the d--d fellow has persuaded me that I

can't do without him; and so I hope you won't except against

Craigie, although it might be easy to find much better company."



"Now, out upon you, Bucklaw," said Lady Ashton, again

interposing; "how can you think Lucy can have any objection to

that blunt, honest, good-natured creature, Captain Craigengelt?"



"Why, madam," replied Bucklaw, "as to Craigie's sincerity,

honesty, and good-nature, they are, I believe, pretty much upon a

par; but that's neither here nor there--the fellow knows my ways,

and has got useful to me, and I cannot well do without him, as I

said before.  But all this is nothing to the purpose; for since I

have mustered up courage to make a plain proposal, I would fain

hear Miss Ashton, from her own lips, give me a plain answer."



"My dear Bucklaw," said Lady Ashton, "let me spare Lucy's

bashfulness.  I tell you, in her presence, that she has already

consented to be guided by her father and me in this matter.

Lucy, my love," she added, with that singular combination of

suavity of tone and pointed energy which we have already noticed-

-"Lucy, my dearest love! speak for yourself, is it not as I say?"



Her victim answered in a tremulous and hollow voice: "I HAVE

promised to obey you--but upon one condition."



"She means," said Lady Ashton, turning to Bucklaw, "she expects

an answer to the demand which she has made upon the man at

Vienna, or Ratisbon, or Paris--or where is he?--for

restitution of the engagement in which he had the art to involve

her.  You will not, I am sure, my dear friend, think it is wrong

that she should feel much delicacy upon this head; indeed, it

concerns us all."



"Perfetly right--quite fair," said Bucklaw, half humming, half

speaking the end of the old song--



"It is best to be off wi' the old love

Before you be on wi' the new.



But I thought," said he, pausing, "you might have had an answer

six times told from Ravenswood.  D--n me, if I have not a mind to

go fetch one myself, if Miss Ashton will honour me with the

commission."



"By no means," said Lady Ashton; "we have had the utmost

difficulty of preventing Douglas, for whom it would be more

proper, from taking so rash a step; and do you think we could

permit you, my good friend, almost equally dear to us, to go to a

desperate man upon an errand so desperate?  In fact, all the

friends of the family are of opinion, and my dear Lucy herself

ought so to think, that, as this unworthy person has returned no

answer to her letter, silence must on this, as in other cases,

be held to give consent, and a contract must be supposed to be

given up, when the party waives insisting upon it.  Sir William,

who should know best, is clear upon this subject; and therefore,

my dear Lucy----"



"Madam," said Lucy, with unwonted energy, "urge me no farther;

if this unhappy engagement be restored, I have already said you

shall dispose of me as you will; till then I should commit a

heavy sin in the sight of God and man in doing what you

require."

"But, my love, if this man remains obstinately silent----"



"He will NOT be silent," answered Lucy; "it is six weeks since

I sent him a double of my former letter by a sure hand."



"You have not--you could not--you durst not," said Lady Ashton,

with violence inconsistent with the tone she had intended to

assume; but instantly correcting herself, "My dearest Lucy,"

said she, in her sweetest tone of expostulation, "how could you

think of such a thing?"



"No matter," said Bucklaw; "I respect Miss Ashton for her

sentiments, and I only wish I had been her messenger myself."



"And pray how long, Miss Ashton," said her mother,

ironically, "are we to wait the return of your Pacolet--your

fairy messenger--since our humble couriers of flesh and blood

could not be trusted in this matter?"



"I have numbered weeks, days, hours, and minutes," said Miss

Ashton; "within another week I shall have an answer, unless he is

dead.  Till that time, sir," she said, addressing Bucklaw, "let

me be thus far beholden to you, that you will beg my mother to

forbear me upon this subject."



"I will make it my particular entreaty to Lady Ashton," said

Bucklaw.  "By my honour, madam, I respect your feelings; and,

although the prosecution of this affair be rendered dearer to me

than ever, yet, as I am a gentleman, I would renounce it, were it

so urged as to give you a moment's pain."



"Mr. Hayston, I think, cannot comprehend that," said Lady

Ashton, looking pale with anger, "when the daughter's happiness

lies in the bosom of the mother.  Let me ask you, Miss Ashton, in

what terms your last letter was couched?"



"Exactly in the same, madam," answered Lucy, "which you dictated

on a former occasion."



"When eight days have elapsed, then," said her mother, resuming

her tone of tenderness, "we shall hope, my dearest love, that you

will end this suspense."



"Miss Ashton must not be hurried, madam," said Bucklaw, whose

bluntness of feeling did not by any means arise from want of

good-nature; "messengers may be stopped or delayed.  I have

known a day's journey broke by the casting of a foreshoe.  Stay,

let me see my calendar: the twentieth day from this is St.

Jude's, and the day before I must be at Caverton Edge, to see the

match between the Laird of Kittlegirth's black mare and Johnston

the meal-monger's four-year-old-colt; but I can ride all night,

or Craigie can bring me word how the match goes; and I hope, in

the mean time, as I shall not myself dstress Miss Ashton with any

further importunity, that your ladyship yourself, and Sir

William, and Colonel Douglas will have the goodness to allow her

uninterrupted time for making up her mind."



"Sir," said Miss Ashton, "you are generous."



"As for that, madam," answered Bucklaw, "I only pretend to be a

plain, good-humoured young fellw, as I said before, who will

willingly make you happy if you will permit him, and show him how

to do so."

Having said this, he saluted her with more emotion than was

consistent with his usual train of feeling, and took his leave;

Lady Ashton, as she accompanied him out of the apartment,

assuring him thta her daughter did full justice to the sincerity

of his attachment, and requesting him to see Sir William before

his departure, "since," as she said, with a keen glance reverting

towards Lucy, "against St. Jude's day, we must all be ready to

SIGN AND SEAL."



"To sign and seal!" echoed Lucy, in a muttering tone, as the

door of the apartment closed--"to sign and seal--to do and die!"

and, clasping her extenuated hands together, she sunk back on

the easy-chair she occupied, in a state resembling stupor.



From this she was shortly after awakened by the boisterous entry

of her brother Henry, who clamorously reminded her of a promise

to give him two yards of carnation ribbon to make knots to his

new garters.  With the most patient composure Lucy arose, and

opening a little ivory cabinet, sought out the ribbon the lad

waned, measured it accurately, cut it off into proper lengths,

and knotted it into the fashion his boyish whim required.



"Dinna shut the cabinet yet," said Henry, "for I must have some

of your silver wire to fasten the bells to my hawk's

jesses,--and yet the new falcon's not worth them neither; for do

you know, after all the plague we had to get her frm an eyrie,

all the way at Posso, in Mannor Water, she's going to prove,

after all, nothing better than a rifler: she just wets her

singles in the blood of the partridge, and then breaks away, and

lets her fly; and what good can the poor bird do after that, you

know, except pine and die in the first heather-cow or whin-bush

she can crawl into?"



"Right, Henry--right--very right," said Luch, mournfully,

holding the boy fast by the hand, after she had given him the

wire he wanted; "but there are more riflers in the world than

your falcon, and more wounded birds that seek but to die in

quiet, that can find neither brake nor whin-bush to hide their

head in."



"Ah! that's some speech out of your romances," said the boy;

"and Sholto says they have turned your head.  But I hear Norman

whistling to the hawk; I must go fasten on the jesses."



And he scampered away with the thoughtless gaiety of

boyhood, leaving his sister to the bitterness of her own

reflections.



"It is decreed," she said, "that every living creature, even

those who owe me most kindness, are to shun me, and leave me to

those by whom I am beset.  It is just it should be thus.  Alone

and uncounselled, I involved myself in these perils; alone and

uncounselled, I must extricate myself or die."

