






CHAPTER III.



Over Gods forebode, then said the King,

That thou shouldst shoot at me.



William Bell, Clim 'o the Cleugh, etc.





On the morning after the funeral, the legal officer whose

authority had been found insufficient to effect an interruption

of the funeral solemnities of the late Lord Ravenswood, hastened

to state before the Keeper the resistance which he had met with

in the execution of his office.



The statesman was seated in a spacious library, once a

banqueting-room in the old Castle of Ravenswood, as was evident

from the armorial insignia still displayed on the carved roof,

which was vaulted with Spanish chestnut, and on the stained glass

of the casement, through which gleamed a dim yet rich light on

the long rows of shelves, bending under the weight of legal

commentators and monkish historians, whose ponderous volumes

formed the chief and most valued contents of a Scottish historian

[library] of the period.  On the massive oaken table and

reading-desk lay a confused mass of letters, petitions, and

parchments; to toil amongst which was the pleasure at once and

the plague of Sir William Ashton's life.  His appearance was

grave and even noble, well becoming one who held an high office

in the state; and it was not save after long and intimate

conversation with him upon topics of pressing and personal

interest, that a stranger could have discovered

something vacillating and uncertain in his resolutions; an

infirmity of purpose, arising from a cautious and timid

disposition, which, as he was conscious of its internal influence

on his mind, he was, from pride as well as policy, most anxious

to conceal from others.

He listened with great apparent composure to an exaggerated

account of the tumult which had taken place at the funeral, of

the contempt thrown on his own authority and that of the church

and state; nor did he seem moved even by the faithful report of

the insulting and threatening language which had been uttered by

young Ravenswood and others, and obviously directed against

himself.  He heard, also, what the man had been able to collect,

in a very distorted and aggravated shape, of the toasts which had

been drunk, and the menaces uttered, at the susequent

entertainment.  In fine, he made careful notes of all these

particulars, and of the names of the persons by whom, in case of

need, an accusation, founded upon these violent proceedings,

could be witnessed and made good, and dismissed his informer,

secure that he was now master of the remaining fortune, and even

of the personal liberty, of young Ravenswood.





When the door had closed upon the officer of the law, the Lord

Keeper remained for a moment in deep meditation; then, starting

from his seat, paced the apartment as one about to take a sudden

and energetic resolution.  "Young Ravenswood," he muttered, "is

now mine--he is my own; he has placed himself in my hand, and he

shall bend or break.  I have not forgot the

determined and dogged obstinacy with which his father fought

every point to the last, resisted every effort at compromise,

embroiled me in lawsuits, and attempted to assail my character

when he could not otherwise impugn my rights.  This boy he has

left behind him--this Edgar--this hot-headed, hare-brained fool,

has wrecked his vessel before she has cleared the harbor.  I must

see that he gains no advantage of some turning tide which may

again float him off.  These memoranda, properly stated to the

privy council, cannot but be construed into an aggravated riot,

in which the dignity both of the civil and ecclesiastical

authorities stands committed.  A heavy fine might be imposed; an

order for committing him to Edinburgh or Blackness Castle seems

not improper; even a charge of treason might be laid on many of

these words and expressions, though God forbid I should prosecute

the matter to that extent.  No, I will not; I will not touch his

life, even if it should be in my power; and yet, if he lives till

a change of times, what follows?  Restitution--perhaps revenge.

I know Athole promised his interest to old Ravenswood, and here

is his son already bandying and making a faction by his own

contemptible influence.  What a ready tool he would be for the

use of those who are watching the downfall of our

administration!"



While these thoughts were agitating the mind of the wily

statesman, and while he was persuading himself that his own

interest and safety, as well as those of his friends and party,

depended on using the present advantage to the uttermost against

young Ranveswood, the Lord Keeper sate down to his desk, and

proceeded to draw up, for the information of the privy council,

an account of the disorderly proceedings which, in contempt of

his warrant, had taken place at the funeral of Lord Ravenswood.

The names of most of the parties concerned, as well as the fact

itself, would, he was well aware, sound odiously in the ears of

his colleagues in administration, and most likely instigate them

to make an example of young Ravenswood, at least, in terrorem.



It was a point of delicacy, however, to select such

expressions as might infer the young man's culpability, without

seeming directly to urge it, which, on the part of Sir William

Ashton, his father's ancient antagonist, could not but appear

odious and invidious.  While he was in the act of composition,

labouring to find words which might indicate Edgar Ravenswood to

be the cause of the uproar, without specifically making such a

charge, Sir William, in a pause of his task, chanced, in looking

upward, to see the crest of the family for whose heir he was

whetting the arrows and disposing the toils of the law carved

upon one of the corbeilles from which the vaulted roof of the

apartment sprung.  It was a black bull's head, with the legend,

"I bide my time"; and the occasion upon which it was adopted

mingled itself singularly and impressively with the subject of

his present reflections.



It was said by a constant tradition that a Malisius de

Ravenswood had, in the 13th century, been deprived of his castle

and lands by a powerful usurper, who had for a while enjoyed his

spoils in quiet.  At length, on the eve of a costly banquet,

Ravenswood, who had watched his opportunity, introduced himself

into the castle with a small band of faithful retainers.  The

serving of the expected feast was impatiently looked for by the

guests, and clamorously demended by the temporary master of the

castle.  Ravenswood, who had assumed the disguise of a sewer upon

the occasion, answered, in a stern voice, "I bide my time"; and

at the same moment a bull's head, the ancient symbol of death,

was placed upon the table.  The explosion of the conspiracy took

place upon the signal, and the usurper and his followers were put

to death.  Perhaps there was something in this still known and

often repeated story which came immediately home to the breast

and conscience of the Lord Keeper; for, putting from him the

paper on which he had begun his report, and carefully locking the

memoranda which he had prepared into a cabinet which stood

beside him, he proceeded to walk abroad, as if for the purpose of

collecting his ideas, and reflecting farther on the consequences

of the step which he was about to take, ere yet they became

inevitable.



In passing through a large Gothic ante-room, Sir William Ashton

heard the sound of his daughter's lute.  Music, when the

performers are concealed, affects us with a pleasure mingled

with surprise, and reminds us of the natural concert of birds

among the leafy bowers.  The statesman, though little accustomed

to give way to emotions of this natural and simple class, was

still a man and a father.  he stopped, therefore, and listened,

while the silver tones of Lucy Ashton's voice mingled with the

accompaniment in an ancient air, to which soem one had adapted

the following words:



"Look not thou on beauty's charming,

Sit thou still when kings are arming,

Taste not when the wine-cup glistens,

Speak not when the people listens,

Stop thine ear against the singer,

From the red gold keep they finger,

Vacant heart, and hand, and eye,

Easy live and quiet die."



The sounds ceased, and the Keeper entered his daughter's

apartment.



The words she had chosen seemed particularly adapted to her

character; for Lucy Ashton's exquisitely beautiful, yet somewhat

girlish features were formed to express peace of mind, serenity,

and indifference to the tinsel of wordly pleasure.  Her locks,

which were of shadowy gold, divided on a brow of exquisite

whiteness, like a gleam of broken and pallid sunshine upon a hill

of snow.  The expression of the countenance was in the last

degree gentle, soft, timid, and feminine, and seemed rather to

shrink from the most casual look of a stranger than to court his

admiration.  Something there was of a Madonna cast, perhaps the

result of delicate health, and of residence in a family where the

dispositions of the inmates were fiercer, more active, and

energetic than her own.



Yet her passiveness of disposition was by no means owing to an

indifferent or unfeeling mind.  Left to the impulse of her own

taste and feelings, Lucy Ashton was peculiarly accessible to

those of a romantic cast.  her secret delight was in the old

legendary tales of ardent devotion and unalterable affection,

chequered as they so often are with strange adventures and

supernatural horrors.  This was her favoured fairy realm, and

here she erected her aerial palaces.  But it was only in secret

that she laboured at this delusive though delightful

architecture.  In her retired chamber, or in the woodland bower

which she had chosen for her own, and called after her name, she

was in fancy distributing the prizes at the tournament, or

raining down influence from her eyes on the valiant combatants:

or she was wandering in the wilderness with Una, under escort of

the generous lion; or she was identifying herself with the simple

yet noble-minded Miranda in the isle of wonder and enchantment.



But in her exterior relations to things of this world, Lucy

willingly received the ruling impulse from those around her.  The

alternative was, in general, too indifferent to her to render

resistance desirable, and she willingly found a motive for

decision in the opinion of her friends which perhaps she might

have sought for in vain in her own choice.  Every reader must

have observed in some family of his acquaintance some individual

of a temper soft and yielding, who, mixed with stronger and more

ardent minds, is borne along by the will of others, with as

little power of opposition as the flower which is flung into a

running stream.  It usually happens that such a compliant and

easy disposition, which resigns itself without murmur to the

guidance of others, becomes the darling of those to whose

inclinations its own seem to be offered, in ungrudging and ready

sacrifice.

This was eminently the case with Lucy Ashton.  Her politic,

wary, and wordly father felt for her an affection the strength of

which sometimes surprised him into an unusual emotion.  Her

elder brother, who trode the path of ambition with a haughtier

step than his father, had also more of human affection.  A

soldier, and in a dissolute age, he preferred his sister Lucy

even to pleasure and to military preferment and distinction.  Her

younger brother, at an age when trifles chiefly occupied his

mind, made her the confidante of all his pleasures and anxieties,

his success in field-sports, and his quarrels with his tutor and

instructors.  To these details, however trivial, Lucy lent

patient and not indifferent attention.  They moved and interested

Henry, and that was enough to secure her ear.



Her mother alone did not feel that distinguished and

predominating affection with which the rest of the family

cherished Lucy.  She regarded what she termed her daughter's want

of spirit as a decided mark that the more plebeian blood of her

father predominated in Lucy's veins, and used to call her in

derision her Lammermoor Shepherdess.  To dislike so gentle and

inoffensive a being was impossible; but Lady Ashton preferred her

eldest son, on whom had descended a large portion of her own

ambitious and undaunted disposition, to a daughter whose softness

of temper seemed allied to feebleness of mind.  Her eldest son

was the more partially beloved by his mother because, contrary to

the usual custom of Scottish families of distinction, he had been

named after the head of the house.



"My Sholto," she said, "will support the untarnished honour of

his maternal house, and elevate and support that of his father.

Poor Lucy is unfit for courts or crowded halls.  Some country

laird must be her husband, rich enough to supply her with every

comfort, without an effort on her own part, so that she may have

nothing to shed a tear for but the tender apprehension lest he

may break his neck in a foxchase.  It was not so, however, that

our house was raised, nor is it so that it can be fortified and

augmented.  The Lord Keeper's dignity is yet new; it must be

borne as if we were used to its weight, worthy of it, and prompt

to assert and maintain it.  Before ancient authorities men bend

from customary and hereditary deference; in our presence they

will stand erect, unless they are compelled to prostrate

themselves.  A daughter fit for the sheepfold or the cloister is

ill qualified to exact respect where it is yielded with

reluctance; and since Heaven refused us a third boy, Lucy should

have held a character fit to supply his place.  The hour will be

a happy one which disposes her hand in marriage to some one whose

energy is greater than her own, or whose ambition is of as low an

order."



So meditated a mother to whom the qualities of her

children's hearts, as well as the prospect of their domestic

happiness, seemed light in comparison to their rank and temporal

greatness.  But, like many a parent of hot and impatient

character, she was mistaken in estimating the feelings of her

daughter, who, under a semblance of extreme indifference,

nourished the germ of those passions which sometimes spring up in

one night, like the gourd of the pro  phet, and astonish the

observer by their unexpected ardour and intensity.  In fact,

Lucy's sentiments seemed chill because nothing had occurred to

interest or awaken them.  Her life had hitherto flowed on in a

uniform and gentle tenor, and happy for her had not its present

smoothness of current resembled that of the stream as it glides

downwards to the waterfall!



"So, Lucy," said her father, entering as her song was ended,

"does your musical philosopher teach you to contmn the world

before you know it?  That is surely something premature.  Or did

you but speak according to the fashion of fair maidens, who are

always to hold the pleasures of life in contempt till they are

pressed upon them by the address of some gentle knight?"



Lucy blushed, disclaimed any inference respecting her own choice

being drawn from her selection of a song, and readily laid aside

her instrument at her father's request that she would attend him

in his walk.



A large and well-wooded park, or rather chase, stretched along

the hill behind the castle, which, occupying, as we have

noticed, a pass ascending from the plain, seemed built in its

very gorge to defend the forest ground which arose behind it in

shaggy majesty.  Into this romantic region the father and

daughter proceeded, arm in arm, by a noble avenue overarched by

embowering elms, beneath which groups of the fallow-deer were

seen to stray in distant perspective.  As they paced slowly on,

admiring the different points of view, for which Sir William

Ashton, notwithstanding the nature of his usual avocations, had

considerable taste and feeling, they were overtaken by the

forester, or park-keeper, who, intent on silvan sport, was

proceeding with his cross-bow over his arm, and a hound led in

leash by his boy, into the interior of the wood.



"Going to shoot us a piece of venison, Norman?" said his master,

as he returned the woodsman's salutation.



"Saul, your honour, and that I am.  Will it please you to see

the sport?"



"Oh no," said his lordship, after looking at his daughter, whose

colour fled at the idea of seeing the deer shot, although, had

her father expressed his wish that they should accompany Norman,

it was probable she would not even have hinted her reluctance.



The forester shrugged his shoulders.  "It was a

disheartening thing," he said, "when none of the gentles came

down to see the sport.  He hoped Captain Sholto would be soon

hame, or he might shut up his shop entirely; for Mr. Harry was

kept sae close wi' his Latin nonsense that, though his will was

very gude to be in the wood from morning till night, there would

be a hopeful lad lost, and no making a man of him.  It was not

so, he had heard, in Lord Ravenswood's time: when a buck was to

be killed, man and mother's son ran to see; and when the deer

fell, the knife was always presented to the knight, and he never

gave less than a dollar for the compliment.  And there was Edgar

Ravenswood--Master of Ravenswood that is now--when he goes up to

the wood--there hasna been a better hunter since Tristrem's time-

-when Sir Edgar hauds out, down goes the deer, faith.  But we hae

lost a' sense of woodcraft on this side of the hill."



There was much in this harangue highly displeasing to the Lord

Keeper's feelings; he could not help observing that his menial

despised him almost avowedly for not possessing that taste for

sport which in those times was deemed the natural and

indispensable attribute of a real gentleman.  But the master of

the game is, in all country houses, a man of great importance,

and entitled to use considerable freedom of speech.  Sir William,

therefore, only smiled and replied, "He had something else to

think upon to-day than killing deer"; meantime, taking out his

purse, he gave the ranger a dollar for his encouragement.  The

fellow received it as the waiter of a fashionable hotel receives

double his proper fee from the hands of a country gentleman--that

is, with a smile, in which pleasure at the gift is mingled with

contempt for the ignorance of the donor.  "Your honour is the bad

paymaster," he said, "who pays before it is done.  What would you

do were I to miss the buck after you have paid me my wood-fee?"



"I suppose," said the Keeper, smiling, "you would hardly guess

what I mean were I to tell you of a condictio indebiti?"



"Not I, on my saul.  I guess it is some law phrase; but sue a

beggar, and--your honour knows what follows.  Well, but I will

be just with you, and if bow and brach fail not, you shall have a

piece of game two fingers fat on the brisket."



As he was about to go off, his master again called him, and

asked, as if by accident, whether the Master of Ravenswood was

actually so brave a man and so good a shooter as the world spoke

him.



"Brave!--brave enough, I warrant you," answered Norman.  "I was

in the wood at Tyninghame when there was a sort of gallants

hunting with my lord; on my saul, there was a buck turned to bay

made us all stand back--a stout old Trojan of the first head,

ten-tyned branches, and a brow as broad as e'er a bullock's.

Egad, he dashed at the old lord, and there would have been

inlake among the perrage, if the Master had not whipt roundly in,

and hamstrung him with his cutlass.  He was but sixteen then,

bless his heart!"



"And is he as ready with the gun as with the couteau?" said Sir

William.



"He'll strike this silver dollar out from between my finger and

thumb at fourscore yards, and I'll hold it out for a gold merk;

what more would ye have of eye, hand, lead, and gunpowder?"

"Oh, no more to be wished, certainly," said the Lord Keeper;

"but we keep you from your sport, Norman.  Good morrow, good

Norman."



And, humming his rustic roundelay, the yeoman went on his road,

the sound of his rough voice gradually dying away as the

distance betwixt them increased:



"The monk must arise when the matins ring,

The abbot may sleep to their chime;

But the yeoman must start when the bugles sing

'Tis time, my hearts, 'tis time.



There's bucks and raes on Bilhope braes,

There's a herd on Shortwood Shaw;

But a lily-white doe in the garden goes,

She's fairly worth them a'."



"Has this fellow," said the Lord Keeper, when the yeoman's song

had died on the wind, "ever served the Ravenswood people, that he

seems so much interested in them?  I suppose you know, Lucy, for

you make it a point of conscience to record the special history

of every boor about the castle."



"I am not quite so faithful a chronicler, my dear father; but I

believe that Norman once served here while a boy, and before he

ewnt to Ledington, whence you hired him.  But if you want to know

anything of the former family, Old Alice is the best authority."



"And what should I have to do with them, pray, Lucy," said her

father, "or with their history or accomplishments?"



"Nay, I do not know, sir; only that you were asking

questions of Norman about young Ravenswood."



"Pshaw, child!" replied her father, yet immediately added: "And

who is Old Alice?  I think you know all the old women in the

country."



"To be sure I do, or how could I help the old creatures when

they are in hard times?  And as to Old Alice, she is the very

empress of old women and queen of gossips, so far as legendary

lore is concerned.  She is blind, poor old soul, but when she

speaks to you, you would think she has some way of looking into

your very heart.  I am sure I often cover my face, or turn it

away, for it seems as if she saw one change colour, though she

has been blind these twenty years.  She is worth visiting, were

it but to say you have seen a blind and paralytic old woman have

so much acuteness of perception and dignity of manners.  I assure

you, she might be a countess from her language and behaviour.

Come, you must go to see Alice; we are not a quarter of a mile

from her cottage."



"All this, my dear," said the Lord Keeper, "is no answer to my

question, who this woman is, and what is her connexion with the

former proprietor's family?"



"Oh, it was somethign of a nouriceship, I believe; and she

remained here, because her two grandsons were engaged in your

service.  But it was against her will, I fancy; for the poor old

creature is always regretting the change of times and of

property."



"I am much obliged to her," answered the Lord Keeper.  "She and

her folk eat my bread and drink my cup, and are lamenting all

the while that they are not still under a family which never

could do good, either to themselves or any one else!"



"Indeed," replied Lucy, "I am certain you do Old Alice

injustice.  She has nothing mercenary about her, and would not

accept a penny in charity, if it were to save her from being

starved.  She is only talkative, like all old folk when you put

them upon stories of their youth; and she speaks abotu the

Ravenswood people, because she lived under them so many years.

But I am sure she is grateful to you, sir, for your protection,

adn taht she would rather speak to you than to any other person

in the whole world beside.  Do, sir, come and see Old Alice."



And with the freedom of an indulged daughter she dragged the

Lord Keeper in the direction she desired.



