





CHAPTER XX.



Lovelier in her own retired abode

....than Naiad by the side

Of Grecian brook--or Lady of the Mere

Lone sitting by the shores of old romance.



WORDSWORTH.





THE meditations of Ravenswood were of a very mixed

complexion.  He saw himself at once in the very dilemma which he

had for some time felt apprehensive he might be placed in.  The

pleasure he felt in Lucy's company had indeed approached to

fascination, yet it had never altogether surmounted his internal

reluctance to wed with the daughter of his father's foe; and even

in forgiving Sir William Ashton the injuries which his family had

received, and giving him credit for the kind intentions he

professed to entertain, he could not bring himself to contemplate

as possible an alliance betwixt their houses.  Still, he felt

that Alice poke truth, and that his honour now required he should

take an instant leave of Ravenswood Castle, or become a suitor of

Lucy Ashton.  The possibility of being rejected, too, should he

make advances to her wealthy and powerful father--to sue for the

hand of an Ashton and be refused--this were a consummation too

disgraceful.  "I wish her well," he said to himself, "and for her

sake I forgive the injuries her father has done to my house; but

I will never--no, never see her more!"



With one bitter pang he adopted this resolution, just as he came

to where two paths parted: the one to the Mermaiden's Fountain,

where he knew Lucy waited him, the other leading to the castle by

another and more circuitous road.  He paused an instant when

about to take the latter path, thinking what apology he should

make for conduct which must needs seem extraordinary, and had

just muttered to himself, "Sudden news from Edinburgh--any

pretext will serve; only let me dally no longer here," when

young Henry came flying up to him, half out of breath: "Master,

Master you must give Lucy your arm back to the castle, for I

cannot give her mine; for Norman is waiting for me, and I am to

go with him to make his ring-walk, and I would not stay away for

a gold Jacobus; and Lucy is afraid to walk home alone, though all

the wild nowt have been shot, and so you must come away

directly."



Betwixt two scales equally loaded, a feather's weight will turn

the scale.  "It is impossible for me to leave the young lady in

the wood alone," said Ravenswood; "to see her once more can be

of little consequence, after the frequent meetings we have had.

I ought, too, in courtesy, to apprise her of my intention to quit

the castle."



And having thus satisfied himself that he was taking not only a

wise, but an absolutely necessary, step, he took the path to the

fatal fountain.  Henry no sooner saw him on the way to join his

sister than he was off like lightning in another

direction, to enjoy the society of the forester in their

congenial pursuits.  Ravenswood, not allowing himself to give a

second thought to the propriety of his own conduct, walked with a

quick step towards the stream, where he found Lucy seated alone

by the ruin.



She sate upon one of the disjointed stones of the ancient

fountain, and seemed to watch the progress of its current, as it

bubbled forth to daylight, in gay and sparkling profusion, from

under the shadow of the ribbed and darksome vault, with which

veneration, or perhaps remorse, had canopied its source.  To a

superstitious eye, Lucy Ashton, folded in her plaided mantle,

with her long hair, escaping partly from the snood and falling

upon her silver neck, might have suggested the idea of the

murdered Nymph of the fountain.  But Ravenswood only saw a female

exquisitely beautiful, and rendered yet more so in his eyes--how

could it be otherwise?--by the consciousness that she had placed

her affections on him.  As he gazed on her, he felt his fixed

resolution melting like wax in the sun, and hastened, therefore,

from his concealment in the neighbouring thicket.  She saluted

him, but did not arise from the stone on which she was seated.



"My madcap brother," she said, "has left me, but I expect him

back in a few minutes; for, fortunately, as anything pleases him

for a minute, nothing has charms for him much longer."



Ravenswood did not feel the power of informing Lucy that her

brother meditated a distant excursion, and would not return in

haste.  He sate himself down on the grass, at some little

distance from Miss Ashton, and both were silent for a short

space.



"I like this spot," said Lucy at length, as if she found the

silence embarrassing; "the bubbling murmur of the clear fountain,

the waving of the trees, the profusion of grass and wild-

flowers that rise among the ruins, make it like a scene in

romance.  I think, too, I have heard it is a spot connected with

the legendary lore which I love so well."



"It has been thought," answered Ravenswood, "a fatal spot to my

family; and I have some reason to term it so, for it was here I

first saw Miss Ashton; and it is here I must take my leave of

her for ever."



The blood, which the first part of this speech called into

Lucy's cheeks, was speedily expelled by its conclusion.



"To take leave of us, Master!" she exclaimed; "what can have

happened to hurry you away?  I know Alice hates--I mean dislikes

my father; and I hardly understood her humour to-day, it was so

mysterious.  But I am certain my father is sincerely grateful for

the high service you rendered us.  Lt me hope that, having won

your friendship hardly, we shall not lose it lightly."



"Lose it, Miss Ashton!" said the Master of Ravenswood.  "No;

wherever my fortune calls me--whatever she inflicts upon me--it

is your friend--your sincere friend, who acts or suffers.  But

there is a fate on me, and I must go, or I shall add the ruin of

others to my own."



"Yet do not go from us, Master," said Lucy; and she laid her

hand, in all simplicity and kindness, upon the skirt of his

cloak, as if to detain him.  "You shall not part from us.  My

father is powerful, he has friends taht are more so than himself;

do not go till you see what his gratitude will do for you.

Believe me, he is already labouring in your behalf with the

council."



"It may be so," said the Master, proudly; "yet it is not to your

father, Miss Ashton, but to my own exertions, that I ought to owe

success in the career on which I am about to enter.  My

preparations are already made--a sword and a cloak, and a bold

heart and a determined hand."



Lucy covered her face her hands, and the tears, in spite of her,

forced their way between her fingers.



"Forgive me," said Ravenswood, taking her right hand, which,

after slight resistance, she yielded to him, still continuing to

shade her face with the left--"I am too rude--too rough--too

intractable to deal with any being so soft and gentle as you are.

Forget that so stern a vision has crossed your path of life; and

let me pursue mine, sure that I can meet with no worse misfortune

after the moment it divides me from your side."



Lucy wept on, but her tears were less bitter.  Each attempt

which the Master made to explain his purpose of departure only

proved a new evidence of his desire to stay; until, at length,

instead of bidding her farewell, he gave his faith to her for

ever, and received her troth in return.  The whole passed so

suddenly, and arose so much out of the immediate impulse of the

moment, that ere the Master of Ravenswood could reflect upon the

consequences of the step which he had taken, their lips, as well

as their hands, had pledged the sincerity of their affection.



"And now," he said, after a moment's consideration, "it is fit I

should speak to Sir William Ashton; he must know of our

engagement.  Ravenswood must not seem to dwell under his roof to

solicit clandestinely the affections of his daughter."



"You would not speak to my father on the subject?" said Lucy,

doubtingly; and then added more warmly: "Oh do not--do not!  Let

your lot in life be determined--your station and purpose

ascertained, before you address my father.  I am sure he loves

you--I think he will consent; but then my mother----!"



She paused, ashamed to express the doubt she felt how far her

father dared to form any positive resolution on this most

important subject without the consent of his lady.



"Your mother, my Lucy!" replied Ravenswood.  "She is of the

house of Douglas, a house that has intermarried with mine even

when its glory and power were at the highest; what could your

mother object to my alliance?"



"I did not say object," said Lucy; "but she is jealous of her

rights, and may claim a mother's title to be consulted in the

first instance."



"Be it so," replied Ravenswood.  "London is distant, but a

letter will reach it and receive an answer within a fortnight; I

will not press on the Lord Keeper for an instant reply to my

proposal."



"But," hesitated Lucy, "were it not better to wait--to wait a

few weeks?  Were my mother to see you--to know you, I am sure

she would approve; but you are unacquainted personally, and the

ancient feud between the families----"



Ravenswood fixed upon her his keen dark eyes, as if he was

desirous of penetrating into her very soul.



"Lucy," he said, "I have sacrificed to you projects of vengeance

long nursed, and sworn to with ceremonies little better than

heathen--I sacrificed them to your image, ere I knew the worth

which it represented.  In the evening which succeeded my poor

father's funeral, I cut a lock from my hair, and, as it consumed

in the fire, I swore that my rage and revenge should pursue his

enemies, until they shrivelled before me like that scorched-up

symbol of annihilation."



"It was a deadly sin," said Lucy, turning pale, "to make a vow

so fatal."



"I acknowledge it," said Ravenswood, "and it had been a worse

crime to keep it.  It was for your sake that I abjured these

purposes of vengeance, though I scarce knew that such was the

argument by which I was conquered, until I saw you once more,

and became ocnscious of the influence you possessed over me."



"And why do you now," said Lucy, "recall sentiments so terrible--

sentiments so inconsistent with those you profess for me--with

those your importunity has prevailed on me to acknowledge?"



"Because," said her lover, "I would impress on you the price at

which I have bought your love--the right I have to expect your

constancy.  I say not that I have bartered for it the honour of

my house, its last remaining possession; but though I say it not,

and think it not, I cannot conceal from myself that the world may

do both."



"If such are your sentiments," said Lucy, "you have played a

cruel game with me.  But it is not too late to give it over: take

back the faith and troth which you could not plight to me without

suffering abatement of honour--let what is passed be as if it had

not been--forget me; I will endeavour to forget myself."



"You do me injustice," said the Master of Ravenswood--"by all I

hold true and honourable, you do me the extremity of injustice;

if I mentioned the price at which I have bought your love, it is

only to show how much I prize it, to bind our

engagement by a still firmer tie, and to show, by what I have

done to attain this atation in your regard, how much I must

suffer should you ever break your faith."



"And why, Ravenswood," answered Lucy, "should you think that

possible?  Why should you urge me with even the mention of

infidelity?  Is it because I ask you to delay applying to my

father for a little space of time?  Bind me by what vows you

please; if vows are unnecessary to secure constancy, they may yet

prevent suspicion."

Ravenswood pleaded, apologised, and even kneeled, to appease her

displeasure; and lucy, as placable as she was single-hearted,

readily forgave the offence which his doubts had implied.  The

dispute thus agitated, however, ended by the lovers going through

an emblematic ceremony of their troth-plight, of which the vulgar

still preserve some traces.  They broke betwixt them the thin

broad-piece of gold which Alice had refused to receive from

Ravenswood.



"And never shall this leave my bosom," said Lucy, as she hung

the piece of gold round her neck, and concealed it with her

handkerchief, "until you, Edgar Ravenswood, ask me to resign it

to you; and, while I wear it, never shall that heart acknowledge

another love than yours."



With like protestations, Ravenswood placed his portion of the

coin opposite to his heart.  And now, at length, it struck them

that time had hurried fast on during this interview, and their

absence at the castle would be subject of remark, if not of

alarm.  As they arose to leave the fountain which had been

witness of their mutual engagement, an arrow whistled through the

air, and struck a raven perched on the sere branch of an old oak,

near to where they had been seated.  The bird fluttered a few

yards and dropped at the feet of Lucy, whose dress was stained

with some spots of its blood.



Miss Ashton was much alarmed, and Ravenswood, surprised and

angry, looked everywhere for the marksman, who had given them a

proof of his skill as little expected as desired.  He was not

long of discovering himself, being no other than Henry Ashton,

who came running up with a crossbow in his hand.



"I knew I should startle you," he said; "and do you know, you

looked so busy that I hoped it would have fallen souse on your

heads before you were aware of it.  What was the Master saying to

you, Lucy?"



"I was telling your sister what an idle lad you were, keeping us

waiting here for you so long," said Ravenswood, to save Lucy's

confusion.



"Waiting for me!  Why, I told you to see Lucy home, and that I

was to go to make the ring-walk with old Norman in the Hayberry

thicket, and you may be sure that would take a good hour, and we

have all the deer's marks and furnishes got, while you were

sitting here with Lucy, like a lazy loon."



"Well, well, Mr. Henry," said Ravenswood; "but let us see how

you will answer to me for killing the raven.  Do you know, the

ravens are all under the protection of the Lords of

Ravenswood, and to kill one in their presence is such bad luck

that it deserves the stab?"



"And that's what Norman said," replied the boy; "he came as far

with me as within a flight-shot of you, and he said he never saw

a raven sit still so near living folk, and he wished it might be

for good luck, for the raven is one of the wildest birds that

flies, unless it be a tame one; and so I crept on and on, till I

was within threescore yards of him, and then whiz went the bolt,

and there he lies, faith!  Was it not well shot? and, I dare say,

I have not shot in a crossbow!--not ten times, maybe."



"Admirably shot, indeed," said Ravenswood; "and you will be a

fine marksman if you practise hard."



"And that's what Norman says," answered the boy; "but I am sure

it is not my fault if I do not practise enough; for, of free

will, I would do little else, only my father and tutor are angry

sometimes, and only Miss Lucy there gives herself airs about my

being busy, for all she can sit idle by a wellside the whole day,

when she has a handsome young gentleman to prate with.  I have

known her do so twenty times, if you will believe me."



The boy looked at his sister as he spoke, and, in the midst of

his mischievous chatter, had the sense to see that he was really

inflicting pain upon her, though without being able to

comprehend the cause or the amount.



"Come now, Lucy," he said, "don't greet; and if I have said

anything beside the mark, I'll deny it again; and what does the

Master of Ravenswood care if you had a hundred sweethearts? so

ne'er put finger in your eye about it."



The Master of Ravenswood was, for the moment, scarce

satisfied with what he heard; yet his good sense naturally

regarded it as the chatter of a spoilt boy, who strove to mortify

his sister in the point which seemed most accessible for the

time.  But, although of a temper equally slow in receiving

impressions and obstinate in retaining them, the prattle of Henry

served to nourish in his mind some vague suspicion that his

present engagement might only end in his being exposed, like a

conquered enemy in a Roman triumph, a captive attendant on the

car of a victor who meditated only the satiating his pride at the

expense of the vanquished.  There was, we repeat it, no real

ground whatever for such an apprehension, nor could he be said

seriously to entertain such for a moment.  Indeed, it was

impossible to look at the clear blue eye of Lucy Ashton, and

entertain the slightest permanent doubt concerning the sincerity

of her disposition.  Still, however, conscious pride and

conscious poverty combined to render a mind suspecious which in

more fortunate circumstances would have been a stranger to that

as well as to every other meanness.



They reached the castle, where Sir William Ashton, who had been

alarmed by the length of their stay, met them in the hall.



"Had Lucy," he said, "been in any other company than that of one

who had shown he had so complete power of protecting her, he

confessed he should have been very uneasy, and would have

despatched persons in quest of them.  But, in the company of the

Master of Ravenswood, he knew his daughter had nothing to dread."

Lucy commenced some apology for their long delay, but,

conscience-struck, becames confused as she proceeded; and when

Ravenswood, coming to her assistance, endeavoured to render the

explanation complete and satisfactory, he only involved himself

in the same disorder, like one who, endeavouring to extricate his

companion from a slough, entangles himself in the same tenacious

swamp.  It cannot be supposed that the confusion of the two

youthful lovers escaped the observation of the sublte lawyer,

accustomed, by habit and profession, to trace human nature

through all her windings.  But it was not his present policy to

take any notice of what he observed.  He desired to hold the

Master of Ravenswood bound, but wished that he himself should

remain free; and it did not occur to him that his plan might be

defeated by Lucy's returning the passion which he hoped she might

inspire.  If she should adopt some romantic feelings towards

Ravenswood, in which circumstances, or the positive and absolute

opposition of Lady Ashton, might render it unadvisable to indulge

her, the Lord Keeper conceived they might be easily superseded

and annulled by a journey to Edinburgh, or even to London, a new

set of Brussels lace, and the soft whispers of half a dozen

lovers, anxious to replace him whom it was convenient she should

renounce.  This was his provision for the worst view of the case.

But, according to its more probable issue, any passing favours

she might entertain for the Master of Ravenswood might require

encouragement rather than repression.



This seemed the more likely, as he had that very morning, since

their departure from the castle, received a letter, the contents

of which he hastened to communicate to Ravenswood.  A foot-post

had arrived with a packet to the Lord Keeper from that friend

whom we have already mentioned, who was labouring hard underhand

to consolidate a band of patriots, at the head of whom stood Sir

William's greatest terror, the active and ambitious Marquis of A-

---.  The success of this convenient friend had been such, that

he had obtained from Sir William, not indeed a

directly favourable answer, but certainly a most patient hearing.

This he had reported to his principal, who had replied by the

ancient French adage, "Chateau qui parle, et femme qui ecoute,

l'un et l'autre va se rendre."  A statesman who hears you

propose a change of measures without reply was, according to the

Marquis's opinion, in the situation of the fortress which parleys

and the lady who listens, and he resolved to press the siege of

the Lord Keeper.



The packet, therefore, contained a letter from his friend and

ally, and another from himself, to the Lord Keeper, frankly

offering an unceremonious visit.  They were crossing the country

to go to the southward; the roads were indifferent; the

accommodation of the inns as execrable as possible; the Lord

Keeper had been long acquainted intimately with one of his

correspondents, and, though more slightly known to the Marquis,

had yet enough of his lordship's acquaintance to render the visit

sufficiently natural, and to shut the mouths of those who might

be disposed to impute it to a political intrigue.  He instantly

accepted the offered visit, determined, however, that he would

not pledge himself an inch farther for the furtherance of their

views than REASON (by which he meant his own self-interest)

should plainly point out to him as proper.



Two circumstances particularly delighted him--the presence of

Ravenswood, and the absence of his own lady.  By having the

former under his roof, he conceived he might be able to quash all

such hazardous and hostile proceedings as he might otherwise have

been engaged in, under the patronage of the Marquis; and Lucy, he

foresaw, would make, for his immediate purpose of delay and

procrastination, a much better mistress of his family than her

mother, who would, he was sure, in some shape or other, contrive

to disconcert his political schemes by her proud and implacable

temper.



His anxious solicitations that the Master would stay to

receive his kinsman, were, of course, readily complied with,

since the eclaircissement which had taken place at the

Mermaiden's Fountain had removed all wish for sudden departure.

Lucy and Lockhard, had, therefore, orders to provide all things

necessary in their different departments, for receiving the

expected guests with a pomp and display of luxury very uncommon

in Scotland at that remote period.

