





CHAPTER IX.



Ay, and when huntsmen wind the merry horn,

And from its covert starts the fearful prey,

Who, warm'd with youth's blood in his swelling veins,

Would, like a lifeless clod, outstretched lie,

Shut out from all the fair creation offers?



Ethwald, Act I. Scene 1.





LIGHT meals procure light slumbers; and therefore it is not

surprising that, considering the fare which Caleb's conscience,

or his necessity, assuming, as will sometimes happen, that

disguise, had assigned to the guests of Wolf's Crag, their

slumbers should have been short.



In the morning Bucklaw rushed into his host's apartment with a

loud halloo, which might have awaked the dead.



"Up! up! in the name of Heaven!  The hunters are out, the only

piece of sport I have seen this month; and you lie here, Master,

on a bed that has little to recommend it, except that it may be

something softer than the stone floor of your ancestor's vault."



"I wish," said Ravenswood, raising his head peevishly, "you had

forborne so early a jest, Mr. Hayston; it is really no pleasure

to lose the very short repose which I had just begun to enjoy,

after a night spent in thoughts upon fortune far harder than my

couch, Bucklaw."



"Pschaw, pshaw!" replied his guest; "get up--get up; the hounds

are abroad.   I have saddled the horses myself, for old Caleb was

calling for grooms and lackeys, and would never have proceeded

without two hours' apology for the absence of men that were a

hundred miles off.  Get up, Master; I say the hounds are out--get

up, I say; the hunt is up."  And off ran Bucklaw.



"And I say," said the Master, rising slowly, "that nothing can

concern me less.  Whose hounds come so near to us?"



"The Honourable Lord Brittlebrains's," answered Caleb, who had

followed the impatient Laird of Bucklaw into his master's

bedroom, "and truly I ken nae title they have to be yowling and

howling within the freedoms and immunities of your lordship's

right of free forestry."



"Nor I, Caleb," replied Ravenswood, "excepting that they have

bought both the lands and the right of forestry, and may think

themselves entitled to exercise the rights they have paid their

money for."



"It may be sae, my lord," replied Caleb; "but it's no

gentleman's deed of them to come here and exercise such-like

right, and your lordship living at your ain castle of Wolf's

Crag.  Lord Brittlebrains would weel to remember what his folk

have been."



"And what we now are," said the Master, with suppressed

bitterness of feeling.  "But reach me my cloak, Caleb, and I will

indulge Bucklaw with a sight of this chase.  It is selfish to

sacrifice my guest's pleasure to my own."



"Sacrifice!" echoed Caleb, in a tone which seemed to imply the

total absurdity of his master making the least concession in

deference to any one--"sacrifice, indeed!--but I crave your

honour's pardon, and whilk doublet is it your pleasure to wear?"



"Any one you will, Caleb; my wardrobe, I suppose, is not very

extensive."



"Not extensive!" echoed his assistant; "when there is the grey

and silver that your lordship bestowed on Hew Hildebrand, your

outrider; and the French velvet that went with my lord your

father--be gracious to him!--my lord your father's auld wardrobe

to the puir friends of the family; and the drap-de-Berry----"



"Which I gave to you, Caleb, and which, I suppose, is the only

dress we have any chance to come at, except that I wore

yesterday; pray, hand me that, and say no more about it."



"If your honour has a fancy," replied Caleb, "and doubtless it's

a sad-coloured suit, and you are in mourning; nevertheless, I

have never tried on the drap-de-Berry--ill wad it become me--

and your honour having no change of claiths at this present--and

it's weel brushed, and as there are leddies down yonder----"



"Ladies!" said Ravenswood; "and what ladies, pray?"



"What do I ken, your lordship?  Looking down at them from the

Warden's Tower, I could but see them glent by wi' their bridles

ringing and their feathers fluttering, like the court of

Elfland."



"Well, well, Caleb," replied the Master, "help me on with my

cloak, and hand me my sword-belt.  What clatter is that in the

courtyard?"



"Just Bucklaw bringing out the horses," said Caleb, after a

glance through the window, "as if there werena men eneugh in the

castle, or as if I couldna serve the turn of ony o' them that are

out o' the gate."



"Alas! Caleb, we should want little if your ability were equal

to your will," replied the Master.



"And I hope your lordship disna want that muckle," said Caleb;

"for , considering a' things, I trust we support the credit of

the family as weel as things will permit of,--only Bucklaw is aye

sae frank and sae forward.  And there he has brought out your

lordship's palfrey, without the saddle being decored wi' the

broidered sumpter-cloth! and I could have brushed it in a

minute."



"It is all very well," said his master, escaping from him and

descending the narrow and steep winding staircase which led to

the courtyard.



"It MAY be a' very weel," said Caleb, somewhat peevishly; "but

if your lordship wad tarry a bit, I will tell you what will

NOT be very weel."



"And what is that?" said Ravenswood, impatiently, but stopping

at the same time.



"Why, just that ye suld speer ony gentleman hame to dinner; for

I canna mak anither fast on a feast day, as when I cam ower

Bucklaw wi' Queen Margaret; and, to speak truth, if your

lordship wad but please to cast yoursell in the way of dining wi'

Lord Bittlebrains, I'se warrand I wad cast about brawly for the

morn; or if, stead o' that, ye wad but dine wi' them at the

change-house, ye might mak your shift for the awing: ye might say

ye had forgot your purse, or that the carline awed ye rent, and

that ye wad allow it in the settlement."



"Or any other lie that cam uppermost, I suppose?" said his

master.  "Good-bye, Caleb; I commend your care for the honour of

the family."  And, throwing himself on his horse, he followed

Bucklaw, who, at the manifest risk of his neck, had begun to

gallop down the steep path which led from the Tower as soon as he

saw Ravenswood have his foot in the stirrup.



Caleb Balderstone looked anxiously after them, and shook his

thin grey locks: "And I trust they will come to no evil; but they

have reached the plain, and folk cannot say but that the horse

are hearty and in spirits."

Animated by the natural impetuosity and fire of his temper,

young Bucklaw rushed on with the careless speed of a whirlwind.

Ravenswood was scarce more moderate in his pace, for his was a

mind unwillingly roused from contemplative inactivity, but which,

when once put into motion, acquired a spirit of forcible and

violent progression.   Neither was his eagerness proportioned in

all cases to the motive of impulse, but might be compared to the

sped of a stone, which rushes with like fury down the hill

whether it was first put in motion by the arm of a giant or the

hand of a boy.  He felt, therefore, in no ordinary degree, the

headlong impulse of the chase, a pastime so natural to youth of

all ranks, that it seems rather to be an inherent passion in our

animal nature, which levels all differences of rank and

education, than an acquired habit of rapid exercise.



The repeated bursts of the French horn, which was then always

used for the encouragement and direction of the hounds; the deep,

though distant baying of the pack; the half-heard cries of the

huntsmen; the half-seen forms which were discovered, now

emerging from glens which crossed the moor, now sweeping over its

surface, now picking their way where it was impeded by morasses;

and, above all, the feeling of his own rapid motion, animated the

Master of Ravenswood, at last for the moment, above the

recollections  of a more painful nature by which he was

surrounded.  The first thing which recalled him to those

unpleasing circumstances was feeling that his horse,

notwithstanding all the advantages which he received from his

rider's knowledge of the country, was unable to keep up with the

chase.  As he drew his bridle up with the bittle feeling that his

poverty excluded him from the favourite recreation of his

forefathers, and indeed their sole employmet when not engaged in

military pursuits, he was accosted by a well-mounted stranger,

who, unobserved, had kept near him during the earlier part of his

career.



"Your horse is blown," said the man, with a complaisance seldom

used in a hunting-field.  "Might I crave your honour to make use

of mine?"



"Sir," said Ravenswood, more surprised than pleased at such a

proposal.  "I really do not know how I have merited such a

favour at a stranger's hands."



"Never ask a question about it, Master," said Bucklaw, who, with

great unwillingness, had hitherto reined in his own gallant

steed, not to outride his host and entertainer.  "Take the goods

the gods provide you, as the great John Dryden says; or stay--

here, my friend, lend me that horse; I see you have been puzzled

to rein him up this half-hour.   I'll take the devil out of him

for you.  Now, Master, do you ride mine, which will carry you

like an eagle."



And throwing the rein of his own horse to the Master of

Ravenswood, he sprung upon that which the stranger resigned to

him, and continued his career at full speed.

"Was ever so thoughtless a being!" said the Master; "and you, my

friend, how could you trust him with your horse?"



"The horse," said the man, "belongs to a person who will make

your honour, or any of your honourable friends, most welcome to

him, flesh and fell."



"And the owner's name is----?" asked Ravenswood.



"Your honour must excuse me, you will learn that from himself.

If you please to take your friend's horse, and leave me your

galloway, I will meet you after the fall of the stag, for I hear

they are blowing him at bay."



"I believe, my friend, it will be the best way to recover your

good horse for you," answered Ravenswood; and mounting  the nag

of his friend Bucklaw, he made all the haste in his power to the

spot where the blast of the horn announced that the stag's

career was nearly terminated.



These jovial sounds were intermixed with the huntsmen's shouts

of "Hyke a Talbot!  Hyke a Teviot!  now, boys, now!" and similar

cheering halloos of the olden hunting-field, to which the

impatient yelling of the hounds, now close of the object of their

pursuit, gave a lively and unremitting chorus.  The straggling

riders began now to rally towards the scene of action,

collecting from different points as to a common centre.



Bucklaw kept the start which he had gotten, and arrived first at

the spot, where the stag, incapable of sustaining a more

prolonged flight, had turned upon the hounds, and, in the

hunter's phrase, was at bay.  With his stately head bent down,

his sides white with foam, his eyes strained betwixt rage and

terror, the hunted animal had now in his turn become an object of

intimidation to his pursuers.  The hunters came up one by one,

and watched an opportunity to assail him with some advantage,

which, in such circumstances, can only be done with caution.  The

dogs stood aloof and bayed loudly, intimating at once eagerness

and fear, and each of the sportsmen seemed to expect that his

comrade would take upon him the perilous task of assaulting and

disabling the animal.  The ground, which was a hollow in the

common or moor, afforded little advantage for approaching the

stag unobserved; and general was the shout of triumph when

Bucklaw, with the dexterity proper to an accomplished cavalier of

the day, sprang from his horse, and dashing suddenly and swiftly

at the stag, brought him to the ground by a cut on the hind leg

with his short hunting-sword.  The pack, rushing in upon their

disabled enemy, soon ended his painful struggles, and solemnised

his fall with their clamour; the hunters, with their horns and

voices, whooping and blowing a mort, or death-note, which

resounded far over the billows of the adjacent ocean.



The huntsman then withdrew the hounds from the throttled stag,

and on his knee presented his knife to a fair female form, on a

white palfrey, whose terror, or perhaps her compassion, had till

then kept her at some distance.  She wore a black silk riding-

mask, which was then a common fashion, as well for

preserving the complexion from the sun and rain, as from an idea

of decorum, which did not permit a lady to appear barefaced while

engaged in a boisterous sport, and attended by a promiscuous

company.  The richness of her dress, however, as well as the

mettle and form of her palfrey, together with the silvan

compliment paid to her by the huntsman, pointed her out to

Bucklaw as the principal person in the field.  It was not without

a feeling of pity, approaching even to contempt, that this

enthusiastic hunter observed her refuse the huntsman's knife,

presented to her for the purpose of making the first incision in

the stag's breast, and thereby discovering the venison.  He felt

more than half inclined to pay his compliments to her; but it had

been Bucklaw's misfortune, that his habits of life had not

rendered him familiarly acquainted with the higher and better

classes of female society, so that, with all his natural

audacity, he felt sheepish and bashful when it became necessary

to address a lady of distinction.



Taking unto himself heart of grace (to use his own phrase), he

did at length summon up resolution enough to give the fair

huntress good time of the day, and trust that her sport had

answered her expectation.  Her answer was very courteously and

modestly expressed, and testified some gratitude to the gallant

cavalier, whose exploit had terminated the chase so adroitly,

when the hounds and huntsmen seemed somewhat at a stand.



"Uds daggers and scabbard, madam," said Bucklaw, whom this

observation brought at once upon his own ground, "there is no

difficulty or merit in that matter at all, so that a fellow is

not too much afraid of having a pair of antlers in his guts.  I

have hunted at force five hundred times, madam; and I never yet

saw the stag at bay, by land or water, but I durst have gone

roundly in on him.  It is all use and wont, madam; and I'll tell

you, madam, for all that, it must be done with good heed and

caution; and you will do well, madam, to have your hunting-sword

right sharp and double-edged, that you may strike either fore-

handed or back-handed, as you see reason, for a hurt with a

buck's horn is a perilous ad somewhat venomous matter."



"I am afraid, sir," said the young lady, and her smile was

scarce concealed by her vizard, "I shall have little use for such

careful preparation."



"But the gentleman says very right for all that, my lady," said

an old huntsman, who had listened to Bucklaw's harangue with no

small edification; "and I have heard my father say, who was a

forester at the Cabrach, that a wild boar's gaunch is more easily

healed than a hurt from the deer's horn, for so says the old

woodman's rhyme--



If thou be hurt with horn of hart, it brings thee to they bier;



But tusk of boar shall leeches heal, thereof have lesser fear."





"An I might advise," continued Bucklaw, who was now in his

element, and desirous of assuming the whole management, "as the

hounds are surbated and weary, the head of the stag should be

cabaged in order to reward them; and if I may presume to speak,

the huntsman, who is to break up the stag, ought to drink to your

good ladyship's health a good lusty bicker of ale, or a tass of

brandy; for if he breaks him up without drinking, the venison

will not keep well."



This very agreeable prescription received, as will be readily

believed, all acceptation from the huntsman, who, in requital,

offered to bucklaw the compliment of his knife, which the young

lady had declined.



This polite proffer was seconded by his mistress.  "I believe,

sir," she said, withdrawing herself from the circle, "that my

father, for whose amusement Lord Bittlebrain's hounds have been

out to-day, will readily surrender all care of these matters to a

gentleman of your experience."



Then, bending gracefully from her horse, she wished him good

morning, and, attended by one or two domestics, who seemed

immediately attached to her service, retired from the scene of

action, to which Bucklaw, too much delighted with an opportunity

of displaying his woodcraft to care about man or woman either,

paid little attention; but was soon stript to his doublet, with

tucked-up sleeves, and naked arms up to the elbows in blood and

grease, slashing, cutting, hacking, and hewing, with the

precision of Sir Tristrem himself, and wrangling and disputing

with all around him concerning nombles, briskets, flankards, and

raven-bones, then usual terms of the art of hunting, or of

butchery, whichever the reader chooses to call it, which are now

probably antiquated.



When Ravenswood, who followed a short pace behind his friend,

saw that the stag had fallen, his temporary ardour for the chase

gave way to that feeling of reluctance which he endured at

encountering in his fallen fortunes the gaze whether of equals

or inferiors.  He reined up his horse on the top of a gentle

eminence, from which he observed the busy and gay scene beneath

him, and heard the whoops of the huntsmen, gaily mingled with the

cry of the dogs, and the neighing and trampling of the horses.

But these jovial sounds fell sadly on the ear of the ruined

nobleman.  The chase, with all its train of excitations, has ever

since feudal times been accounted the almost exclusive privilege

of the aristocracy, and was anciently their chief employment in

times of peace.  The sense that he was excluded by his situation

from emjoying the silvan sport, which his rank assigned to him as

a special prerogative, and the feeling that new men were now

exercising it over the downs which had been jealously reserved by

his ancestors for their own amusement, while he, the heir of the

domain, was fain to hold himself at a distance from their party,

awakened reflections calculated to depress deeply a mind like

Ravenswood's, which was naturally contemplative and melancholy.

His pride, however, soon shook off this feeling of dejection, and

it gave way to impatience upon finding that his volatile friend

Bucklaw seemed in no hurry to return with his borrowed steed,

which Ravenswood, before leaving the field, wished to see

restored to the obliging owner.  As he was about to move towards

the group of assembled huntsmen, he was joined by a horseman,

who, like himself, had kept aloof during the fall of the deer.



This personage seemed stricken in years.  He wore a scarlet

cloak, buttoning high upon his face, and his hat was unlooped and

slouched, probably by way of defence against the weather.  His

horse, a strong and steady palfrey, was calculated for a rider

who proposed to witness the sport of the day rather than to share

it.  An attendant waited at some distance, and the whole

equipment was that of an elderly gentleman of rank and fashion.

He accosted Ravenswood very politely, but not without some

embarrassment.



"You seem a gallant young gentleman, sir," he said, "and yet

appear as indifferent to this brave sport as if you had my load

of years on your shoulders."



"I have followed the sport with more spirit on other occasions,"

replied the Master; "at present, late events in my family must be

my apology; and besides," he added, "I was but indifferently

mounted at the beginning of the sport."



"I think," said the stranger, "one of my attendants had the

sense to accommodate your friend with a horse."



"I was much indebted to his politeness and yours," replied

Ravenswood.  "My friend is Mr. Hayston of Bucklaw, whom I dare

say you will be sure to find in the thick of the keeest

sportsmen.  He will return your servant's horse, and take my pony

in exchange; and will add," he concluded, turning his horse's

head from the stranger, "his best acknowledgments to mine for the

accommodation."



The Master of Ravenswood, having thus expressed himself, began

to move homeward, with the manner of one who has taken leave of

his company.  But the stranger was not so to be shaken off.  He

turned his horse at the same time, and rode in the same

direction, so near to the Master that, without outriding him,

which the formal civility of the time, and the respect due to the

stranger's age and recent civility, would have rendered improper,

he could not easily escape from his company.



The stranger did not long remain silent.  "This, then," he said,

"is the ancient Castle of Wolf's Crag, often mentioned in the

Scottish recods," looking to the old tower, then darkening under

the influence of a stormy cloud, that formed its

background; for at the distance of a short mile, the chase,

having been circuitous, had brought the hunters nearly back to

the point which they had attained when Ravenswood and Bucklaw had

set forward to join them.



Ravenswood answered this observation with a cold and distant

assent.

"It was, as I have heard," continued the stranger, unabashed by

his coldness, "one of the most early possessions of the

honourable family of Ravenswood."



"Their earliest possession," answered the Master, "and probably

their latest."



"I--I--I should hope not, sir," answered the stranger, clearing

his voice with more than one cough, and making an effort to

voercome a certain degree of hesitation; "Scotland knows what

she owes to this ancient family, and remembers their frequent and

honourable achievements.  I have little doubt that, were it

properly represented to her Majesty that so ancient and noble a

family were subjected to dilapidation--I mean to decay--means

might be found, ad re-aedificandum antiquam domum----"



"I will save you the trouble, sir, of discussing this point

farther," interrupted the Master, haughtily.  "I am the heir of

that unfortunate house--I am the Master of Ravenswood.  And you,

sir, who seem to be a gentleman of fashion and education, must be

sensible that the next mortification after being unhappy is the

being loaded with undesired commiseration."



"I beg your pardon, sir," said the elder horseman; "I did not

know--I am sensible I ought not to have mentioned--nothing could

be farther from my thoughts than to suppose----"



"There are no apologies necessary, sir," answered

Ravenswood, "for here, I suppose, our roads separate, and I

assure you that we part in perfect equanimity on my side."



As speaking these words, he directed his horse's head towards a

narrow causeway, the ancient approach to Wolf's Crag, of which it

might be truly said, in the words of the Bard of Hope, that



Frequented by few was the grass-cover'd road,

Where the hunter of deer and the warrior trode,

To his hills that encircle the sea.



But, ere he could disengage himself from his companion, the young

lady we have already mentioned came up to join the stranger,

followed by her servants.



"Daughter," said the stranger to the unmasked damesl, "this is

the Master of Ravenswood."



It would have been natural that the gentleman should have

replied to this introduction; but there was something in the

graceful form and retiring modesty of the female to whom he was

thus presented, which not only pevented him from inquiring to

whom, and by whom, the annunciation had been made, but which even

for the time struck him absolutely mute.  At this moment the

cloud which had long lowered above the height on which Wolf's

Crag is situated, and which now, as it advanced, spread itself in

darker and denser folds both over land and sea, hiding the

distant objects and obscuring those which were nearer, turning

the sea to a leaden complexion and the heath to a darker brown,

began now, by one or two distant peals, to announce the thunders

with which it was fraught; while two flashes of lightning,

following each other very closely, showed in the distance the

grey turrets of Wolf's Crag, and, more nearly, the rollowing

billows of the ocean, crested suddenly with red and dazzling

light.



The horse of the fair huntress showed symptoms of impatience and

restiveness, and it became impossible for Ravenswood, as a man or

a gentleman, to leave her abruptly to the case of an aged father

or her menial attendants.  He was, or believed himself, obliged

in courtesy to take hold of her bridle, and assist her in

managing the unruly animal.  While he was thus engaged, the old

gentleman observed that the storm seemed to increase; that they

were far from Lord Bittlebrains's, whose guests they were for the

present; and that he would be obliged to the Master of Ravenswood

to point him the way to the nearest place of refuge from the

storm.  At the same time he cast a wistful and embarrassed look

towards the Tower of Wolf's Crag, which seemed to render it

almost impossible for the owner to avoid offering an old man and

a lady, in such an emergency, the temporary use of his house.

Indeed, the condition of the young huntress made this courtesy

indispensable; for, in the course of the services which he

rendered, he could not but perceive that she trembled much, and

was extremely agitated, from her apprehensions, doubtless, of the

coming storm.



I know not if the Master of Ravenswood shared her terrors, but

he was not entirely free from something like a similar disorder

of nerves, as he observed, "The Tower of Wolf's Crag has nothing

to offer beyond the shelter of its roof, but if that can be

acceptable at such a moment----" he paused, as if the rest of

the invitation stuck in his throat.  But the old gentleman, his

self-constituted companion, did not allow him to recede from the

invitation, which he had rather suffered to be implied than

directly expressed.



"The storm," said the stranger, "must be an apology for waiving

ceremony; his daughter's health was weak, she had

suffered much from a recent alarm; he trusted their intrusion on

the Master of Ravenswood's hospitality would not be altogether

unpardonable in the circumstances of the case: his child's safety

must be dearer to him than ceremony."



There was no room to retreat.  The Master of Ravenswood led the

way, continuing to keep hold of the lady's bridle to prevent her

horse from starting at some unexpected explosion of thunder.  He

was not so bewildered in his own hurried reflections but that he

remarked, that the deadly paleness which had occupied her neck

and temples, and such of her features as the riding-mask left

exposed, gave place to a deep and rosy suffusion; and he felt

with embarrassment that a flush was by tacit sympathy excited in

his own cheeks.  The stranger, with watchfulness which he

disguised under apprehensions of the safety of his daughter,

continued to observe the expression of the Master's countenance

as they ascended the hill to Wolf's Crag.  When they stood in

front of that ancient fortress, Ravenswood's emotions were of a

very complicated description; and as he led the way into the rude

courtyard, and hallooed to Caleb to give attendance, there was a

tone of sternness, almost of fierceness, which seemed somewhat

alien from the courtesies of one who is receiving honoured

guests.



Caleb came; and not the paleness of the fair stranger at the

first approach of the thunder, nor the paleness of any other

person, in any other circumstances whatever, equalled that which

overcame the thin cheeks of the disconsolate seneschal when he

beheld this accession of guests to the castle, and reflected that

the dinner hour was fast approaching.  "Is he daft?" he muttered

to himself;--"is he clean daft a'thegither, to bring lords and

leddies, and a host of folk behint them, and twal o'clock

chappit?"  Then approaching the Master, he craved pardon for

having permitted the rest of his people to go out to see the

hunt, observing, that "They wad never think of his lordship

coming back till mirk night, and that he dreaded they might play

the truant."



"Silence, Balderstone!" said Ravenswood, sternly; "your folly is

unseasonable.  Sir and madam," he said, turning to his guests,

"this old man, and a yet older and more imbecile female

domestic, form my whole retinue.  Our means of refreshing you are

more scanty than even so miserable a retinue, and a dwelling so

dilapidated, might seem to promise you; but, such as they may

chance to be, you may command them."



The elder stranger, struck with the ruined and even savage

appearance of the Tower, rendered still more disconsolate by the

lowering and gloomy ksy, and perhaps not altogether unmoved by

the grave and determined voice in which their host addressed

them, looked round him anxiously, as if he half repented the

readiness with which he had accepted the offered hospitality.

But there was now no opportunity of receding from the situation

in which he had placed himself.



As for Caleb, he was so utterly stunned by his master's public

and unqualified acknowledgment of the nakedness of the land, that

for two minutes he could only mutter within his hebdomadal beard,

which had not felt the razor for six days, "He's daft--clean

daft--red wud, and awa' wit!  But deil hae Caleb Balderstone,"

said he, collecting his powers of invention and resource, "if the

family shall lose credit, if he were as mad as the seven wise

masters!"  He then boldly advanced, and in spite of his master's

frowns and impatience, gravely asked, "If he should not serve up

some slight refection for the young leddy, and a glass of tokay,

or old sack--or----"



"Truce to this ill-timed foolery," said the Master, sternly;

"put the horses into the stable, and interrupt us no more with

your absurdities."



"Your honour's pleasure is to be obeyed aboon a' things," said

Caleb; "nevertheless, as for the sack and tokay which it is not

your noble guests' pleasure to accept----"



But here the voice of Bucklaw, heard even above the

clattering of hoofs and braying of horns with which it mingled,

announced that he was scaling the pathway to the Tower at the

head of the greater part of the gallant hunting train.



"The deil be in me," said Caleb, taking heart in spite of this

new invasion of Philistines, "if they shall beat me yet!  The

hellicat ne'er-do-weel! to bring such a crew here, that will

expect to find brandy as plenty as ditch-water, and he kenning

sae absolutely the case in whilk we stand for the present!  But I

trow, could I get rid of thae gaping gowks of flunkies that hae

won into the courtyard at the back of their betters, as mony a

man gets preferment, I could make a' right yet."



The measures which he took to execute this dauntless

resolution, the reader shall learn in the next chapter.
