





CHAPTER XXXIII.



This by his tongue should be a Montague!

Fetch me my rapier, boy;

Now, by the faith and honour of my kin,

To strike him dead I hold it not a sin.



Romeo and Juliet.





HARDLY had Miss Ashton dropped the pen, when the door of the

apartment flew open, and the Master of Ravenswood entered the

apartment.



Lockhard and another domestic, who had in vain attempted to

oppose his passage through the gallery or antechamber, were seen

standing on the threshold transfixed with surprise, which was

instantly communicated to the whole party in the staterroom.

That of Colonel Douglas Ashton was mingled with resentment; that

of Bucklaw with haughty and affected indifference; the rest, even

Lady Ashton herself, showed signs of fear; and Lucy seemed

stiffened to stone by this unexpected apparition.  Apparition it

might well be termed, for Ravenswood had more the appearance of

one returned from the dead than of a living visitor.



He planted himself full in the middle of the apartment, opposite

to the table at which Lucy was seated, on whom, as if she had

been alone in the chamber, he bent his eyes with a mingled

expression of deep grief and deliberate indignation.  His dark-

coloured riding cloak, displaced from one shoulder, hung around

one side of his person in the ample folds of the Spanish mantle.

The rest of his rich dress was travel-soiled, and

deranged by hard riding.  He had a sword by his side, and pistols

in his belt.  His slouched hat, which he had not removed at

entrance, gave an additional gloom to his dark features, which,

wasted by sorrow and marked by the ghastly look communicated by

long illness, added to a countenance naturally somewhat stern and

wild a fierce and even savage expression.  The matted and

dishevelled locks of hair which escaped from under his hat,

together with his fixed and unmoved posture, made his head more

resemble that of a marble bust than that of a living man.  He

said not a single word, and there was a deep silence in the

company for more than two minutes.



It was broken by Lady Ashton, who in that space partly recovered

her natural audacity.  She demanded to know the cause of this

unauthorised intrusion.



"That is a question, madam," said her son, "which I have the

best right to ask; and I must request of the Master of Ravenswood

to follow me where he can answer it at leisure."



Bucklaw interposed, saying, "No man on earth should usurp his

previous right in demanding an explanation from the Master.

Craigengelt," he added, in an undertone, "d--n ye, why do you

stand staring as if you saw a ghost? fetch me my sword from the

gallery."



"I will relinquish to none," said Colonel Ashton, "my right of

calling to account the man who has offered this unparalleled

affront to my family."

"Be patient, gentlemen," said Ravenswood, turning sternly

towards them, and waving his hand as if to impose silence on

their altercation.  "If you are as weary of your lives as I am,

I will find time and place to pledge mine against one or both;

at present, I have no leisure for the disputes of triflers."



"Triflers!" echoed Colonel Ashton, half unsheathing his sword,

while Bucklaw laid his hand on the hilt of that which

Craigengelt had just reached him.



Sir William Ashton, alarmed for his son's safety, rushed between

the young men and Ravenswood, exclaiming: "My son, I command you-

-Bucklaw, I entreat you--keep the peace, in the name of the Queen

and of the law!"



"In the name of the law of God," said Bide-the-Bent,

advancing also with uplifted hands between Bucklaw, the Colonel,

and the object of their resentment--"in the name of Him who

brought peace on earth and good-will to mankind, I implore--I

beseech--I command you to forbear violence towards each other! 

God hateth the bloodthirsty man; he who striketh with the sword

shall perish with the sword."



"Do you take me for a dog, sir" said Colonel Ashton, turning

fiercely upon him, "or something more brutally stupid, to endure

this insult in my father's house?  Let me go, Bucklaw!  He shall

account to me, or, by Heavens, I will stab him where he stands!"



"You shall not touch him here," said Bucklaw; "he once gave me

my life, and were he the devil come to fly away with the whole

house and generation, he shall have nothing but fair play."



The passions of the two young men thus counteracting each other

gave Ravenswood leisure to exclaim, in a stern and steady voice:

"Silence!--let him who really seeks danger take the fitting time

when it is to be found; my mission here will be shortly

accomplished.  Is THAT your handwriting, madam?" he added in a

softer tone, extending towards Miss Ashton her last letter.



A faltering "Yes" seemed rather to escape from her lips than to

be uttered as a voluntary answer.



"And is THIS also your handwriting?" extending towards her the

mutual engagement.



Lucy remained silent.  Terror, and a yet stronger and more

confused feeling, so utterly disturbed her understanding that she

probably scarcely comprehended the question that was put to her.



"If you design," said Sir William Ashton, "to found any legal

claim on that paper, sir, do not expect to receive any answer to

an extrajudicial question."



"Sir William Ashton," said Ravenswood, "I pray you, and all who

hear me, that you will not mistake my purpose.  If this young

lady, of her own free will, desires the restoration of this

contract, as her letter would seem to imply, there is not a

withered leaf which this autumn wind strews on the heath that is

more valueless in my eyes.  But I must and will hear the truth

from her own mouth; without this satisfaction I will not leave

this spot.  Murder me by numbers you possibly may; but I am an

armed man--I am a desperate man, and I will nto die without ample

vengeance.  This is my resolution, take it as you may.  I WILL

hear her determination from her own mouth; from her own mouth,

alone, and without witnesses, will I hear it.  Now, choose," he

said, drawing his sword with the right hand, and, with the left,

by the same motion taking a pistol from his belt and cocking it,

but turning the point of one weapon and the muzzle of the other

to the ground--"choose if you will have this hall floated with

blood, or if you will grant me the decisive interview with my

affianced bride which the laws of God and the country alike

entitle me to demand."



All recoiled at the sound of his voice and the determined action

by which it was accompanied; for the ecstasy of real desperation

seldom fails to overpower the less energetic

passions by which it may be opposed.  The clergyman was the first

to speak.  "In the name of God," he said, "receive an overture of

peace from the meanest of His servants.  What this honourable

person demands, albeit it is urged with over violence, hath yet

in it something of reason.  Let him hear from Miss Lucy's own

lips that she hath dutifully acceded to the will of her parents,

and repenteth her of her covenant with him; and when he is

assured of this he will depart in peace unto his own dwelling,

and cumber us no more.  Alas! the workings of the ancient Adam

are strong even in the regenerate; surely we should have long-

suffering with those who, being yet in the gall of bitterness and

bond of iniquity, are swept forward by the uncontrollable current

of worldly passion.  Let, then, the Master of Ravenswood have the

interview on which he insisteth; it can but be as a passing pang

to this honourable maiden, since her faith is now irrevocably

pledged to the choice of her parents.  Let it, I say, be this: it

belongeth to my functions to entreat your honours' compliance

with this headling overture."



"Never!" answered Lady Ashton, whose rage had now overcome her

first surprise and terror--"never shall this man speak in

private with my daughter, the affianced bride of another!  pass

from this room who will, I remain here.  I fear neither his

violence nor his weapons, though some, " she said, glancing a

look towards Colonel Ashton, "who bear my name appear more moved

by them."



"For God's sake, madam," answered the worthy divine, "add not

fuel to firebrands.  The Master of Ravenswood cannot, I am sure,

object to your presence, the young lady's state of health being

considered, and your maternal duty.  I myself will also tarry;

peradventure my grey hairs may turn away wrath."



"You are welcome to do so, sir," said Ravenswood; "and Lady

Ashton is also welcome to remain, if she shall think proper; but

let all others depart."



"Ravenswood," said Colonel Ashton, crossing him as he went out,

"you shall account for this ere long."



"When you please," replied Ravenswood.



"But I," said Bucklaw, with a half smile, "have a prior demand

on your leisure, a claim of some standing."



"Arrange it as you will," said Ravenswood; "leave me but this

day in peace, and I will have no dearer employment on earth to-

morrow than to give you all the satisfaction you can desire."



The other gentlemen left the apartment; but Sir William Ashton

lingered.



"Master of Ravenswood," he said, in a conciliating tone, "I

think I have not deserved that you should make this scandal and

outrage in my family.  If you will sheathe your sword, and retire

with me into my study, I will prove to you, by the most

satisfactory arguments, the inutility of your present irregular

procedure----"



"To-morrow, sir--to-morrow--to-morrow, I will hear you at

length," reiterated Ravenswood, interrupting him; "this day hath

its own sacred and indispensable business."



He pointed to the door, and Sir William left the apartment.



Ravenswood sheathed his sword, uncocked and returned his pistol

to his belt; walked deliberately to the door of the apartment,

which he bolted; returned, raised his hat from his forehead, and

gazing upon Lucy with eyes in which an expression of sorrow

overcame their late fierceness, spread his dishevelled locks back

from his face, and said, "Do you know me, Miss

Ashton?  I am still Edgar Ravenswood."  She was silent, and he

went on with increasing vehemence: "I am still that Edgar

Ravenswood who, for your affection, renounced the dear ties by

which injured honour bound him to seek vengeance.  I am that

Ravenswood who, for your sake, forgave, nay, clasped hands in

friendship with, the oppressor and pillager of his house, the

traducer and murderer of his father."



"My daughter," answered Lady Ashton, interrupting him, "has no

occasion to dispute the identity of your person; the venom of

your present language is sufficient to remind her that she

speaks with the moral enemy of her father."



"I pray you to be patient, madam," answered Ravenswood; "my

answer must come from her own lips.  Once more, Miss Lucy Ashton,

I am that Ravenswood to whom you granted the solemn engagement

which you now desire to retract and cancel."



Lucy's bloodless lips could only falter out the words, "It was

my mother."



"She speaks truly," said Lady Ashton, "it WAS I who,

authorised alike by the laws of God and man, advised her, and

concurred with her, to set aside an unhappy and precipitate

engagement, and to annul it by the authority of Scripture

itself."



"Scripture!" said Ravenswood, scornfully.



"Let him hear the text," said Lady Ashton, appealing to the

divine, "on which you yourself, with cautious reluctance,

declared the nullity of the pretended engagement insisted upon by

this violent man."



The clergyman took his clasped Bible from his pocket, and read

the following words: "If a woman vow a vow unto the Lord, and

bind herself by a bond, being in her father's house in her

youth, and her father hear her vow, and her bond wherewith she

hath bound her soul, and her father shall hold his peace at her;

then all her vows shall stand, and every vow wherewith she hath

bound her soul shall stand."



"And was it not even so with us?" interrrupted Ravenswood.



"Control thy impatience, young man," answered the divine, "and

hear what follows in the sacred text: 'But if her father

disallow her in the day that he heareth, not any of her vows, or

of her bonds wherewith she hath bound her soul, shall stand; and

the Lord shall forgive her, because her father disallowed her."



"And was not," said Lady Ashton, fiercely and triumphantly

breaking in--"was not ours the case stated in the Holy Writ?

Will this person deny, that the instant her parents heard of the

vow, or bond, by which our daughter had bound her soul, we

disallowed the same in the most express terms, and informed him

by writing of our determination?"



"And is this all?" said Ravenswood, looking at Lucy.  "Are you

willing to barter sworn faith, the exercise of free will, and

the feelings of mutual affection to this wretched hypocritical

sophistry?"



"Hear him!" said Lady Ashton, looking to the clergyman--"hear

the blasphemer!"



"May God forgive him," said Bide-the-Bent, "and enlighten his

ignorance!"



"Hear what I have sacrificed for you," said Ravenswood, still

addressing Lucy, "ere you sanction what has been done in your

name.  The honour of an ancient family, the urgent advice of my

best friends, have been in vain used to sway my resolution;

neither the arguments of reason nor the portents of superstition

have shaken my fidelity.  The very dead have arisen to warn me,

and their warning has been despised.  Are you

prepared to pierce my heart for its fidelity with the very weapon

which my rash confidence entrusted to your grasp?"



"Master of Ravenswood," said Lady Ashton, "you have asked what

questions you thought fit.  You see the total incapacity of my

daughter to answer you.  But I will reply for her, and in a

manner which you cannot dispute.  You desire to know whether Lucy

Ashton, of her own free will, desires to annual the engagement

into which she has been trepanned.  You have her letter under her

own hand, demanding the surrender of it; and, in yet more full

evidence of her purpose, here is the contract which she has this

morning subscribed, in presence of this reverence gentleman, with

Mr. Hayston of Bucklaw."



Ravenswood gazed upon the deed as if petrified.  "And it was

without fraud or compulsion," said he, looking towards the

clergyman, "that Miss Ashton subscribed this parchment?"



"I couch it upon my sacred character."



"This is indeed, madam, an undeniable piece of evidence," said

Ravenswood, sternly; "and it will be equally unnecessary and

dishonourable to waste another word in useless remonstrance or

reproach.  There, madam," he said, laying down before Lucy the

signed paper and the broken piece of gold--"there are the

evidences of your first engagement; may you be more faithful to

that which you have just formed.  I will trouble you to return

the corresponding tokens of my ill-placed confidence; I ought

rather to say, of my egregious folly."



Lucy returned the scornful glance of her lover with a gaze from

which perception seemed to have been banisshed; yet she seemed

partly to have understood his meaning, for she raised her hands

as if to undo a blue ribbon which she wore around her neck.  She

was unable to accomplish her purpose, but Lady Ashton cut the

ribbon asunder, and detached the broken piece of gold, which Miss

Ashton had till then worn concealed in her bosom; the written

counterpart of the lovers' engagement she for some time had had

in her own possession.  With a haughty courtesy, she delivered

both to Ravenswood, who was much

softened when he took the piece of gold.



"And she could wear it thus," he said, speaking to himself--

"could wear it in her very bosom--could wear it next to her

heart--even when----  But complain avails not," he said, dashing

from his eye the tear which had gathered in it, and resuming the

stern composure of his manner.  He strode to the chimney, and

threw into the fire the paper and piece of gold, stamping upon

the coals with the heel of his boot, as if to ensure their

destruction.  "I will be no longer," he then said, "an intruder

here.  Your evil wishes, and your worse offices, Lady Ashton, I

will only return by hoping these will be your last machinations

against your daughter's honour and happiness.  And to you,

madam," he said, addressing Lucy, "I have nothing farther to say,

except to pray to God that you may not become a world's wonder

for this act of wilful and deliberate perjury."  Having uttered

these words, he turned on his heel and left the apartment.



Sir William Ashton, by entreaty and authority, had detained his

son and Bucklaw in a distant part of the castle, in order to

prevent their again meeting with Ravenswood; but as the Master

descended the great staircase, Lockhard delivered him a billet,

signed "Sholto Douglas Ashton," requesting to know where the

Master of Ravenswood would be heard of four or five days from

hence, as the writer had business of weight to settle with him,

so soon as an important family event had taken place.



"Tell Colonel Ashton," said Ravenswood, composedly, "I shall be

found at Wolf's Crag when his leisure serves him."



As he descended the outward stair which led from the

terrace, he was a second time interrupted by Craigengelt, who, on

the part of his principal, the Laird of Bucklaw, expressed a

hope that Ravenswood would not leave Scotland within ten days at

least, as he had both former and recent civilities for which to

express his gratitude.



"Tell your master," said Ravenswood, fiercely, "to choose his own

time.  He will find me at Wolf's Crag, if his purpose is not

forestalled."



"MY master!" replied Craigengelt, encouraged by seeing Colonel

Ashton and Bucklaw at the bottom of the terrace.  "Give me leave

to say I know of no such person upon earth, nor will I permit

such language to be used to me!"



"Seek your master, then, in hell!" exclaimed Ravenswood, giving

way to the passion he had hitherto restrained, and

throwing Craigengelt from him with such violence that he rolled

down the steps and lay senseless at the foot of them.   "I am a

fool," he instantly added, "to vent my passion upon a caitiff so

worthless."



He then mounted his horse, which at his arrival he had secured

to a balustrade in front of the castle, rode very slowly past

Bucklaw and Colonel Ashton, raising his hat as he passed each,

and looking in their faces steadily while he offered this mute

salutation, which was returned by both with the same stern

gravity.  Ravenswood walked on with equal deliberation until he

reached the head of the avenue, as if to show that he rather

courted than avoided interruption.  When he had passed the upper

gate, he turned his horse, and looked at the castle with a fixed

eye; then set spurs to his good steed, and departed with the

speed of a demon dismissed by the exorcist.

