





CHAPTER XIII.



Should I take aught of you?  'Tis true I begged now;

And what is worse than that, I stole a kindness;

And, what is worst of all, I lost my way in't.



Wit Without Money.





THE face of the little boy, sole witness of Caleb's

infringement upon the laws at once of property and hospitality,

would have made a good picture.  He sat motionless, as if he had

witnessed some of the spectral appearances which he had heard

told of in a winter's evening; and as he forgot his own duty, and

allowed his spit to stand still, he added to the misfortunes of

the evening by suffering the mutton to burn as black as a coal.

He was first recalled from his trance of astonishment by a hearty

cuff administered by Dame Lightbody, who, in whatever other

respects she might conform to her name, was a woman strong of

person, and expert in the use of her hands, as some say her

deceased husband had known to his cost.



"What garr'd ye let the roast burn, ye ill-clerkit gude-for-

nought?"



"I dinna ken," said the boy.



"And where's that ill-deedy gett, Giles?"



"I dinna ken," blubbered the astonished declarant.



"And where's Mr. Balderstone?--and abune a', and in the name of

council and kirk-session, that I suld say sae, where's the

broche wi' the wild-fowl?"

As Mrs. Girder here entered, and joined her mother's

exclamations, screaming into one ear while the old lady deafened

the other, they succeeded in so utterly confounding the unhappy

urchin, that he could not for some time tell his story at all,

and it was only when the elder boy returned that the truth began

to dawn on their minds.



"Weel, sirs!" said Mrs. Lightbody, "wha wad hae thought o' Caleb

Balderstone playing an auld acquaintance sic a pliskie!"



"Oh, weary on him!" said the spouse of Mr. Girder; "and what am

I to say to the gudeman?  He'll brain me, if there wasna anither

woman in a' Wolf''s Hope."



"Hout tout, silly quean," said the mother; "na, na, it's come to

muckle, but it's no come to that neither; for an he brain you he

maun brain me, and I have garr'd his betters stand back.  Hands

aff is fair play; we maunna heed a bit flyting."



The tramp of horses now announced the arrival of the cooper,

with the minister.  They had no sooner dismounted than they made

for the kitchen fire, for the evening was cool after the

thunderstorm, and the woods wet and dirty.  The young gudewife,

strong in the charms of her Sunday gown and biggonets, threw

herself in the way of receiving the first attack, while her

mother, like the veteran division of the Roman legion, remained

in the rear, ready to support her in case of necessity.  Both

hoped to protract the discovery of what had happened--the mother,

by interposing her bustling person betwixt Mr. Girder and the

fire, and the daughter, by the extreme cordiality with which she

received the minister and her husband, and the anxious fears

which she expressed lest they should have "gotten cauld."

"Cauld!" quoted the husband, surlily, for he was not of that

class of lords and amsters whose wives are viceroys over them,

"we'll be cauld eneugh, I think, if ye dinna let us in to the

fire."



And so saying, he burst his way through both lines of defence;

and, as he had a careful eye over his property of every kind, he

perceived at one glance the absence of the spit with its savoury

burden.  "What the deil, woman----"



"Fie for shame!" exclaimed both the women; "and before Mr. Bide-

the-Bent!"



"I stand reproved," said the cooper; "but----"



"The taking in our mouths the name of the great enemy of our

souls," said Mr. Bide-the-Bent----



"I stand reproved," said the cooper.



"--Is an exposing ourselves to his temptations," continued the

reverend monitor, "and in inviting, or, in some sort, a

compelling, of him to lay aside his other trafficking with

unhappy persons, and wait upon those in whose speech his name is

frequent."



"Weel, weel, Mr. Bide-the-Bent, can a man do mair than stand

reproved?" said the cooper; "but jest let me ask the women what

for they hae dished the wild-fowl before we came."



"They arena dished, Gilbert," said his wife; "but--but an

accident----"



"What accident?" said Girder, with flashing eyes.  "Nae ill come

ower them, I trust?  Uh?"



His wife, who stood much in awe of him, durst not reply, but her

mother bustled up to her support, with arms disposed as if they

were about to be a-kimbo at the next reply.--"I gied them to an

acquaintance of mine, Gibbie Girder; and what about it now?"



Her excess of assurance struck Girder mute for an instant.  "And

YE gied the wild-fowl, the best end of our christening dinner,

to a friend of yours, ye auld rudas!  And what might HIS name

be, I pray ye?"



"Just worthy Mr. Caleb Balderstone--frae Wolf's Crag," answered

Marion, prompt and prepared for battle.



Girder's wrath foamed over all restraint.  If there was a

circumstance which could have added to the resentment he felt, it

was that this extravagant donation had been made in favour of

our friend Caleb, towards whom, for reasons to which the reader

is no stranger, he nourished a decided resentment.  He raised his

riding-wand against the elder matron, but she stood firm,

collected in herself, and undauntedly brandished the iron ladle

with which she had just been "flambing" (Anglice, basting) the

roast of mutton.  Her weapon was certainly the better, and her

arm not the weakest of the two; so that Gilbert thought it safest

to turn short off upon his wife, who had by this time hatched a

sort of hysterical whine, which greatly moved the minister, who

was in fact as simple and kind-hearted a creature as ever

breathed.  "And you, ye thowless jade, to sit still and see my

substance disponed upon to an idle, drunken, reprobate, worm-

eaten serving-man, just because he kittles the lugs o' a silly

auld wife wi' useless clavers, and every twa words a lee?  I'll

gar you as gude----"



Here the minister interposed, both by voice and action, while

Dame Lightbody threw herself in front of her daughter, and

flourished her ladle.



"Am I no to chastise my ain wife?" exclaimed the cooper very

indignantly.



"Ye may chastise your ain wife if ye like," answered Dame

Lightbody; "but ye shall never lay finger on my daughter, and

that ye may found upon."

"For shame, Mr. Girder!" said the clergyman; "this is what I

little expected to have seen of you, that you suld give rein to

your sinful passions against your nearestt and your dearest, and

this night too, when ye are called to the most solemn duty of a

Christian parent; and a' for what?  For a redundancy of creature-

comforts, as worthless as they are unneedful."



"Worthless!" exclaimed the cooper.  "A better guse never walkit

on stubble; two finer, dentier wild ducks never wat a feather."



"Be it sae, neighbour," rejoined the minister; "but see what

superfluities are yet revolving before your fire.  I have seen

the day when ten of the bannocks which stand upon that board

would have been an acceptable dainty to as many men, that were

starving on hills and bogs, and in caves of the earth, for the

Gospel's sake."



"And that's what vexes me maist of a'," said the cooper, anxious

to get some one to sympathise with his not altogether causeless

anger; "an the quean had gien it to ony suffering sant, or to ony

body ava but that reaving, lying, oppressing Tory villain, that

rade in the wicked troop of militia when it was commanded out

against the sants at Bothwell Brig by the auld tyrant Allan

Ravenswood, that is gane to his place, I wad the less hae minded

it.  But to gie the principal parts o' the feast to the like o'

him----!"



"Aweel, Gilbert," said the minister, "and dinna ye see a high

judgment in this?  The seed of the righteous are not seen

begging their bread: think of the son of a powerful oppressor

being brought to the pass of supporting his household from your

fulness."



"And, besides," said the wife, "it wasna for Lord Ravenswood

neither, an he wad hear but a body speak: it was to help to

entertain the Lord Keeper, as they ca' him, that's up yonder at

Wolf's Crag."



"Sir William Ashton at Wolf's Crag!" ejaculated the

astonished man of hoops and staves.



"And hand and glove wi' Lord Ravenswood," added Dame

Lightbody.



"Doited idiot! that auld, clavering sneckdrawer wad gar ye trow

the moon is made of green cheese.  The Lord Keeper and

Ravenswood! they are cat and dog, hare and hound."



"I tell ye they are man and wife, and gree better than some

others that are sae," retorted the mother-in-law; "forbye, Peter

Puncheon, that's cooper the Queen's stores, is dead, and the

place is to fill, and----"



"Od guide us, wull ye haud your skirling tongues!" said Girder,--

for we are to remark, that this explanation was given like a

catch for two voices, the younger dame, much encouraged by the

turn of the debate, taking up and repeating in a higher tone the

words as fast as they were uttered by her mother.



"The gudewife says naething but what's true, maister," said

Girder's foreman, who had come in during the fray.  "I saw the

Lord Keeper's servants drinking and driving ower at Luckie

Sma'trash's, ower-bye yonder."



"And is their maister up at Wolf's Crag?" said Girder.



"Ay, troth is he," replied his man of confidence.



"And friends wi' Ravenswood?"



"It's like sae," answered the foreman, "since he is putting up

wi' him."



"And Peter Puncheon's dead?"



"Ay, ay, Puncheon has leaked out at last, the auld carle," said

the foreman; "mony a dribble o' brandy has gaen through him in

his day.  But as for the broche and the wild-fowl, the

saddle's no aff your mare yet, maister, and I could follow and

bring it back, for Mr. Balderstone's no far aff the town yet."



"Do sae, Will; and come here, I'll tell ye what to do when ye

owertake him."



He relieved the females of his presence, and gave Will his

private instructions.



"A bonny-like thing," said the mother-in-law, as the cooper re-

entered the apartment, "to send the innocent lad after an armed

man, when ye ken Mr. Balderstone aye wears a rapier, and whiles a

dirk into the bargain."



"I trust," said the minister, "ye have reflected weel on what ye

have done, lest you should minister cause of strife, of which it

is my duty to say, he who affordeth matter, albeit he himself

striketh not, is in no manner guiltless."



"Never fash your beard, Mr. Bide-the-Bent," replied Girder; "ane

canna get their breath out here between wives and ministers.  I

ken best how to turn my ain cake.  Jean, serve up the dinner,

and nae mair about it."



Nor did he again allude to the deficiency in the course of the

evening.



Meantime, the foreman, mounted on his master's steed, and

charged with his special orders, pricked swiftly forth in pursuit

of the marauder Caleb.  That personage, it may be imagined, did

not linger by the way.  He intermitted even his dearly-beloved

chatter, for the purpose of making more haste, only assuring Mr.

Lockhard that he had made the purveyor's wife give the wild-fowl

a few turns before the fire, in case that Mysie, who had been so

much alarmed by the thunder, should not have her kitchen-grate in

full splendour.  Meanwhile, alleging the necessity of being at

Wolf's Crag as soon as possible, he pushed on so fast that his

companions could scarce keep up with him.  He began already to

think he was safe from pursuit, having gained the summit of the

swelling eminence which divides Wolf's Crag from the village,

when he heard the distant tread of a horse, and a voice which

shouted at intervals, "Mr. Caleb--Mr. Balderstone--Mr. Caleb

Balderstone--hollo--bide a wee!"



Caleb, it may be well believed, was in no hurry to

acknowledge the summons.  First, he would not heart it, and faced

his companions down, that it was the echo of the wind; then he

said it was not worth stopping for; and, at length, halting

reluctantly, as the figure of the horseman appeared through the

shades of the evening, he bent up his whole soul to the task of

defending his prey, threw himself into an attitude of dignity,

advanced the spit, which is his grasp might with its burden seem

both spear and shield, and firmly resolved to die rather than

surrender it.



What was his astonishment, when the cooper's foreman, riding up

and addressing him with respect, told him:  "His master was very

sorry he was absent when he came to his dwelling, and grieved

that he could not tarry the christening dinner; and that he had

taen the freedom to send a sma' runlet of sack, and ane anker of

brandy, as he understood there were guests at the castle, and

that they were short of preparation."



I have heard somewhere a story of an elderly gentleman who was

pursued by a bear that had gotten loose from its muzzle, until

completely exhausted.  In a fit of desperation, he faced round

upon Bruin and lifted his cane; at the sight of which the

instinct of discipline prevailed, and the animal, instead of

tearing him to pieces, rose up upon his hind-legs and instantly

began to shuffle a saraband.  Not less than the joyful surprise

of the senior, who had supposed himself in the extremity of peril

from which he was thus unexpectedly relieved, was that of our

excellent friend Caleb, when he found the pursuer intended to add

to his prize, instead of bereaving him of it.  He recovered his

latitude, however, instantly, so soon as the foreman, stooping

from his nag, where he sate perched betwixt the two barrels,

whispered in his ear:  "If ony thing about Peter Puncheon's place

could be airted their way, John [Gibbie] Girder wad mak it better

to the Master of Ravenswood than a pair of new gloves; and that

he wad be blythe to speak wi' Maister Balderstone on that head,

and he wad find him as pliant as a hoop-willow in a' that he

could wish of him."



Caleb heard all this without rendering any answer, except that

of all great men from Louis XIV. downwards, namely, "We will see

about it"; and then added aloud, for the edification of Mr.

Lockhard:  "Your master has acted with becoming civility and

attention in forwarding the liquors, and I will not fail to

represent it properly to my Lord Ravenswood.  And, my lad," he

said, "you may ride on to the castle, and if none of the servants

are returned, whilk is to be dreaded, as they make day and night

of it when they are out of sight, ye may put them into the

porter's lodge, whilk is on the right hand of the great entry;

the porter has got leave to go to see his friends, sae ye will

met no ane to steer ye."



The foreman, having received his orders, rode on; and having

deposited the casks in the deserted and ruinous porter's lodge,

he returned unquestioned by any one.  Having thus executed his

master's commission, and doffed his bonnet to Caleb and his

company as he repassed them in his way to the village, he

returned to have his share of the christening festivity.

