






CHAPTER XXII.



And soon they spied the merry-men green,

And eke the coach and four.



Duke upon Duke.





CRAIGENGELT set forth on his mission so soon as his equipage was

complete, prosecuted his journey with all diligence, and

accomplished his commission with all the dexterity for which

bucklaw had given him credit.  As he arrived with credentials

from Mr. Hayston of Bucklaw, he was extremely welcome to both

ladies; and those who are prejudiced in favour of a new

acquaintance can, for a time at least, discover

excellencies in his very faults and perfections in his

deficiencies.  Although both ladies were accustomed to good

society, yet, being pre-determined to find out an agreeable and

well-behaved gentleman in Mr. Hayston's friend, they succeeded

wonderfully in imposing on themselves.  It is true that

Craigengelt was now handsomely dressed, and that was a point of

no small consequence.  But, independent of outward show, his

blackguard impudence of address was construed into honourable

bluntness. becoming his supposed military profession; his

hectoring passed for courage, and his sauciness for wit.  Lest,

however, any one should think this a violation of probability, we

must add, in fairness to the two ladies, that their discernment

was greatly blinded, and their favour propitiated, by the

opportune arrival of Captain Craigengelt in the moment when they

were longing for a third hand to make a party at tredrille, in

which, as in all games, whether of chance or skill, that worthy

person was a great proficient.



When he found himself established in favour, his next point was

how best to use it for the furtherance of his patron's views.

He found Lady Ashton prepossessed strongly in favour of the

motion which Lady Blenkensop, partly from regard to her

kinswoman, partly from the spirit of match-making, had not

hesitated to propose to her; so that his task was an easy one.

Bucklaw, reformed from his prodigality, was just the sort of

husband which she desired to have for her Shepherdess of

Lammermoor; and while the marriage gave her an easy fortune, and

a respectable country gentleman for her husband, Lady Ashton was

of opinion that her destinies would be fully and most favourably

accomplished.  It so chanced, also, that Bucklaw, among his new

acquisitions, had gained the management of a little political

interest in a neighbouring county where the Douglas family

originally held large possessions.  It was one of the bosom-hopes

of Lady Ashton that her eldest son, Sholto, should represent this

county in the British Parliament, and she saw this alliance with

Bucklaw as a circumstance which might be highly favourable to

her wishes.



Craigengelt, who, in his way, by no means wanted sagacity, no

sooner discovered in what quarter the wind of Lady Ashton's

wishes sate, than he trimmed his course accordinly.  "There was

little to prevent Bucklaw himself from sitting for the county; he

must carry the heat--must walk the course.  Two cousins-german,

six more distant kinsmen,  his factor and his chamberlain, were

all hollow votes; and the Girnington interest had always carried,

betwixt love and fear, about as many more.  But Bucklaw cared no

more about riding the first horse, and that sort of thing, than

he, Craigengelt, did about a game at birkie: it was a pity his

interest was not in good guidance."



All this Lady Ashton drank in with willing and attentive ears,

resolving internally to be herself the person who should take the

management of the political influence of her destined son-in-law,

for the benefit of her eldest-born, Sholto, and all other parties

concerned.



When he found her ladyship thus favourably disposed, the Captain

proceeded, to use his employer's phrase, to set spurs to her

resolution, by hinting at the situation of matters at

Ravenswood Castle, the long residence which the heir of that

family had made with the Lord Keeper, and the reports which--

though he would be d--d ere he gave credit to any of them--had

been idly circulated in the neighbourhood.  It was not the

Captain's cue to appear himself to be uneasy on the subject of

these rumours; but he easily saw from Lady Ashton's flushed

cheek, hesitating voice, and flashing eye, that she had caught

the alarm which he intended to communicate.  She had not heard

from her husband so often or so regularly as she though him

bound in duty to have written, and of this very interesting

intelligence concerning his visit to the Tower of Wolf's Crag,

and the guest whom, with such cordiality, he had received at

Ravenswsood Castle, he had suffered his lady to remain altogether

ignorant, until she now learned it by the chance information of a

stranger.  Such concealment approached, in her apprehension, to a

misprision, at last, of treason, if not to actual rebellion

against her matrimonial authority; and in her inward sould she

did vow to take vengeance on the Lord Keeper, as on a subject

detected in meditating revolt.  Her indignation burned the more

fiercely as she found herself obliged to suppress it in presence

of Lady Blenkensop, the kinswoman, and of Craigengelt, the

confidential friend, of Bucklaw, of whose alliance she now became

trebly desirous, since it occurred to her alarmed imagination

that her husband might, in his policy or timidity, prefer that of

Ravenswood.



The Captain was engineer enough to discover that the train was

fired; and therefore heard, in the course of the same day,

without the least surprise, that Lady Ashton had resolved to

abridge her visit to Lady Blenkensop, and set forth with the peep

of morning on her return to Scotland, using all the despatch

which the state of the roads and the mode of travelling would

possibly permit.



Unhappy Lord Keeper!  little was he aware what a storm was

travelling towards him in all the speed with which an old-

fashioned coach and six could possibly achieve its journey.  He,

like Don Gayferos, "forgot his lady fair and true," and was only

anxious about the expected visit of the Marquis of A----.

Soothfast tidings had assured him that this nobleman was at

length, and without fail, to honour his castle at one in the

afternoon, being a late dinner-hour; and much was the bustle in

consequence of the annunciation.  The Lord Keeper traversed the

chambers, held consultation with the butler in the cellars, and

even ventured, at the risk of a demele with a cook of a spirit

lofty enough to scorn the admonitions of Lady Ashton herself, to

peep into the kitchen.  Satisfied, at length, that everything was

in as active a train of preparation as was possible, he summoned

Ravenswood and his daughter to walk upon the terrace, for the

purpose of watching, from that commanding position, the earliest

symptoms of his lordship's approach.   For this purpose, with

slow and idle step, he paraded the terrace, which, flanked with a

heavy stone battlement, stretched in front of the castle upon a

level with the first story; while visitors found access to the

court by a projecting gateway, the bartizan or flat-leaded roof

of which was accessible from the terrace by an easy flight of low

and broad steps.  The whole bore a resemblance partly to a

castle, partly to a nobleman's seat; and though calculated, in

some respects, for defence, evinced that it had been constructed

under a sense of the power and security of the ancient Lords of

Ravenswood.



This pleasant walk commanded a beautiful and extensive view.

But what was most to our present purpose, there were seen from

the terrace two roads, one leading from the east, and one from

the westward, which, crossing a ridge opposed to the eminence on

which the castle stood, at different angles, gradually approached

each other, until they joined not far from the gate of the

avenue.  It was to the westward approach that the Lord Keeper,

from a sort of fidgeting anxiety, his daughter, from complaisance

to him, and Ravenswood, though feeling some symptoms of internal

impatience, out of complaisance to his daughter, directed their

eyes to see the precursors of the Marquis's approach.



These were not long of presenting themselves.  Two running

footmen, dressed in white, with black jockey-caps, and long

staffs in their hands, headed the train; and such was their

agility, that they found no difficulty in keeping the necessary

advance, which the etiquette of their station required, before

the carriage and horsemen.  Onward they came at a long swinging

trot, arguing unwearied speed in their long-breathed calling.

Such running footmen are often alluded to in old plays (I would

particularly instance Middleton's Mad World, my Masters), and

perhaps may be still remembered by some old persons in Scotland,

as part of the retinue of the ancient nobility when travelling in

full ceremony.  Behind these glancing meteors, who footed it as

if the Avenger of Blood had been behind them, came a cloud of

dust, raised by riders who preceded, attended, or followed the

state-carriage of the Marquis.



The privilege of nobility, in those days, had something in it

impressive on the imagination.  The dresses and liveries and

number of their attendants, their style of travelling, the

imposing, and almost warlike, air of the armed men who surrounded

them, place them far above the laird, who travelled with his

brace of footmen; and as to rivalry from the mercantile part of

the community, these would as soon have thought of imitating the

state equipage of the Sovereign.  At present it is different; and

I myself, Peter Pattieson, in a late journey to Edinburgh, had

the honour, in the mail-coach phrasem to "change a leg" with a

peer of the realm.  It was not so in the days of which I write;

and the Marquis's approach, so long expected in vain, now took

place in the full pomp of ancient aristocracy.  Sir William

Ashton was so much interested in what he beheld, and in

considering the ceremonial of reception, in case any

circumstance had been omitted, that he scarce heard his son Henry

exclaim: "There is another coach and six coming down the east

road, papa; can they both belong to the Marquis of A----?"



At length, when the youngster had fairly compelled his attention

by pulling his sleeve,



He turned his eyes, and, as he turned, survey'd

An awful vision.



Sure enough, another coach and six, with four servants or

outriders in attendance, was descending the hill from the

eastward, at such a pace as made it doubtful which of the

carriages thus approaching from different quarters would first

reach the gate at the extremity of the avenue.  The one coach was

green, the other blue; and not the green and blue chariots in the

circus of Rome or Constantinople excited more turmoil among the

citizens than the double apparition occasioned in the mind of the

Lord Keeper.



We all remember the terrible exclamation of the dying

profligate, when a friend, to destroy what he supposed the

hypochondriac idea of a spectre appearing in a certain shape at a

given hour, placed before him a person dressed up in the manner

he described.  "Mon Dieu!" said the expiring sinner, who, it

seems, saw both the real and polygraphic apparition, "il y en a

deux!"  The surprise of the Lord Keeper was scarcely less

unpleasing at the duplication of the expected arrival; his mind

misgave him strangely.  There was no neighbour who would have

approached so unceremoniously, at a time when ceremony was held

in such respect.  It must be Lady Ashton, said his conscience,

and followed up the hint with an anxious anticipation of the

purpose of her sudden and unannounced return.  He felt that he

was caught "in the manner."  That the company in which she had so

unluckily surprised him was likely to be highly distasteful to

her, there was no question; and the only hope which remained for

him was her high sense of dignified propriety, which, he trusted,

might prevent a public explosion.  But so active were his doubts

and fears as altogether to derange his purposed ceremonial for

the reception of the Marquis.



These feelings of apprehension were not confined to Sir William

Ashton.  "It is my mother--it is my mother!" said Lucy, turning

as pale as ashes, and clasping her hands together as she looked

at Ravenswood.



"And if it be Lady Ashton," said her lover to her in a low tone,

"what can be the occasion of such alarm?  Surely the return of a

lady to the family from which she has been so long absent should

excite other sensations than those of fear and dismay."



"You do not know my mother," said Miss Ashton, in a tone almost

breathless with terror; "what will she say when she sees you in

this place!"



"My stay has been too long," said Ravenswood, somewhat

haughtily, "if her displeasure at my presence is likely to be so

formidable.  My dear Lucy," he resumed, in a tone of soothing

encouragement, "you are too childishly afraid of Lady Ashton; she

is a woman of family--a lady of fashion--a person who must know

the world, and what is due to her husband and her husband's

guests."

Lucy shook her head; and, as if her mother, still at the

distance of half a mile, could have seen and scrutinised her

deportment, she withdrew herself from besdie Ravenswood, and,

taking her brother Henry's arm, led him to a different part of

the terrace.  The Keeper also shuffled down towards the portal of

the great gate, without inviting Ravenswood to accompany him; and

thus he remained standing alone on the terrace, deserted and

shunned, as it were, by the inhabitants of the mansion.

This suited not the mood of one who was proud in proportion to

his poverty, and who thought that, in sacrificing his deep-

rooted resentments so far as to become Sir William Ashton's

guest, he conferred a favour, and received none.  "I can forgive

Lucy," he said to himself; "she is young, timid, and conscious of

an important engagement assumed without her mother's sanction;

yet she should remember with whom it has been assumed, and leave

me no reason to suspect that she is ashamed of her choice.  For

the Keeper, sense, spirit, and expression seem to have left his

face and manner since he had the first glimpse of Lady Ashton's

carriage.  I must watch how this is to end; and, if they give me

reason to think myself an unwelcome guest, my visit is soon

abridged."



With these suspicions floating on his mind, he left the terrace,

and walking towards the stables of the castle, gave directions

that his horse should be kept in readiness, in case he should

have occasion to ride abroad.



In the mean while, the drivers of the two carriages, the

approach of which had occasioned so much dismay at the castle,

had become aware of each other's presence, as they approached

upon different lines to the head of the avenue, as a ocmmon

centre.  Lady Ashton's driver and postilions instantly received

orders to get foremost, if possible, her ladyship being desirous

of despatching her first interview with her husband before the

arrival of these guests, whoever they might happen to be.  On the

other hand, the coachman of the Marquis, conscious of his own

dignity and that of his master, and observing the rival

charioteer was mending his pace, resolved, like a true brother of

the whip, whether ancient or modern, to vindicate his right of

precedence.  So that, to increase the confusion of the Lord

Keeper's understanding, he saw the short time which remained for

consideration abridged by the haste of the contending coachmen,

who, fixing their eyes sternly on each other, and applying the

lash smartly to their horses, began to thunder down the descent

with emulous rapidity, while the horsemen who attended them were

forced to put on to a hand-gallop.



Sir William's only chance now remaining was the possibility of

an overturn, and that his lady or visitor might break their

necks.  I am not aware that he formed any distinct wish on the

subject, but I have no reason to think that his grief in either

case would have been altogether inconsolable.  This chance,

however, also disappeared; for Lady Ashton, though insensible to

fear, began to see the ridicule of running a race with a visitor

of distinction, the goal being the portal of her own castle, and

commanded her coachman, as they approached the avenue, to slacken

his pace, and allow precedence to the stranger's equipage; a

command which he gladly obeyed, as coming in time to save his

honour, the horses of the Marquis's carriage being better, or, at

least, fresher than his own.  He restrained his pace, therefore,

and suffered the green coach to enter the avenue, with all its

retinue, which pass it occupied with the speed of a whirlwind.

The Marquis's laced charioteer no sooner found the pas d'avance

was granted to him than he resumed a more deliberate pace, at

which he advanced under the embowering shade of the lofty elms,

surrounded by all the attendants; while the carriage of Lady

Ashton followed, still more slowly, at some distance.



In the front of the castle, and beneath the portal which

admitted guests into the inner court, stood Sir William Ashton,

much perplexed in mind, his younger son and daughter beside him,

and in their rear a train of attendants of various ranks, in and

out of livery.  The nobility and gentry of Scotland, at this

period, were remarkable even to extravagance for the number of

their servants, whose services were easily purchased in a country

where men were numerous beyond proportion to the means of

employing them.



The manners of a man trained like Sir William Ashton are too

much at his command to remain long disconcerted with the most

adverse concurrence of circumstances.  He received the Marquis,

as he alighted from his equipage, with the usual compliments of

welcome; and, as he ushered him into the great hall, expressed

his hope that his journey had been pleasant.  The Marquis was a

tall, well-made man, with a thoughtful and intelligent

countenance, and an eye in which the fire of ambition had for

some years replaced the vivacity of youth; a bold, proud

expression of countenance, yet chastened by habitual caution, and

the desire which, as the head of a party, he necessarily

entertained of acquiring popularity.  He answered with courtesy

the courteous inquiries of the Lord Keeper, and was formally

presented to Miss Ashton, in the course of which ceremony the

Lord Keeper gave the first symptom of what was chiefly occupying

his mind, by introducing his daughter as "his wife, Lady Ashton."



Lucy blushed; the Marquis looked surprised at the extremely

juvenile appearance of his hostess, and the Lord Keeper with

difficulty rallied himself so far as to explain.  "I should have

said my daughter, my lord; but the truth is, that I saw Lady

Ashton's carriage enter the avenue shortly after your lordship's,

and----"



"Make no apology, my lord," replied his noble guest; "let me

entreat you will wait on your lady, and leave me to cultivate

Miss Ashton's acquaintance.  I am shocked my people should have

taken precedence of our hostess at her own gate; but your

lordship is aware that I supposed Lady Ashton was still in the

south.  Permit me to beseech you will waive ceremony, and hasten

to welcome her."



This was precisely what the Lord Keeper longed to do; and he

instantly profited by his lordship's obliging permission.  To see

Lady Ashton, and encounter the first burst of her displeasure in

private, might prepare her, in some degree, to receive her

unwelcome guests with due decorum.  As her carriage, therefore,

stopped, the arm of the attentive husband was ready to assist

Lady Ashton in dismounting.  Looking as if she saw him not, she

put his arm aside, and requested that of Captain Craigengelt, who

stood by the coach with his laced hat under his arm, having acted

as cavaliere servente, or squire in attendance, during the

journey.  Taking hold of this respectable person's arm as if to

support her, Lady Ashton traversed the court, uttering a wod or

two by way of direction to the servants, but not one to Sir

William, who in vain endeavoured to attract her attention, as he

rather followed than accompanied her into the hall, in which they

found the Marquis in close conversation with the Master of

Ravenswood.  Lucy had taken the first opportunity of escaping.

There was embarrassment on every countenance except that of the

Marquis of A----; for even Craigengelt's impudence was hardly

able to veil his fear of Ravenswood, an the rest felt the

awkwardness of the position in which they were thus unexpectedly

placed.



After waiting a moment to be presented by Sir William Ashton,

the Marquis resolved to introduce himself.  "The Lord Keeper," he

said, bowing to Lady Ashton, "has just introduced to me his

daughter as his wife; he might very easily present Lady Ashton as

his daughter, so little does she differ from what I remember her

some years since.  Will she permit an old

acquaintance the privilege of a guest?"



He saluted the lady with too good a grace to apprehend a

repulse, and then proceeded: "This, Lady Ashton, is a peacemaking

visit, and therefore I presume to introduce my cousin, the young

Master of Ravenswood, to your favourable notice."



Lady Ashton could not choose but courtesy; but there was in her

obeisance an air of haughtiness approaching to contemptuous

repulse.  Ravenswood could not choose but bow; but his manner

returned the scorn with which he had been greeted.



"Allow me," she said, "to present to your lordship MY friend."

Craigengelt, with the forward impudence which men of his cast

mistake for ease, made a sliding bow to the Marquis, which he

graced by a flourish of his gold-laced hat.  The lady turned to

her husband.  "You and I, Sir William," she said, and these were

the first words she had addressed to him, "have acquired new

acquaintances since we parted; let me introduce the acquisition I

have made to mine--Captain Craigengelt."



Another bow, and another flourish of the gold-laced hat, which

was returned by the Lord Keeper without intimation of former

recognition, and with that sort of anxious readiness which

intimated his wish that peace and amnesty should take place

betwixt the contending parties, including the auxiliaries on both

sides.  "Let me introduce you to the Master of Ravenswood," said

he to Captain Craigengelt, following up the same amicable system.





But the Master drew up his tall form to the full extent of his

height, and without so much as looking towards the person thus

introduced to him, he said, in a marked tone: "Captain

Craigengelt and I are already perfectly well acquainted with each

other."



"Perfectly--perfectly," replied the Captain, in a mumbling tone,

like that of a double echo, and with a flourish of his hat, the

circumference of which was greatly abridged, compared with those

which had so cordially graced his introduction to the Marquis and

the Lord Keeper.



Lockhard, followed by three menials, now entered with wine and

refreshments, which it was the fashion to offer as a whet before

dinner; and when they were placed before the guests, Lady Ashton

made an apology for withdrawing her husband from them for some

minutes upon business of special import.  The Marquis, of

course, requested her ladyship would lay herself under no

restraint; and Craigengelt, bolting with speed a second glass of

racy canary, hastened to leave the room, feeling no great

pleasure in the prospect of being left alone with the Marquis of

A---- and the Master of Ravenswood; the presence of the former

holding him in awe, and that of the latter in bodily terror.



Some arrangements about his horse and baggage formed the pretext

for his sudden retreat, in which he persevered, although Lady

Ashton gave Lockhard orders to be careful most particularly to

accommodate Captain Craigengelt with all the attendance which he

could possibly require.  The Marquis and the Master of

Ravenswood were thus left to communicate to each other their

remarks upon the reception which they had met with, while Lady

Ashton led the way, and her lord followed somewhat like a

condemned criminal, to her ladyship's dressing-room.



So soon as the spouses had both entered, her ladyship gave way

to that fierce audacity of temper which she had with

difficulty suppressed, out of respect to appearances.  She shut

the door behind the alarmed Lord Keeper, took the key out of the

spring-lock, and with a countenance which years had not bereft of

its haughty charms, and eyes which spoke at once resolution and

resentment, she addressed her astounded husband in these words:

"My lord, I am not greatly surprised at the connexions you have

been pleased to form during my absence, they are entirely in

conformity with your birth and breeding; and if I did expect

anything else, I heartily own my error, and that I merit, by

having done so, the disappointment you had prepared for me."



"My dear Lady Ashton--my dear Eleanor [Margaret]," said the Lord

Keeper, "listen to reason for a moment, and I will convince you I

have acted with all the regard due to the dignity, as well as the

interest, of my family."



"To the interest of YOUR family I conceive you perfectly

capable of attending," returned the indignant lady, "and even to

the dignity of your own family also, as far as it requires any

looking after.  But as mine happens to be inextricably involved

with it, you will excuse me if I choose to give my own attention

so far as that is concerned."



"What would you have, Lady Ashton?" said the husband.  "What is

it that displeases you?  Why is it that, on your return after so

long an absence, I am arraigned in this manner?"

"Ask your own conscience, Sir William, what has prompted you to

become a renegade to your political party and opinions, and led

you, for what I know, to be on the point of marrying your only

daughter to a beggarly Jacobite bankrupt, the inveterate enemy of

your family to the boot."



"Why, what, in the name of common sense and common civility,

would you have me do, madam?" answered her husband.  "Is it

possible for me, with ordinary decency, to turn a young

gentleman out of my house, who saved my duaghter's life and my

own, but the other morning, as it were?"



"Saved your life!  I have heard of that story," said the lady.

"The Lord Keeper was scared by a dun cow, and he takes the young

fellow who killed her for Guy of Warwick: any butcher from

Haddington may soon have an equal claim on your hospitality."



"Lady Ashton," stammered the Keeper, "this is intolerable; and

when I am desirous, too, to make you easy by any sacrifice, if

you would but tell me what you would be at."



"Go down to your guests," said the imperious dame, "and make

your apology to Ravenswood, that the arrival of Captain

Craigengelt and some other friends renders it impossible for you

to offer him lodgings at the castle.  I expect young Mr. Hayston

of Bucklaw."



"Good heavens, madam!" ejaculated her husband.  "Ravenswood to

give place to Craigengelt, a common gambler and an informer!  It

was all I could do to forbear desiring the fellow to get out of

my house, and I was much surprised to see him in your

ladyship's train."



"Since you saw him there, you might be well assured," answered

this meek helpmate, "that he was proper society.  As to this

Ravenswood, he only meets with the treatment which, to my

certain knowledge, he gave to a much-valued friend of mine, who

had the misfortune to be his guest some time since.  But take

your resolution; for, if Ravenswood does not quit the house, I

will."



Sir William Ashton paced up and down the apartment in the most

distressing agitation; fear, and shame, and anger contending

against the habitual deference he was in the use of rendering to

his lady.  At length it ended, as is usual with timid minds

placed in such circumstances, in his adopting a mezzo termine--

a middle measure.



"I tell you frankly, madam, I neither can nor will be guilty of

the incivility you propose to the Master of Ravenswood; he has

not deserved it at my hand.  If you will be so unreasonable as

to insult a man of quality under your own roof, I cannot prevent

you; but I will not at least be the agent in such a preposterous

proceeding."



"You will not?" asked the lady.



"No, by heavens, madam!" her husband replied; "ask me anything

congruent with common decency, as to drop his

acquaintance by degrees, or the like; but to bid him leave my

house is what I will nto and cannot consent to."



"Then the task of supporting the honour of the family will fall

on me, as it has often done before," said the lady.



She sat down, and hastily wrote a few lines.  The Lord Keeper

made another effort to prevent her taking a step so decisive,

just as she opened the door to call her female

attendant from the ante-room.  "Think what you are doing, Lady

Ashton: you are making a mortal enemy of a young man who is like

to have the means of harming us----"



"Did you ever know a Douglas who feared an enemy?" answered the

lady, contemptuously.



"Ay, but he is as proud and vindictive as an hundred

Douglasses, and an hundred devils to boot.  Think of it for a

night only."



"Not for another moment," answered the lady.  "Here, Mrs.

Patullo, give this billet to young Ravenswood."



"To the Master, madam!" said Mrs. Patullo.



"Ay, to the Master, if you call him so."



"I wash my hands of it entirely," said the Keeper; "and I shall

go down into the garden, and see that Jardine gathers the winter

fruit for the dessert."



"Do so," said the lady, looking after him with glances of

infinite contempt; "and thank God that you leave one behind you

as fit to protect the honour of the family as you are to look

after pippins and pears."



The Lord Keeper remained long enough in the garden to give her

ladyship's mind time to explode, and to let, as he thought, at

least the first violence of Ravenswood's displeasure blow oever.

When he entered the hall, he found the Marquis of A----giving

orders to some of his attendants.  He seemed in high

displeasure, and interrupted an apology which Sir William had

commenced for having left his lordship alone.



"I presume, Sir William, you are no stranger to this

singular billet with which MY kinsman of Ravenswood (an

emphasis on the word 'my') has been favoured by your lady; and,

of course, that you are prepared to receive my adieus.  My

kinsman is already gone, having thought it unnecessary to offer

any on his part, since all former civilities had been cancelled

by this singular insult."



"I protest, my lord," said Sir William, holding the billet in

his hand, "I am not privy to the contents of this letter.  I

know Lady Ashton is a warm-tempered and prejudiced woman, and I

am sincerely sorry for any offence that has been given or taken;

but I hope your lordship will consider that a lady----"



"Should bear herself towards persons of a certain rank with the

breeding of one," said the Marquis, completing the half-uttered

sentence.



"True, my lord," said the unfortunate Keeper; "but Lady Ashton

is still a woman----"



"And, as such, methinks," said the Marquis, again

interrupting him, "should be taught the duties which correspond

to her station.  But here she comes, and I will learn from her

own mouth the reason of this extraordinary and unexpected affront

offered to my near relation, while both he and I were her

ladyship's guests."



Lady Ashton accordingly entered the apartment at this moment.

Her dispute with Sir William, and a subsequent interview with her

daughter, had not prevented her from attending to the duties of

her toilette.  She appeared in full dress; and, from the

character of her countenance and manner, well became the

splendour with which ladies of quality then appeared on such

occasions.



The Marquis of A---- bowed haughtily, and she returned the

salute with equal pride and distance of demeanour.  He then took

from the passive hand of Sir William Ashton the billet he had

given him the moment before he approached the lady, and was about

to speak, when she interrupted him.  "I perceive, my lord, you

are about to enter upon an unpleasant subject.  I am sorry any

such should have occurred at this time, to interrupt in the

slightest degree the respectful reception due to your lordship;

but so it is.  Mr. Edgar Ravenswood, for whom I have addressed

the billet in your lordship's hand, has abused the hospitality of

this family, and Sir William Ashton's softness of temper, in

order to seduce a young person into engagements without her

parents' consent, and of which they never can approve."



Both gentlemen answered at once.  "My kinsman is incapable----"

said the Lord Marquis.



"I am confident that my daughter Lucy is still more

incapable----" said the Lord Keeper.



Lady Ashton at once interrupted and replied to them both: "My

Lord Marquis, your kinsman, if Mr. Ravenswood has the honour to

be so, has made the attempt privately to secure the

affections of this young and inexperienced girl.  Sir William

Ashton, your daughter has been simple enough to give more

encouragement than she ought to have done to so very improper a

suitor."



"And I think, madam," said the Lord Keeper, losing his

accustomed temper and patience, "that if you had nothing better

to tell us, you had better have kept this family secret to

yourself also."



"You will pardon me, Sir William," said the lady, calmly; "the

noble Marquis has a right to know the cause of the treatment I

have found it necessary to use to a gentleman whom he calls his

blood-relation."



"It is a cause," muttered the Lord Keeper, "which has emerged

since the effect has taken place; for, if it exists at all, I am

sure she knew nothing of it when her letter to

Ravenswood was written."



"It is the first time that I have heard of this," said the

Marquis; "but, since your ladyship has tabled a subject so

delicate, permit me to say, that my kinsman's birth and

connexions entitled him to a patient hearing, and at least a

civil refusal, even in case of his being so ambitious as to

raise his eyes to the daughter of Sir William Ashton."



"You will recollect, my lord, of what blood Miss Lucy Ashton is

come by the mother's side," said the lady.



"I do remember your descent--from a younger branch of the house

of Angus," said the Marquis; "and your ladyship--forgive me,

lady--ought not to forget that the Ravenswoods have thrice

intermarried with the main stem.  Come, madam, I know how matters

stand--old and long-fostered prejudices are difficult to get

over, I make every allowance for them; I ought not, and I would

not, otherwise have suffered my kinsman to depart alone,

expelled, in a manner, from this house, but I had hopes of being

a mediator.  I am still unwilling to leave you in anger, and

shall not set forward till after noon, as I rejoin the Master of

Ravenswood upon the road a few miles from hence.  Let us talk

over this matter more coolly."



"It is what I anxiously desire, my lord," said Sir William

Ashton, eagerly.  "Lady Ashton, we will not permit my Lord of A--

-- to leave us in displeasure.  We must compel him to tarry

dinner at the castle."



"The castle," said the lady, "and all that it contains, are at

the command of the Marquis, so long as he chooses to honour it

with his residence; but touching the farther discussion of this

disagreeable topic----"



"Pardon me, good madam," said the Marquis; "but I cannot allow

you to express any hasty resolution on a subject so

important.  I see that more company is arriving; and, since I

have the good fortune to renew my former acquaintance with Lady

Ashton, I hope she will give me leave to avoid perilling what I

prize so highly upon any disagreeable subject of discussion--at

least till we have talked over more pleasant topics."



The lady smiled, courtesied, and gave her hand to the Marquis,

by whom, with all the formal gallantry of the time, which did not

permit the guest to tuck the lady of the house under the arm, as

a rustic does his sweetheart at a wake, she was ushered to the

eating-room.



Here they were joined by Bucklaw, Craigengelt, and other

neighbours, whom the Lord Keeper had previously invited to meet

the Marquis of A----.  An apology, founded upon a slight

indisposition, was alleged as an excuse for the absence of Miss

Ashton, whose seat appeared unoccupied.  The entertainment was

splendid to profusion, and was protracted till a late hour.

