





CHAPTER I





By Cauk and keel to win your bread,

Wi' whigmaleeries for them wha need,

Whilk is a gentle trade indeed

To carry the gaberlunzie on.



Old Song.





FEW have been in my secret while I was compiling these

narratives, nor is it probable that they will ever become public

during the life of their author.  Even were that event to happen,

I am not ambitious of the honoured distinction, digito

monstrari.   I confess that, were it safe to cherish such dreams

at all, I should more enjoy the thought of remaining behind the

curtain unseen, like the ingenious manager of Punch and his wife

Joan, and enjoying the astonishment and conjectures of my

audience.  Then might I, perchance, hear the productions of the

obscure Peter Pattieson praised by the judicious and admired by

the feeling, engrossing the young and attracting even the old;

while the critic traced their fame up to some name of literary

celebrity, and the question when, and by whom, these tales were

written filled up the pause of conversation in a hundred circles

and coteries.  This I may never enjoy during my lifetime; but

farther than this, I am certain, my vanity should never induce me

to aspire.



I am too stubborn in habits, and too little polished in manners,

to envy or aspire to the honours assigned to my literary

contemporaries.  I could not think a whit more highly of myself

were I found worthy to "come in place as a lion" for a winter in

the great metropolis.  I could not rise, turn round, and show all

my honours, from the shaggy mane to the tufted tail, "roar you

an't were any nightingale," and so lie down again like a well-

behaved  beast of show, and all at the cheap and easy rate of a

cup of coffee and a slice of bread and butter as thin as a wafer.

And I could ill stomach the fulsome flattery with which the lady

of the evening indulges her show-monsters on such occasions, as

she crams her parrots with sugar-plums, in order to make them

talk before company.  I cannot be tempted to "come aloft" for

these marks of distinction, and, like imprisoned Samson, I would

rather remain--if such must be the alternative--all my life in

the mill-house, grinding for my very bread, than be brought forth

to make sport for the Philistine lords and ladies.  This proceeds

from no dislike, real or affected, to the aristocracy of these

realms.  But they have their place, and I have mine; and, like

the iron and earthen vessels in the old fable, we can scarce come

into collision without my being the sufferer in every sense.  It

may be otherwise with the sheets which I am now writing.  These

may be opened and laid aside at pleasure; by amusing themselves

with the perusal, the great will excite no false hopes; by

neglecting or condemning them, they will inflict no pain; and how

seldom can they converse with those whose minds have toiled for

their delight without doing either the one or the other.



In the better and wiser tone of feeling with Ovid only expresses

in one line to retract in that which follows, I can address these

quires--



Parve, nec invideo, sine me, liber, ibis in urbem.



Nor do I join the regret of the illustrious exile, that he

himself could not in person accompany the volume, which he sent

forth to the mart of literature, pleasure, and luxury.  Were

there not a hundred similar instances on record, the rate of my

poor friend and school-fellow, Dick Tinto, would  be sufficient

to warn me against seeking happiness in the celebrity which

attaches itself to a successful cultivator of the fine arts.



Dick Tinto, when he wrote himself artist, was wont to derive his

origin from the ancient family of Tinto, of that ilk, in

Lanarkshire, and occasionally hinted that he had somewhat

derogated from his gentle blood in using the pencil for his

principal  means of support.  But if Dick's pedigree  was

correct, some of his ancestors must have suffered a more heavy

declension, since the good man his father executed the necessary,

and, I trust, the honest, but certainly not very distinguished,

employment of tailor in ordinary to the village of Langdirdum in

the west..  Under his humble roof was Richard born, and to his

father's humble trade was Richard, greatly contrary to his

inclination, early indentured.  Old Mr. Tinto had, however, no

reason to congratulate himself upon having compelled the youthful

genius of his son to forsake its natural bent.  He fared like the

school-boy who attempts to stop with his finger the spout of a

water cistern, while the stream, exasperated at this compression,

escapes by a thousand uncalculated spurts, and wets him all over

for his pains.  Even so fared the senior Tinto, when his hopeful

apprentice not only exhausted all the chalk in making sketches

upon the shopboard, but even executed several caricatures of his

father's best customers, who began loudly to murmur, that it was

too hard to have their persons deformed by the vestments of the

father, and to be at the same time turned into ridicule by the

pencil of the son.  This led to discredit and loss of practice,

until the old tailor, yielding to destiny and to the entreaties

of  his son, permitted him to attempt his fortune in a line for

which he was better qualified.



There was about this time, in the village of Langdirdum, a

peripatetic brother of the brush, who exercised his vocation sub

Jove frigido, the object of admiration of all the boys of the

village, but especially to Dick Tinto.  The age had not yet

adopted, amongst other unworthy retrenchments, that illiberal

measure of economy which, supplying by written characters the

lack of symbolical representation, closes one open and easily

accessible avenue of instruction and emolument against the

students of the fine arts.  It was not yet permitted to write

upon the plastered doorway of an alehouse,. or the suspended sign

of an inn, "The Old Magpie," or "The Saracen's Head,"

substituting that cold description for the lively effigies of the

plumed chatterer, or the turban'd frown of the terrific soldan.

That early and more simple age considered alike the necessities

of all ranks, anddepicted the symbols of good cheer so as to be

obvious to all capacities; well judging that a man who could not

read a syllable might nevertheless love a pot of good ale as well

as his better-educated neighbours, or even as the parson himself.

Acting upon this liberal principle, publicans as yet hung forth

the painted emblems of their calling, and sign-painters, if they

seldom feasted, did not at least absolutely starve.



To a worthy of this decayed profession, as we have already

intimated, Dick Tinto became an assistant; and thus, as is not

unusual among heaven-born geniuses in this department of the

fine arts, began to paint before he had any notion of drawing.



His talent for observing nature soon induced him to rectify the

errors, adn soar above the instructions, of his teacher.  He

particularly shone in painting horses, that being a favourite

sign in the Scottish villages; and, in tracing his progress, it

is beautiful to observe how by degrees he learned to shorten the

backs and prolong the legs of these noble animals, until they

came to look less like crocodiles, and more like nags.

Detraction, which always pursues merit with strides proportioned

to its advancement, has indeed alleged that Dick once upon a time

painted a horse with five legs, instead of four.  I might have

rested his defence upon the license allowed to that branch of his

profession, which, as it permits all sorts of singular and

irregular combinations, may be allowed to extend itself so far as

to bestow a limb supernumerary on a favourite subject.  But the

cause of a deceased friend is sacred; and I disdain to bottom it

so superficially.  I have visited the sign in question, which yet

swings exalted in the village of Langdirdum; and I am ready to

depone upon the oath that what has been idly mistaken or

misrepresented as being the fifth leg of the horse, is, in fact,

the tail of that quadruped, and, considered with reference to the

posture in which he is delineated, forms a circumstance

introduced and managed with great and successful, though daring,

art.  The nag being represented in a rampant or rearing posture,

the tail, which is prolonged till it touches the ground, appears

to form a point d'appui, and gives the firmness of a tripod to

the figure, without which it would be difficult to conceive,

placed as the feet are, how the courser could maintain his ground

without tumbling backwards.  This bold conception has fortunately

fallen into the custody of one by whom it is duly valued; for,

when Dick, in his more advanced state of proficiency, became

dubious of the propriety of so daring a deviation to execute a

picture of the publican himself in exchange for this juvenile

production, the courteous offer was declined by his judicious

employer, who had observed, it seems, that when his ale failed to

do its duty in conciliating his guests, one glance at his sign

was sure to put them in good humour.



It would be foreign to my present purpose to trace the steps by

which Dick Tinto improved his touch, and corrected, by the rules

of art, the luxuriance of a fervid imagination.  The scales fell

from his eyes on viewing the sketches of a contemporary, the

Scottish Teniers, as Wilkie has been deservedly styled.  He threw

down the brush. took up the crayons, and, amid hunger and toil,

and suspense and uncertainty, pursued the path of his profession

under better auspices than those of his original master.  Still

the first rude emanations of his genius, like the nursery rhymes

of Pope, could these be recovered, will be dear to the companions

of Dick Tinto's youth.  There is a tankard and gridiron painted

over the door of an obscure change-house in the Back Wynd of

Gandercleugh----But I feel I must tear myself from the subject,

or dwell on it too long.



Amid his wants and struggles, Dick Tinto had recourse, like his

brethren, to levying that tax upon the vanity of mankind which he

could not extract from their taste and liberality--on a word, he

painted portraits.  It was in this more advanced state of

proficiency, when Dick had soared above his original line of

business, and highly disdained any allusion to it, that, after

having been estranged for several years, we again met in the

village of Gandercleugh, I holding my present situation, and Dick

painting copies of the human face divine at a guinea per head.

This was a small premium, yet, in the first burst of business, it

more than sufficed for all Dick's moderate wants; so that he

occupied an apartment at the Wallace Inn, cracked his jest with

impunity even upon mine host himself, and lived in respect and

observance with the chambermaid, hostler, and waiter.



Those halcyon days were too serene to last long.  When his

honour the Laird of Gandercleugh, with his wife and three

daughters, the minister, the gauger, mine esteemed patron Mr.

Jedediah Cleishbotham, and some round dozen of the feuars and

farmers, had been consigned to immortality by Tinto's brush,

custom began to slacken, and it was impossible to wring more

than crowns and half-crowns from the hard hands of the peasants

whose ambition led them to Dick's painting-room.



Still, though the horizon was overclouded, no storm for some

time ensued.  Mine host had Christian faith with a lodger who had

been a good paymaster as long as he had the means.  And from a

portrait of our landlord himself, grouped with his wife and

daughters, in the style of Rubens, which suddenly appeared in the

best parlour, it was evident that Dick had found some mode of

bartering art for the necessaries of life.



Nothing, however, is more precarious than resources of this

nature.  It was observed that Dick became in his turn the

whetstone of mine host's wit, without venturing either at defence

or retaliation; that his easel was transferred to a garret0room,

in which there was scarce space for it to stand upright; and that

he no longer ventured to join the weekly club, of which he had

been once the life and soul.  In short, Dick Tinto's friends

feared that he had acted like the animal called the sloth, which,

heaving eaten up the last green leaf upon the tree where it has

established itself, ends by tumbling down from the top, and dying

of inanition.  I ventured to hint this to Dick, recommended his

transferring the exercise of his inestimable talent to some other

sphere, and forsaking the common which he might be said to have

eaten bare.



"There is an obstacle to my change of residence," said my

friend, grasping my hand with a look of solemnity.



"A bill due to my landlord, I am afraid?" replied I, with

heartfelt sympathy; "if any part of my slender means can assist

in this emergence----"



"No, by the soul of Sir Joshua!" answered the generous youth, "I

will never involve a friend in the consequences of my own

misfortune.  There is a mode by which I can regain my

liberty; and to creep even through a common sewer is better than

to remain in prison."



I did not perfectly understand what my friend meant.  The muse

of painting appeared to have failed him, and what other goddess

he could invoke in his distress was a mystery to me.  We parted,

however, without further explanation, and I did not see him until

three days after, when he summoned me to partake of the "foy"

with which his landlord proposed to regale him ere his departure

for Edinburgh.



I found Dick in high spirits, whistling while he buckled the

small knapsack which contained his colours, brushes, pallets, and

clean shirt.  That he parted on the best terms with mine host was

obvious from the cold beef set forth in the low parlour, flanked

by two mugs of admirable brown stout; and I own my curiosity was

excited concerning the means through which the face of my

friend's affairs had been so suddenly improved.  I did not

suspect Dick of dealing with the devil, and by what earthly means

he had extricated himself thus happily I was at a total loss to

conjecture.



He perceived my curiosity, and took me by the hand.  "My

friend," he said, "fain would I conceal, even from you, the

degradation to which it has been necessary to submit, in order to

accomplish an honourable retreat from Gandercleaugh.  But what

avails attempting to conceal that which must needs betray itself

even by its superior excellence?  All the village--all the

parish--all the world--will soon discover to what poverty has

reduced Richard Tinto.:



A sudden thought here struck me.  I had observed that our

landlord wore, on that memorable morning, a pair of bran new

velveteens instead of his ancient thicksets.



"What," said I, drawing my right hand, with the forefinger and

thumb pressed together, nimbly from my right haunch to my left

shoulder, "you have condescended to resume the

paternal arts to which you were first bred--long stitches,  ha,

Dick?"



He repelled this unlucky conjecture with a frown and a pshaw,

indicative of indignant contempt, and leading me into another

room, showed me, resting against the wall, the majestic head of

Sir William Wallace, grim as when severed from the trunk by the

orders of the Edward.



The painting was executed on boards of a substantial

thickness, and the top decorated with irons, for suspending the

honoured effigy upon a signpost.



"There," he said, "my friend, stands the honour of Scotland, and

my shame; yet not so--rather the shame of those who, instead of

encouraging art in its proper sphere, reduce it to these

unbecoming and unworthy extremities."



I endeavoured to smooth the ruffled feelings of my misused and

indignant friend.  I reminded him that he ought not, like the

stag in the fable, to despise the quality which had extricated

him from difficulties, in which his talents, as a portrait or

landscape painter, had been found unavailing.  Above all, I

praised the execution, as well as conception, of his painting,

and reminded him that, far from feeling dishonoured by so superb

a specimen of his talents being exposed to the general view of

the public, he ought rather to congratulate himself upon the

augmentation of his celebrity to which its public exhibition must

necessarily give rise.



"You are right, my friend--you are right," replied poor Dick,

his eye kindling with enthusiasm; "why should I shun the name of

an--an--(he hesitated for a phrase)--an out-of-doors artist?

Hogarth has introduced himself in that character in one of his

best engravings; Domenichino, or somebody else, in ancient

times, Morland in our own, have exercised their talents in this

manner.  And wherefore limit to the rich and higher classes alone

the delight which the exhibition of works of art is calculated to

inspire into all classes?  Statues are placed in the open air,

why should Painting be more niggardly in displaying her

masterpieces than her sister Sculpture?  And yet, my friend, we

must part suddenly; the carpenter is coming in an hour to put up

the--the emblem; and truly, with all my philosophy, and your

consolatory encouragement to boot, I would rather wish to leave

Gandercleugh before that operation commences."



We partook of our genial host's parting banquet, and I escorted

Dick on his walk to Edinburgh.  We parted about a mile from the

village, just as we heard the distant cheer of the boys which

accompanied the mounting of the new symbol of the Wallace Head.

Dick Tinto mended his pace to get out of hearing, so little had

either early practice or recent philosophy reconciled him to the

character of a sign-painter.



In Edinburgh, Dick's talents were discovered and

appreciated, and he received dinners and hints from several

distinguished judges of the fine arts.  But these gentlemen

dispensed their criticism more willingly than their cash, and

Dick thought he needed cash more than criticism.  He therefore

sought London, the universal mart of talent, and where, as is

usual in general marts of most descriptions, much more of each

commodity is exposed to sale than can ever find purchasers.



Dick, who, in serious earnest, was supposed to have

considerable natural talents for his profession, and whose vain

and sanguine disposition never permitted him to doubt for a

moment of ultimate success, threw himself headlong into the crowd

which jostled and struggled for notice and preferment.  He

elbowed others, and was elbowed himself; and finally, by dint of

intrepidity, fought his way into some notice, painted for the

prize at the Institution, had pictures at the exhibition at

Somerset House, and damned the hanging committee.  But poor Dick

was doomed to lose the field he fought so gallantly.  In the fine

arts, there is scarce an alternative betwixt distinguished

success and absolute failure; and as Dick's zeal and industry

were unable to ensure the first, he fell into the distresses

which, in his condition, were the natural consequences of the

latter alternative.  He was for a time patronised by one or two

of those judicious persons who make a virtue of being singular,

and of pitching their own opinions against those of the world in

matters of taste and criticism.  But they soon tired of poor

Tinto, and laid him down as a load, upon the principle on which a

spoilt child throws away its plaything.  Misery, I fear, took him

up, and accompanied him to a premature grave, to which he was

carried from an obscure lodging in Swallow Street, where he had

been dunned by his landlady within doors, and watched by bailiffs

without, until death came to his relief.  A corner of the

Morning Post noticed his death, generously adding, that his

manner displayed considerable genius, though his style was rather

sketchy; and referred to an advertisement, which announced that

Mr. Varnish, a well-known printseller, had still on hand a very

few drawings and painings by Richard Tinto, Esquire, which those

of the nobility and gentry who might wish to complete their

collections of modern art were invited to visit without delay.

So ended Dick Tinto! a lamentable proof of the great truth, that

in the fine arts mediocrity is not permitted, and that he who

cannot ascend to the very top of the ladder will do well not to

put his foot upon it at all.



The memory of Tinto is dear to me, from the recollection of the

many conversations which we have had together, most of them

turning upon my present task.  He was delighted with my

progress, and talked of an ornamented and illustrated edition,

with heads, vignettes, and culs de lampe, all to be designed by

his own patriotic and friendly pencil.  He prevailed upon an old

sergeant of invalids to sit to him in the character of Bothwell,

the lifeguard's-man of Charles the Second, and the bellman of

Gandercleugh in that of David Deans.  But while he thus proposed

to unite his own powers with mine for the illustration of these

narratives, he mixed many a dose of salutary criticism with the

panegyrics which my composition was at times so fortunate as to

call forth.



"Your characters," he said, "my dear Pattieson, make too much

use of the gob box; they patter too much (an elegant

phraseology which Dick had learned while painting the scenes of

an itinerant company of players); there is nothing in whole pages

but mere chat and dialogue."



"The ancient philosopher," said I in reply, "was wont to say,

'Speak, that I may know thee'; and how is it possible for an

author to introduce his personae dramatis to his readers in a

more interesting and effectual manner than by the dialogue in

which each is represented as supporting his own appropriate

character?"



"It is a false conclusion," said Tinto; "I hate it, Peter, as I

hate an unfilled can.  I grant you, indeed, that speech is a

faculty of some value in the intercourse of human affairs, and I

will not even insist on the doctrine of that Pythagorean toper,

who was of opinion that over a bottle speaking spoiled

conversation.  But I will not allow that a professor of the fine

arts has occasion to embody the idea of his scene in language, in

order to impress upon the reader its reality and its effect.  On

the contrary, I will be judged by most of your readers, Peter,

should these tales ever become public, whether you have not given

us a page of talk for every single idea which two words might

have communicated, while the posture, and manner, and incident,

accurately drawn, and brougth out by appropriate colouring, would

have preserved all that was worthy of preservation, and saved

these everlasting 'said he's' and 'said she's,' with which it has

been your pleasure to encumber your pages."



I replied, "That he confounded the operations of the pencil and

the pen; that the serene and silent art, as painting has been

called by one of our first living poets, necessarily appealed to

the eye, because it had not the organs for addressing the ear;

whereas poetry, or that species of composition which approached

to it, lay under the necessity of doing absolutely the reverse,

and addressed itself to the ear, for the purpose of exciting that

interest which it could not attain through the medium of the

eye."



Dick was not a whit staggered by my argument, which he contended

was founded on misrepresentation.  "Description," he said, "was

to the author of a romance exactly what drawing and tinting were

to a painter: words were his colours, and, if properly employed,

they could not fail to place the scene which he wished to conjure

up as effectually before the mind's eye as the tablet or canvas

presents it to the bodily organ.  The same rules," he contended,

"applied to both, and an exuberance of dialogue, in the former

case, was a verbose and laborious mode of composition which went

to confound the proper art of fictitious narrative with that of

the drama, a widely different species of composition, of which

dialogue was the very essence, because all, excepting the

language to be made use of, was presented to the eye by the

dresses, and persons, and actions of the performers upon the

stage.  But as nothing," said Dick, "can be more dull than a long

narrative written upon the plan of a drama, so where you have

approached most near to that species of composition, by

indulging in prolonged scenes of mere

conversation, the course of your story has become chill and

constrained, and you have lost the power of arresting the

attention and exciting the imagination, in which upon other

occasions you may be considered as having succeeded tolerably

well."



I made my bow in requital of the compliment, which was probably

thrown in by way of placebo, and expressed myself willing at

least to make one trial of a more straightforward style of

composition, in which my actors should do more, and say less,

than in my former attempts of this kind.  Dick gave me a

patronising and approving nod, and observed that, finding me so

docile, he would communicate, for the benefit of my muse, a

subject which he had studied with a view to his own art.



"The story," he said, "was, by tradition, affirmed to be truth,

although, as upwards of a hundred years had passed away since the

events took place, some doubts upon the accuracy of all the

particulars might be reasonably entertained."



When Dick Tinto had thus spoken, he rummaged his portfolio for

the sketch from which he proposed one day to execute a picture of

fourteen feet by eight.  The sketch, which was

cleverly executed, to use the appropriate phrase, represented an

ancient hall, fitted up and furnished in what we now call the

taste of Queen Elizabeth's age.  The light, admitted from the

upper part of a high casement, fell upon a female figure of

exquisite beauty, who, in an attitude of speechless terror,

appeared to watch the issue of a debate betwixt two other

persons.  The one was a young man, in the Vandyke dress common to

the time of Charles I., who, with an air of indignant priude,

testified by the manner in which he raised his head and extended

his arm, seemed to be urging a claim of right, rather than of

favour, to a lady whose age, and some resemblance in their

features, pointed her out as the mother of the younger female,

and who appeared to listen with a mixture of displeasure and

impatience.



Tinto produced his sketch with an air of mysterious triumph, and

gazed on it as a fond parent looks upon a hopeful child, while he

anticipates the future figure he is to make in the world, and the

height to which he will raise the honour of his family.  He held

it at arm's length from me--he helt it closer--he placed it upon

the top of a chest of drawers--closed the lower shutters of the

casement,  to adjust a downward and favourable light--fell back

to the due distance, dragging me after him--shaded his face with

his hand, as if to exclude all but the favourite object--and

ended by spoiling a child's copy-book, which he rolled up so as

to serve for the darkened tube of an amateur.  I fancy my

expressions of enthusiasm had not been in proportion to his own,

for he presently exclaimed with vehemence:  "Mr. Pattieson, I

used to think you had an eye in your head."



I vindicated my claim to the usual allowance of visual organs.



"Yet, on my honour," said Dick, "I would swear you had been born

blind, since you have failed at the first glance to discover the

subject and meaning of that sketch.  I do not mean to praise my

own performance, I leave these arts to others; I am sensible of

my deficiencies, conscious that my drawing and colouring may be

improved by the time I intend to dedicate to the art.  But the

conception--the expression--the positions--these tell the story

to every one who looks at the sketch; and if I can finish the

picture without diminution of the original conception, the name

of Tinto shall no more be smothered by the mists of envy and

intrigue."



I replied:  "That I admired the sketch exceedingly; but that to

understand its full merit, I felt it absolutely necessary to be

informed of the subject."



"That is the very thing I complain of," answered Tinto; "you

have accustomed yourself so much to these creeping twilight

details of yours, that you are become incapable of receiving that

instant and vivid flash of conviction which darts on the mind

from seeing the happy and expressive combinations of a single

scene, and which gathers from the position, attitude, and

countenance of the moment, not only the history of the past lives

of the personages represented, and the nature of the business on

which they are immediately engaged, but lifts even the veil of

futurity, and affords a shrewd guess at their future fortunes."



"In that case," replied I, "Paining excels the ape of the

renowned Gines de Passamonte, which only meddled with the past

and the present; nay, she excels that very Nature who affords

her subject; for I protest to you, Dick, that were I permitted to

peep into that Elizabeth-chamber, and see the persons you have

sketched conversing in flesh and blood, I should not be a jot

nearer guessing the nature of their business than I am at this

moment while looking at your sketch.  Only generally, from the

languishing look of the young lady, and the care you have taken

to present a very handsome leg on the part of the gentleman, I

presume there is some reference to a love affair between them."



"Do you really presume to form such a bold conjecture?" said

Tinto.  "And the indignant earnestness with which you see the man

urge his suit, the unresisting and passive despair of the

younger female, the stern air of inflexible determination in the

elder woman, whose looks express at once consciousness that she

is acting wrong and a firm determination to persist in the course

she has adopted----"



"If her looks express all this, my dear Tinto," replied I,

interrupting him, "your pencil rivals the dramatic art of Mr.

Puff in The Critic, who crammed a whole complicated sentence

into the expressive shake of Lord Burleigh's head."



"My good friend, Peter," replied Tinto, "I observe you are

perfectly incorrigible; however, I have compassion on your

dulness, and am unwilling you should be deprived of the pleasure

of understanding my picture, and of gaining, at the same time, a

subject for your own pen.  You must know then, last summer, while

I was taking sketches on the coast of East Lothian and

Berwickshire, I was seduced into the mountains of Lammermoor by

the account I received of some remains of antiquity in that

district.  Those with which I was most struck were the ruins of

an ancient castle in which that Elizabeth-chamber, as you call

it, once existed.  I resided for two or three days at a farmhouse

in the neighbourhood, where the aged goodwife was well acquainted

with the history of the castle, and the events which had taken

place in it.  One of these was of a nature so interesting and

singular, that my attention was divided between my wish to draw

the old ruins in landscape, and to represent, in a history-

piece, the singular events which have taken place in it.  Here

are my notes of the tale," said poor Dick, handing a parcel of

loose scraps, partly scratched over with his pencil, partly with

his pen, where outlines of caricatures, sketches of turrets,

mills, old gables, and dovecots, disputed the ground with his

written memoranda.



I proceeded, however, to decipher the substance of the

manuscript as well as I could, and move it into the following

Tale, in which, following in part, though not entirely, my friend

Tinto"s advice, I endeavoured to render my narrative rather

descriptive than dramatic.  My favourite propensity, however, has

at times overcome me, and my persons, like many others in this

talking world, speak now what then a great deal more than they

act.

