





CHAPTER XXVIII.



Was ever woman in this humor wooed?

Was ever woman in this humour won?

I'll have her.



Richard III.





TWELVE months had passed away since the Master of

Ravenswood's departure for the continent, and, although his

return to Scotland had been expected in a much shorter space, yet

the affairs of his mission, or, according to a prevailing report,

others of a nature personal to himself, still detained him

abroad.  In the mean time, the altered state of affairs in Sir

William Ashton's family may be gathered from the following

conversation which took place betwixt Bucklaw and his

confidential bottle companion and dependant, the noted Captain

Craigengelt.  They were seated on either side of the huge

sepulchral-looking freestone chimney in the low hall at

Girnington.  A wood fire blazed merrily in the grate; a round

oaken table, placed between them, supported a stoup of excellent

claret, two rummer glasses, and other good cheer; and yet, with

all these appliances and means to boot, the countenance of the

patron was dubious, doubtful, and unsatisfied, while the

invention of his dependant was taxed to the utmost to parry what

he most dreaded, a fit, as he called it, of the sullens, on the

part of his protector.  After a long pause, only interrupted by

the devil's tattoo, which Bucklaw kept beating against the hearth

with the toe of his boot, Craigengelt at last ventured to break

silence.  "May I be double distanced," said he, "if ever I saw a

man in my life have less the air of a bridegroom!  Cut me out of

feather, if you have not more the look of a man condemned to be

hanged!"



"My kind thanks for the compliment," replied Bucklaw; "but I

suppose you think upon the predicament in which you yourself are

most likely to be placed; and pray, Captain Craigengelt, if it

please your worship, why should I look merry, when I'm sad, and

devilish sad too?"



"And that's what vexes me," said Craigengelt.  "Here is this

match, the best in the whole country, andwhich were so anxious

about, is on the point of being concluded, and you are as sulky

as a bear that has lost its whelps."



"I do not know," answered the Laird, doggedly, "whether I should

conclude or not, if it was not that I am too far forwards to leap

back."



"Leap back!" exclaimed Craigengelt, with a well-assumed air of

astonishment, "that would be playing the back-game with a

witness!  Leap back!  Why, is not the girl's fortune----"



"The young lady's, if you please," said Hayston,

interrupting him.



"Well--well, no disrespect meant.  Will Miss Ashton's tocher not

weigh against any in Lothian?"



"Granted," answered Bucklaw; "but I care not a penny for her

tocher; I have enough of my own."



"And the mother, that loves you like her own child?"



"Better than some of her children, I believe," said Bucklaw, "or

there would be little love wared on the matter."



"And Colonel Sholto Douglas Ashton, who desires the marriage

above all earthly things?"



"Because," said Bucklaw, "he expects to carry the county of ----

 through my interest."



"And the father, who is as keen to see the match concluded as

ever I have been to win a main?"



"Ay," said Bucklaw, in the same disparaging manner, "it lies

with Sir William's policy to secure the next best match, since he

cannot barter his child to save the great Ravenswood estate,

which the English House of Lords are about to wrench out of his

clutches."



"What say you to the young lady herself?" said Craigengelt; "the

finest young woman in all Scotland, one that you used to be so

fond of when she was cross, and now she consents to have you,

and gives up her engagement with Ravenswood, you are for jibbing.

I must say, the devil's in ye, when ye neither know what you

would have nor what you would want."



"I'll tell you my meaning in a word," answered Bucklaw, getting

up and walking through the room; "I want to know what the devil

is the cause of Miss Ashton's changing her mind so

suddenly?"



"And what need you care," said Craigengelt, "since the change is

in your favour?"



"I'll tell you what it is," returned his patron, "I never knew

much of that sort of fine ladies, and I believe they may be as

capricious as the devil; but there is something in Miss Ashton's

change a devilish deal too sudden and too serious for a mere

flisk of her own.  I'll be bound, Lady Ashton understands every

machine for breaking in the human mind, and there are as many as

there are cannon-bit, martingales, and cavessons for young

colts."



"And if that were not the case," said Craigengelt, "how the

devil should we ever get them into training at all?"



"And that's true too," said Bucklaw, suspending his march

through the dining-room, and leaning upon the back of a chair.

"And besides, here's Ravenswood in the way still, do you think

he'll give up Lucy's engagement?"



"To be sure he will," answered Craigengelt; "what good can it do

him to refuse, since he wishes to marry another woman and she

another man?"



"And you believe seriously," said Bucklaw, "that he is going to

marry the foreign lady we heard of?"



"You heard yourself," answered Craigengelt, "what Captain

Westenho said about it, and the great preparation made for their

blythesome bridal."



"Captain Westenho," replied Bucklaw, "has rather too much of

your own cast about, Craigie, to make what Sir William would call

a 'famous witness.'  He drinks deep, plays deep, swears deep, and

I suspect can lie and cheat a little into the bargain; useful

qualities, Craigie, if kept in their proper sphere, but which

have a little too much of the freebooter to make a figure in a

court of evidence."



"Well, then," said Craigengelt, "will you believe Colonel

Douglas Ashton, who heard the Marquis of A---- say in a public

circle, but not aware that he was within ear-shot, that his

kinsman had made a better arrangement for himself than to give

his father's land for the pale-cheeked daughter of a broken-down

fanatic, and that Bucklaw was welcome to the wearing of

Ravenswood's shaughled shoes."



"Did he say so, by heavens!" cried Bucklaw, breaking out into

one of those incontrollable fits of passion to which he was

constitutionally subject; "if I had heard him, I would have torn

the tongue out of his throat before all his peats and minions,

and Highland bullies into the bargain.  Why did not Ashton run

him through the body?"



"Capot me if I know," said the Captain.  "He deserved it sure

enough; but he is an old man, and a minister of state, and there

would be more risk than credit in meddling with him.  You had

more need to think of making up to Miss Lucy Ashton the disgrace

that's like to fall upon her than of interfering with a man too

old to fight, and on too high a tool for your hand to reach him."



"It SHALL reach him, though, one day," said Bucklaw, "and his

kinsman Ravenswood to boot.  In the mean time, I'll take care

Miss Ashton receives no discredit for the slight they have put

upon her.  It's an awkward job, however, and I wish it were

ended; I scarce know how to talk to her,--but fill a bumper,

Craigie, and we'll drink her health.  It grows late, and a night-

cowl of good claret is worth all the considering-caps in Europe."
