






CHAPTER V.



Is she a Capulet?

O dear account! my life is my foe's debt.



SHAKESPEARE





THE Lord Keeper walked for nearly a quarter of a mile in

profound silence.  His daughter, naturally timid, and bred up in

those ideas of filial awe and implicit obedience which were

inculcated upon the youth of that period, did not venture to

interrupt his meditations.



"Why do you look so pale, Lucy?" said her father, turning

suddenly round and breaking silence.



According to the ideas of the time, which did not permit a young

woman to offer her sentiments on any subject of importance

unless required to do so, Lucy was bound to appear ignorant of

the meaning of all that had passed betwixt Alice and her father,

and imputed the emotion he had observed to the fear of the wild

cattle which grazed in that part of the extensive chase through

which they were now walking.



Of these animals, the descendants of the savage herds which

anciently roamed free in the Caledonian forests,. it was formerly

a point of state to preserve a few in the parks of the Scottish

nobility.  Specimens continued within the memory of man to be

kept at least at three houses of distinction--Hamilton, namely,

Drumlanrig, and Cumbernauld.  They had degenerated from the

ancient race in size and strength, if we are to judge from the

accounts of old chronicles, and from the formidable remains

frequently discovered in bogs and morasses when drained and laid

open.  The bull had lost the shaggy honours of his mane, and the

race was small and light made, in colour a dingy white, or rather

a pale yellow, with black horns and hoofs.  They retained,

however, in some measure, the ferocity of their ancestry, could

not be domesticated on account of their antipathy to the human

race, and were often dangerous if approached unguardedly, or

wantonly disturbed.  It was this last reason which has occasioned

their being extirpated at the places we have mentioned, where

probably they would otherwise have been retained as appropriate

inhabitants of a Scottish woodland, and fit tenants for a

baronial forest.  A few, if I mistake not, are still preserved at

Chillingham Castle, in Northumberland, the seat of the Earl of

Tankerville.



It was to her finding herself in the vicinity of a group of

three or four of these animals, that Lucy thought proper to

impute those signs of fear which had arisen in her countenance

for a different reason.  For she had been familiarised with the

appearance of the wil cattle during her walks in the chase; and

it was not then, as it may be now, a necessary part of a young

lady's demeanour to indulge in causeless tremors of the nerves.

On the present occasion, however, she speedily found cause for

real terror.



Lucy had scarcely replied to her father in the words we have

mentioned, and he was just about to rebuke her supposed timidity,

when a bull, stimulated either by the scarlet colour of Miss

Ashton's mantle, or by one of those fits of capricious ferocity

to which their dispositions are liable, detached himself suddenly

from the group which was feeding at the upper extremity of a

grassy glade, that seemed to lose itself among the crossing and

entangled boughs.  The animal approached the intruders on his

pasture ground, at first slowly, pawing the ground with his hoof,

bellowing from time to time, and tearing up the sand with his

horns, as if to lash himself up to rage and violence.



The Lord Keeper, who observed the animal's demeanour, was aware

that he was about to become mischievous, and, drawing his

daughter's arm under his own, began to walk fast along the

avenue, in hopes to get out of his sight and his reach.  This was

the most injudicious course he could have adopted, for,

encouraged by the appearance of flight, the bull began to pursue

them at full speed.  Assailed by a danger so imminent, firmer

courage than that of the Lord Keeper might have given way.  But

paternal tenderness, "love strong as death," sustained him.  He

continued to support and drag onward his daughter, until her

fears altogether depriving her of the power of flight, she sunk

down by his side; and when he could no longer assist her to

escape, he turned round and placed himself betwixt her and the

raging animal, which, advancing in full career, its brutal fury

enhanced by the rapidity of the pursuit, was now within a few

yards of them.  The Lord Keeper had no weapons; his age and

gravity dispensed even with the usual appendage of a walking

sword--could such appendage have availed him anything.



It seemed inevitable that the father or daughter, or both,

should have fallen victims to the impending danger, when a shot

from the neighbouring thicket arrested the progress of the

animal.  He was so truly struck between the junction of the spine

with the skull, that the wound, which in any other part of his

body might scarce have impeded his career, proved instantly

fatal.  Stumbling forward with a hideous bellow, the progressive

force of his previous motion, rather than any operation of his

limbs, carried him up to within three yards of the astonished

Lord Keeper, where he rolled on the ground, his limbs darkened

with the black death-sweat, and quivering with the last

convulsions of muscular motion.



Lucy lay senseless on the ground, insensible of the

wonderful deliverance which she had experience.  Her father was

almost equally stupified, so rapid and unexpected had been the

transition from the horrid death which seemed inevitable to

perfect security.  He gazed on the animal, terrible even in

death, with a species of mute and confused astonishment, which

did not permit him distinctly to understand what had taken place;

and so inaccurate was his consciousness of what had passed, that

he might have supposed the bull had been arrested in its career

by a thunderbolt, had he not observed among the branches of the

thicket the figure of a man, with a short gun or musquetoon in

his hand.



This instantly recalled him to a sense of their situation: a

glance at his daughter reminded him of the necessity of procuring

her assistance.  He called to the man, whom he concluded to be

one of his foresters, to give immediate attention to Miss Ashton,

while he himself hastened to call assistance.  The huntsman

approached them accordingly, and the Lord Keeper saw he was a

stranger, but was too much agitated to make any farther remarks.

In a few hurried words he directed the shooter, as stronger and

more active than himself, to carry the young lady to a

neighbouring fountain, while he went back to Alice's hut to

procure more aid.



The man to whose timely itnerference they had been so much

indebted did not seem inclined to leave his good work half

finished.  He raised Lucy from the ground in his arms, and

convenying her through the glades of the forest by paths with

which he seemed well acquainted, stopped not until he laid her in

safety by the side of a plentiful and pellucid fountain, which

had been once covered in, screened and decorated with

architectural ornaments of a Gothic character.  But now the vault

which had covered it being broken down and riven, and the Gothic

font ruined and demolished, the stream burst forth from the

recess of  the earth in open day, and winded its way among the

broken sculpture and moss-grown stones which lay in confusion

around its source.



Tradition, always busy, at least in Scotland, to grace with a

legendary tale a spot in itself interesting, had ascribed a

cause of peculiar veneration to this fountain.  A beautiful young

lady met one of the Lords of Ravenswood while hunting near this

spot, and, like a second Egeria, had captivated the affections of

the feudal Numa.  They met frequently afterwards, and always at

sunset, the charms of the nymph's mind completing the conquest

which her beauty had begun, and the mystery of the intrigue

adding zest to both.  She always appeared and disappeared close


by the fountain, with which, therefore, her lover judged she had

some inexplicable connexion.  She placed certain restrictions on

their intercourse, which also savoured of mystery.  They met only

once a week--Friday was the appointed day--and she explained to

the Lord of Ravenswood that they were under the necessity of

separating so soon as the bell of a chapel, belonging to a

hermitage in the adjoining wood, now long ruinous, should toll

the hour of vespers.  In the course of his confession, the Baron

of Ravenswood entrusted the hermit with the secret of this

singular amour, and Father Zachary drew the necessary and

obvious consequence that his patron was enveloped in the toils of

Satan, and in danger of destruction, both to body and soul.  He

urged these perils to the Baron with all the force of monkish

rhetoric, and described, in the most frightful colours, the real

character and person of the apparently lovely Naiad, whom he

hesitated not to denounce as a limb of the kingdom of darkness.

The lover listened with obstinate incredulity; and it was not

until worn out by the obstinacy of the anchoret that he consented

to put the state and condition of his mistress to a certain

trial, and for that purpose acquiesced in Zachary's proposal that

on their next interview the vespers bell should be rung half an

hour later than usual.  The hermit maintained and bucklered his

opinion, by quotations from Malleus Malificarum, Sprengerus,

Remigius, and other learned demonologists, that the Evil One,

thus seduced to remain behind the appointed hour, would assume

her true shape, and, having appeared to herterrified lover as a

fiend of hell, would vanish from him in a flash of sulphurous

lightning.  Raymond of Ravenswood acquiesced in the experiment,

not incurious concerning the issue, though confident it would

disappoint the expectations of the hermit.



At the appointed hour the lovers met, and their interview was

protracted beyond that at which they usually parted, by the

delay of the priest to ring his usual curfew.  No change took

place upon the nymph's outward form; but as soon as the

lengthening shadows made her aware that the usual hour of the

vespers chime was passed, she tore herself from her lover's arms

with a shriek of despair, bid him adieu for ever, and, plunging

into the fountain, disappeared from his eyes.  The bubbles

occasioned by her descent were crimsoned with blood as they

arose, leading the distracted Baron to infer that his ill-judged

curiosity had occasioned the death of this interesting and

mysterious being.  The remorse which he felt, as well as the

recollection of her charms, proved the penance of his future

life, which he lost in the battle of Flodden not many months

after.  But, in memory of his Naiad, he had previously ornamented

the fountain in which she appeared to reside, and secured its

waters from profanation or pollution by the small vaulted

building of which the fragments still remained scattered around

it.  From this period the house of Ravenswood was supposed to

have dated its decay.



Such was the generally-received legend, which some, who would

seem wiser than the vulgar, explained as obscurely

intimating the fate of a beautiful maid of plebeian rank, the

mistress of this Raymond, whom he slew in a fit of jealousy, and

whose blood was mingled with the waters of the locked foundtain,

as it was commonly called.  Others imagined thatthe tale had a

more remote origin in the ancient heathen mythology.  All,

however, agreed that the spot was fatal to the Ravenswood family;

and that to drink of the waters of the well, or even approach its

brink, was as ominous to a descendant of that house as for a

Grahame to wear green, a Bruce to kill a spider, or a St. Clair

to cross the Ord on a Monday.



It was on this ominous spot that Lucy Ashton first drew breath

after her long and almost deadly swoon.  Beautiful and pale as

the fabulous Naiad in the last agony of separation from her

lover, she was seated so as to rest with her back against a part

of the ruined wall, while her mantle, dripping with the water

which her protector had used profusely to recall her senses,

clung to her slender and beautifully proportioned form.



The firts moment of recollection brought to her mind the danger

which had overpowered her senses; the next called to remembrance

that of her father.  She looked around; he was nowhere to be

seen.  "My father, my father!" was all that she could ejaculate.



"Sir William is safe," answered the voice of a stranger--

"perfectly safe, adn will be with you instantly."



"Are you sure of that?" exclaimed Lucy.  "The bull was close by

us.  Do not stop me: I must go to seek my father!"



And she rose with that purpose; but her strength was so much

exhausted that, far from possessing the power to execute her

purpose, she must have fallen against the stone on which she had

leant, probably not without sustaining serious injury.



The stranger was so near to her that, without actually suffering

her to fall, he could not avoid catching her in his arms, which,

however, he did with a momentary reluctance, very unusual when

youth interposes to prevent beauty from danger.  It seemed as if

her weight, slight as it was, proved too heavy for her young and

athletic assistant, for, without feeling the temptation of

detaining her in his arms even for a single

instant, he again placed her on the stone from which she had

risen, and retreating a few steps, repeated hastily "Sir William

Ashton is perfectly safe and will be here instantly.  Do not make

yourself anxious on his account: Fate has singularly preserved

him.  You, madam, are exhausted, and must not think of rising

until you have some assistance more suitable than mine."



Lucy, whose senses were by this time more effectually collected,

was naturally led to look at the stranger with

attention.  There was nothing in his appearance which should have

rendered him unwilling to offer his arm to a young lady who

required support, or which could have induced her to refuse his

assistance; and she could not help thinking, even in that moment,

that he seemed cold and reluctant to offer it.  A shooting-dress

of dark cloth intimated the rank of the wearer, though concealed

in part by a large and loose cloak of a dark brown colour.  A

montero cap and a black feather drooped over the wearer's brow,

and partly concealed his features, which, so far as seen, were

dark, regular, adn full of majestic, though somewhat sullen,

expression.  Some secret sorrow, or the brooding spirit of some

moody passion, had quenched the light and ingenuous vivacity of

youth in a countenance singularly fitted to display both, and it

was not easy to gaze on the stranger without a secret impression

either of pity or awe, or at least of doubt and curiosity allied

to both.



The impression which we have necessarily been long in

describing, Lucy felt in the glance of a moment, and had no

sooner encountered the keen black eyes of the stranger than her

own were bent on the ground with a mixture of bashful

embarrassment and fear.  Yet there was a necessity to speak, or

at last she thought so, and in a fluttered accent she began to

mention her wonderful escape, in which she was sure that the

stranger must, under Heaven, have been her father's protector

and her own.



He seemed to shrink from her expressions of gratitude, while he

replied abruptly, "I leave you, madam," the deep melody of his

voice rendered powerful, but not harsh, by something like a

severity of tone--"I leave you to the protection of those to whom

it is possible you may have this day been a guardian angel."



Lucy was surprised at the ambiguity of his language, and, with a

feeling of artless and unaffected gratitude, began to deprecate

the idea of having intended to give her deliverer any offence, as

if such a thing had been possible.  "I have been unfortunate,"

she said, "in endeavouring to express my thanks--I am sure it

must be so, though I cannot recollect what I said; but would you

but stay till my father--till the Lord Keeper comes; would you

only permit him to pay you his thanks, and to inquire your name?"



"My name is unnecessary," answered the stranger; "your father--I

would rather say Sir William Ashton--will learn it soon enough,

for all the pleasure it is likely to afford him."



"You mistake him," said Lucy, earnestly; "he will be

grateful for my sake and for his own.  You do not know my father,

or you are deceiving me with a story of his safety, when he has

already fallen a victim to the fury of that animal."



When she had caught this idea, she started from the ground and

endeavoured to press towards the avenue in which the accident

had taken place, while the stranger, though he seemed to

hesitate between the desire to assist and the wish to leave her,

was obliged, in common humanity, to oppose her both by entreaty

and action.



"On the word of a gentleman, madam, I tell you the truth; your

father is in perfect safety; you will expose yourself to injury

if you venture back where the herd of wild cattle grazed.  If you

will go"--for, haing once adoped the idea that her father was

still in danger, she pressed forward in spite of him--"if you

WILL go, accept my arm, though I am not perhaps the person who

can with most propriety offer you support."



But, without heeding this intimation, Lucy took him at his word.

"Oh, if you be a man," she said--"if you be a gentleman, assist

me to find my father!  You shall not leave me--you must go with

me; he is dying perhaps while we are talking here!"



Then, without listening to excuse or apology, and holding fast

by the stranger's arm, though unconscious of anything save the

support which it gave,  and without which she could not have

moved, mixed with a vague feeling of preventing his escape from

her, she was urging, and almost dragging, him forward when Sir

William Ashton came up, followed by the female attendant of blind

Alice, and by two woodcutters, whom he had summoned from their

occupation to his assistance.  His joy at seeing his daughter

safe overcame the surprise with which he would at another time

have beheld her hanging as familiarly on the arm of a stranger as

she might have done upon his own.



"Lucy, my dear Lucy, are you safe?--are you well?" were the only

words that broke from him as he embraced her in ecstasy.



"I am well, sir, thank God! and still more that I see you so;

but this gentleman," she said, quitting his arm and shrinking

from him, "what must he think of me?" and her eloquent blood,

flushing over neck and brow, spoke how much she was ashamed of

the freedom with which she had craved, and even compelled, his

assistance.



"This gentleman," said Sir William Ashton, "will, I trust, not

regret the trouble we have given him, when I assure him of the

gratitude of the Lord Keeper for the greatest service which one

man ever rendered to another--for the life of my child--for my

own life, which he has saved by his bravery and presence of

mind.  He will, I am sure, permit us to request----"

"Request nothing of ME, my lord," said the stranger, in a stern

and peremptory tone; "I am the Master of Ravenswood."



There was a dead pause of surprise, not unmixed with less

pleasant feleings.  The Master wrapt himself in his cloak, made a

haughty inclination toward Lucy, muttering a few words of

courtesy, as indistinctly heard as they seemed to be relunctantly

uttered, and, turning from them, was immediately lost in the

thicket.



"The Master of Ravenswood!" said the Lord Keeper, when he had

recovered his momentary astonishment.  "Hasten after him--stop

him--beg him to speak to me for a single moment."



The two foresters accordingly set off in pursuit of the

stranger.  They speedily reappeared, and, in an embarrassed and

awkward manner, said the gentleman would not return.



The Lord Keeper took one of the fellows aside, and

questioned him more closely what the Master of Ravenswood had

said.



"He just said he wadna come back," said the man, with the

caution of a prudent Scotchman, who cared not to be the bearer of

an unpleasant errand.



"He said something more, sir," said the Lord Keeper, "and I

insist on knowing what it was."



"Why, then, my lord," said the man, looking down, "he said----

But it wad be nae pleasure to your lordship to hear it, for I

dare say the Master meant nae ill."



"That's none of your concern, sir; I desire to hear the very

words."



"Weel, then," replied the man, "he said, 'Tell Sir William

Ashton that the next time he and I forgather, he will nto be half

sae blythe of our meeting as of our parting.'"



"Very well, sir," said the Lord Keeper, "I believe he alludes to

a wager we have on our hawks; it is a matter of no consequence."



He turned to his daughter, who was by this time so much

recovered as to be able to walk home.  But the effect, which the

various recollections connected with a scene so terrific made

upon a mind which was susceptible in an extreme degree,  was more

permanent than the injury which her nerves had sustained.

Visions of terror, both in sleep and in waking reveries, recalled

to her the form of the furious animal, and the dreadful bellow

with which he accompanied his career; and it was always the image

of the Master of Ravenswood, with his native nobleness of

countenance and form, that seemed to interpose betwixt her and

assured death.  It is, perhaps, at all times dangerous for a

young person to suffer recollection to dwell repeatedly, and with

too much complacency, on the same individual; but in Lucy's

situation it was almost unavoidable.  She had never happened to

see a young man of mien and features so romantic and so striking

as young Ravenswood; but had she seen an hundred his equals or

his superiors in those particulars, no one else would have been

linked to her heart by the strong

associations of remembered danger and escape, of gratitude,

wonder, and curiosity.  I say curiosity, for it is likely that

the singularly restrained and unaccommodating manners of the

Master of Ravenswood, so much at variance with the natural

expression of his features and grace of his deportment, as they

excited wonder by the contrast, had their effect in riveting her

attention to the recollections.  She knew little of Ravenswood,

or the disputes which had existed betwixt her father and his, and

perhaps could in her gentleness of mind hardly have comprehended

the angry and bitter passions which they had engendered.  But she

knew that he was come of noble stem; was poor, though descended

from the noble and the wealthy; and she felt that she could

sympathise with the feelings of a proud mind, which urged him to

recoil from the proffered gratitude of the new proprietors of his

father's house and domains.  Would he have equally shunned their

acknowledgments and avoided their intimacy, had her father's

request been urged more mildly, less abruptly, and softened with

the grace which women so well know how to throw into their

manner, when they mean to mediate betwixt the headlong passions

of the ruder sex?  This was a perilous question to ask her own

mind--perilous both in the idea and its consequences.



Lucy Ashton, in short, was involved in those mazes of the

imagination which are most dangerous to the young and the

sensitive.  Time, it is true, absence, change of scene and new

faces, might probably have destroyed the illusion in her

instance, as it has done in many others; but her residence

remained solitary, and her mind without those means of

dissipating her pleasing visions.  This solitude was chiefly

owing to the absence of Lady Ashton, who was at this time in

Edinburgh, watching the progress of some state-intrigue; the Lord

Keeper only received society out of policy or ostentation, and

was by nature rather reserved and unsociable; and thus no

cavalier appeared to rival or to obscure the ideal picture of

chivalrous excellence which Lucy had pictured to herself in the

Master of Ravenswood.



While Lucy indulged in these dreams, she made frequent visits to

old blind Alice, hoping it would be easy to lead her to talk on

the subject which at present she had so imprudently admitted to

occupy so large a portion of her thoughts.  But Alice did not in

this particular gratify her wishes and expectations.  She spoke

readily, and with pathetic feeling, concerning the family in

general, but seemed to observe an especial and cautious silence

on the subject of the present representative.  The little she

said of him was not altogether so favourable as Lucy had

anticipated.  She hinted that he was of a stern and unforgiving

character, more ready to resent than to pardon injuries; and Lucy

combined, with great alarm, the hints which she now dropped of

these dangerous qualities with Alice's advice to her father, so

emphatically given, "to beware of Ravenswood."



Btu that very Ravenswood, of whom such unjust suspicions had

been entertained, had, almost immediately after they had been

uttered, confuted them by saving at once her father's life and

her own.  Had he nourished such black revenge as Alice's dark

hints seemed to indicate, no deed of active guilt was necessary

to the full gratification of that evil passion.  He needed but to

have withheld for an instant his indispensable and effective

assistance, and the object of his resentment must have perished,

without any direct aggression on his part, by a death equally

fearful and certain.  She conceived, therefore, that some secret

prejudice, or the suspicions incident to age and misfortune, had

led Alice to form conclusions injurious to the character, and

irreconcilable both with the generous conduct and noble features,

of the Master of Ravenswood.  And in this belief Lucy reposed her

hope, and went on weaving her enchanted web of fairy tissue, as

beautiful and transient as the film of the gossamer when it is

pearled with the morning dew and glimmering to the sun.



Her father, in the mean while, as well as the Master of

Ravenswood, were making reflections, as frequent though more

solid than those of Lucy, upon the singular event which had

taken place.  The Lord Keeper's first task, when he returned

home, was to ascertain by medical advice that his daughter had

sustained no injury from the dangerous and alarming situation in

which she had been placed.  Satisfied on this topic, he proceeded

to revise the memoranda which he had taken down from the mouth of

the person employed to interrupt the funeral service of the late

Lord Ravenswood.   Bred to casuistry, and well accustomed to

practise the ambidexter ingenuity of the bar, it cost him little

trouble to soften the features of the tumult which he had been

at first so anxiuous to exaggerate.  He preached to his

colleagues of the privy council the necessity of using

conciliatory measures with young men, whose blood and temper were

hot, and their experience of life limited.  He did not hesitate

to attribute some censure to the conduct of the officer, as

having been unnecessarily irritating.



These were the contents of his public despatches.  The letters

which he wrote to those private friends into whose management the

matter was likely to fall were of a yet more favourable tenor.

He represented that lenity in this case would be equally politic

and popular, whereas, considering the high respect with which the

rites of interment are regarded in

Scotland, any severity exercised against the Master of Ravenswood

for protecting those of his father from interruption, would be on

all sides most unfavourably construed.  And, finally, assuming

the language of a generous and high-spirited man, he made it his

particular request that this affair should be passed over without

severe notice.  He alluded with delicacy to the predicament in

which he himself stood with young Ravenswood, as having succeeded

in the long train of litigation by which the fortunes of that

noble house had been so much reduced, and confessed it would be

most peculiarly acceptable to his own feelings, could he find in

some sort to counterbalance the disadvantages which he had

occasioned the family, though only in the prosecution of his just

and lawful rights.  He therefore made it his particular and

personal request that the matter should have no farther

consequences, an insinuated a desire that he himself should have

the merit of having put a stop to it by his favourable report and

intercession.  It was particularly remarkable that, contrary to

his uniform practice, he made no special communication to Lady

Ashton  upon the subject of the tumult; and although he mentioned

the alarm which Lucy had received from one of the wild cattle,

yet he gave no detailed account of an incident so interesting and

terrible.



There was much surprise among Sir William Ashton's political

friends and colleagues on receiving letters of a tenor so

unexpected.  On comparing notes together, one smiled, one put up

his eyebrows, a third nodded acquiescence in the general wonder,

and a fourth asked if they were sure these were ALL the letters

the Lord Keeper had written on the subject.  "It runs strangely

in my mind, my lords, that none of these advices contain the root

of the matter."



But no secret letters of a contrary nature had been

received, although the question seemed to imply the possibility

of their existence.



"Well," said an old grey-headed statesman, who had

contrived, by shifting and trimming, to maintain his post at the

steerage through all the changes of course which the vessel had

held for thirty years, "I thought Sir William would hae verified

the auld Scottish saying, 'As soon comes the lamb's skin to

market as the auld tup's'"



"We must please him after his own fashion,"  said another,

"though it be an unlooked0for one."



"A wilful man maun hae his way," answered the old

counsellor.



"The Keeper will rue this before year and day are out," said a

third; "the Master of Ravenswood is the lad to wind him a pirn."



"Why, what would you do, my lords, with the poor young fellow?"

said a noble Marquis present.  "The Lord Keeper has got all his

estates; he has not a cross to bless himself with."



On which the ancient Lord Turntippet replied



"If he hasna gear to fine,

He ha shins to pine.



And that was our way before the Revolution: Lucitur cum persona,

qui luere non potest cum crumena.  Hegh, my lords, that's gude

law Latin."



"I can see no motive," replied the Marquis, "that any noble lord

can have for urging this matter farther; let the Lord Keeper

have the power to deal in it as he pleases."



"Agree, agree--remit to the Lord Keeper, with any other person

for fashion's sake--Lord Hirplehooly, who is bed-ridden--one to

be a quorum.  Make your entry in the minutes, Mr. Clerk.  And

now, my lords, there is that young scattergood the Laird of

Bucklaw's fine to be disposed upon.  I suppose it goes to my Lord

Treasurer?"



"Shame be in my meal-poke, then," exclaimed the Lord

Turntippet, "and your hand aye in the nook of it!  I had set that

down for a bye-bit between meals for mysell."



"To use one of your favourite saws, my lord," replied the

Marquis, "you are like the miller's dog, that licks his lips

before the bag is untied: the man is not fined yet."



"But that costs but twa skarts of a pen," said Lord

Turntippet; "and surely there is nae noble lord that will presume

to say that I, wha hae complied wi' a' compliances, taen all

manner of tests, adjured all that was to be abjured, and sworn a'

that was to be sworn, for these thirty years bye-past, sticking

fast by my duty to the state through good report and bad report,

shouldna hae something now and then to synd my mouth wi' after

sic drouthy wark?  Eh?"



"It would be very unreasonable indeed, my lord," replied the

Marquis, "had we either thought that your lordship's drought was

quenchable, or observed anything stick in your throat that

required washing down."



And so we close the scene on the privy council of that period.

