






CHAPTER VII.



Now, Billy Berwick, keep good heart,

And of they talking let me be;

But if thou art a man, as I am sure thou art,

Come over the dike and fight with me.



Old Ballad.





THE Master of Ravenswood had mounted the ambling hackney which

he before rode, on finding the accident which had happened to his

led horse, and, for the animal's ease, was proceeding at a slow

pace from the Tod's Den towards his old tower of Wolf's Crag,

when he heard the galloping of a horse behind him, and, looking

back, perceived that he was pursued by young Bucklaw, who had

been delayed a few minutes in the pursuit by the irresistable

temptation of giving the hostler at the Tod's Den some recipe for

treating the lame horse.  This brief delay he had made up by hard

galloping, and now overtook ths Master where the road traversed a

waste moor.  "Halt, sir," cried Bucklaw; "I am no political

agent--no Captain Craigengelt, whose life is too important to be

hazarded in defence of his honour.  I am Frank Hayston of

Bucklaw, and no man injures me by word, deed, sign, or look, but

he must render me an account of it."



"This is all very well, Mr. Hayston of Bucklaw," replied the

Master of Ravenswood, in a tone the most calm and indifferent;

"but I have no quarrel with you, and desire to have none.  Our

roads homeward, as well as our roads through life, lie in

different directions; there is no occasion for us crossing each

other."



"Is there not?" said Bucklaw, impetuously.  "By Heaven! but I

say that there is, though: you called us intriguing

adventurers."



"Be correct in your recollection, Mr. Hayston; it was to your

companion only I applied that epithet, and you know him to be no

better."



"And what then?  He was my companion for the time, and no man

shall insult my companion, right or wrong, while he is in my

company."



"Then, Mr. Hayston," replied Ravenswood, with the same

composure, "you should choose your society better, or you are

like to have much work in your capacity of their champion.  Go

home, sir; sleep, and have more reason in your wrath to-morrow."



"Not so, Master, you have mistaken your man; high airs and wise

saws shall not carry it off thus.  Besides, you termed me bully,

and you shall retract the word before we part."



"Faith, scarcely," said Ravenswood, "unless you show me better

reason for thinking myself mistaken than you are now producing."



"Then, Master," said Bucklaw, "though I should be sorry to offer

it to a man of your quality, if you will not justify your

incivility, or retract it, or name a place of meeting, you must

here undergo the hard word and the hard blow."



"Neither will be necessary," said Ravenswood; "I am

satisfied with what I have done to avoid an affair with you.   If

you are serious, this place will serve as well as another."



"Dismount then, and draw," said Bucklaw, setting him an example.

"I always thought and said you were a pretty man; I should be

sorry to report you otherwise."



"You shall have no reason, sir," said Ravenswood, alighting, and

putting himself into a posture of defence.



Their swords crossed, and the combat commenced with great spirit

on the part of Bucklaw, who was well accustomed to affairs of the

kind, and distinguished by address and dexterity at his weapon.

In the present case, however, he did not use his skill to

advantage; for, having lost temper at the cool and

contemptuous manner in which the Master of Ravenswood had long

refused, and at length granted, him satisfaction, and urged by

his impatience, he adopted the part of an assailant with

inconsiderate eagerness.  The Master, with equal skill, and much

greater composure, remained chiefly on the defensive, and even

declined to avail himself of one or two advantages afforded him

by the eagerness of his adversary.  At length, in a desperate

lunge, which he followed with an attempt to close, Bucklaw's foot

slipped, and he fell on the short grassy turf on which they were

fighting.  "Take your life, sir," said the Master of Ravenswood,

"and mend it if you can."



"It would be but a cobbled piece of work, I fear," said Bucklaw,

rising slowly and gathering up his sword, much less disconcerted

with the issue of the combat than could have been expected from

the impetuosity of his temper.  "I thank you for my life,

Master," he pursued.  "There is my hand; I bear no ill-will to

you, either for my bad luck or your better swordsmanship."



The Master looked steadily at him for an instant, then extended

his hand to him.  "Bucklaw," he said, "you are a

generous fellow, and I have done you wrong.  I heartily ask your

pardon for the expression which offended you; it was hastily and

incautiously uttered, and I am convinced it is totally

misapplied."



"Are you indeed, Master?" said Bucklaw, his face resuming at

once its natural expression of light-hearted carelessness and

audacity; "that is more than I expected of you; for, Master, men

say you are not ready to retract your opinion and your language."



"Not when I have well considered them," said the Master.



"Then you are a little wiser than I am, for I always give my

friend satisfaction first, and explanation afterwards.  If one of

us falls, all accounts are settled; if not, men are never so

ready for peace as after war.  But what does that bawling brat of

a boy want?" said Bucklaw.  "I wish to Heaven he had come a few

minutes sooner! and yet it must have been ended some time, and

perhaps this way is as well as any other."



As he spoke, the boy he mentioned came up, cudgelling an ass, on

which he was mounted, to the top of its speed, and sending, like

one of Ossian's heroes, his voice before him:  "Gentlemen--

gentlemen, save yourselves! for the gudewife bade us tell ye

there were folk in her house had taen Captain

Craigengelt, and were seeking for Bucklaw, and that ye behoved to

ride for it."

"By my faith, and that's very true, my man" said Bucklaw; "and

there's a silver sixpence for your news, and I would give any man

twice as much would tell me which way I should ride."



"That will I, Bucklaw," said Ravenswood; "ride home to Wolf's

Crag with me.  There are places in the old tower where you might

lie hid, were a thousand men to seek you."



"But that will bring you into trouble yourself, Master; and

unless you be in the Jacobite scrape already, it is quite

needless for me to drag you in."



"Not a whit; I have nothing to fear."



"Then I will ride with you blythely, for, to say the truth, I do

not know the rendezvous that Craigie was to guide us to this

night; and I am sure that, if he is taken, he will tell all the

truth of me, and twenty lies of you, in order to save himself

from the withie."



They mounted and rode off in company accordingly, striking off

the ordinary road, and holding their way by wild moorish

unfrequented paths, with which the gentlemen were well

acquainted from the exercise of the chase, but through which

others would have had much difficulty in tracing their course.

They rode for some time in silence, making such haste as the

condition of Ravenswood's horse permitted, until night having

gradually closed around them, they discontinued their speed, both

from the difficulty of discovering their path, and from the hope

that they were beyond the reach of pursuit or observation.



"And now that we have drawn bridle a bit," said Bucklaw, "I

would fain ask you a question, Master."



"Ask and welcome," said Ravenswood, "but forgive not

answering it, unless I think proper."



"Well, it is simply this," answered his late antagonist "What,

in the name of old Sathan, could make you, who stand so highly on

your reputation, think for a moment of drawing up with such a

rogue as Craigengelt, and such a scapegrace as folk call

Bucklaw?"



"Simply, because I was desperate, and sought desperate

associates."



"And what made you break off from us at the nearest?" again

demanded Bucklaw.



"Because I had changed my mind," said the Master, "and renounced

my enterprise, at least for the present.  And now that I have

answered your questions fairly and frankly, tell me what makes

you associate with Craigengelt, so much beneath you both in

birth and in spirit?"



"In plain terms," answered Bucklaw, "because I am a fool, who

have gambled away my land in thse times.  My grand-aunt, Lady

Girnington, has taen a new tack of life, I think, and I could

only hope to get something by a change of government.  Craigie

was a sort of gambling acquaintance; he saw my condition, and, as

the devil is always at one's elbow, told me fifty lies about his

credentials from Versailles, and his interest at Saint Germains,

promised me a captain's commission at Paris, and I have been ass

enough to put my thumb under his belt.  I dare say, by this time,

he has told a dozen pretty stories of me to the government.  And

this is what I have got by wine, women, and dice, cocks, dogs,

and horses."



"Yes, Bucklaw," said the Master, "you have indeed nourished in

your bosom the snakes that are now stinging you."



"That's home as well as true, Master," replied his

companion; "but, by your leave, you have nursed in your bosom one

great goodly snake that has swallowed all the rest, and is as

sure to devour you as my half-dozen are to make a meal on all

that's left of Bucklaw, which is but what lies between bonnet and

boot-heel."



"I must not," answered the Master of Ravenswood, "challenge the

freedom of speech in which I have set example.  What, to speak

without a metaphor, do you call this monstrous passion which you

charge me with fostering?"



"Revenge, my good sir--revenge; which, if it be as gentle

manlike a sin as wine and wassail, with their et coeteras, is

equally unchristian, and not so bloodless.  It is better breaking

a park-pale to watch a doe or damsel than to shoot an old man."



"I deny the purpose," said the Master of Ravenswood.  "On my

soul, I had no such intention; I meant but to confront the

oppressor ere I left my native land, and upbraid him with his

tyranny and its consequences.  I would have stated my wrongs so

that they would have shaken his soul within him."



"Yes," answered Bucklaw, "and he would have collared you, and

cried 'help,' and then you would have shaken the soul OUT of him,

I suppose.  Your very look and manner would have frightened the

old man to death."



"Consider the provocation," answered Ravenswood--"consider the

ruin and death procured and caused by his hard-hearted cruelty--

an ancient house destroyed, an affectionate father murdered!

Why, in our old Scottish days, he that sat quiet under such

wrongs would have been held neither fit to back a friend nor face

a foe."



"Well, Master, I am glad to see that the devil deals as

cunningly with other folk as he deals with me; for whenever I am

about to commit any folly, he persuades me it is the most

necessary, gallant, gentlemanlike thing on earth, and I am up to

saddlegirths in the bog before I see that the ground is soft.

And you, Master, might have turned out a murd----a homicide, just

out of pure respect for your father's memory."



"There is more sense in your language, Bucklaw," replied the

Master, "than might have been expected from your conduct.  It is

too true, our vices steal upon us in forms outwardly as fair as

those of the demons whom the superstitious represent  as

intriguing with the human race, and are not discovered in their

native hideousness until we have clasped them in our arms."



"But we may throw them from us, though," said Bucklaw, "and that

is what I shall think of doing one of these days--that is, when

old Lady Girnington dies."



"Did you ever hear the expression of the English divine?" said

Ravenswood--"'Hell is paved with good intentions,'--as much as to

say, they are more often formed than executed."



"Well," replied Bucklaw, "but I will begin this blessed night,

and have determined not to drink above one quart of wine, unless

your claret be of extraordinary quality."



"You will find little to tempt you at Wolf's Crag," said the

Master.  "I know not that I can promise you more than the shelter

of my roof; all, and more than all, our stock of wine and

provisions was exhausted at the late occasion."



"Long may it be ere provision is needed for the like

purpose," answered Bucklaw; "but you should not drink up the last

flask at a dirge; there is ill luck in that."



"There is ill luck, I think, in whatever belongs to me," said

Ravenswood.  "But yonder is Wolf's Crag, and whatever it still

contains is at your service."



The roar of the sea had long announced their approach to the

cliffs, on the summit of which, like the nest of some sea-eagle,

the founder of the fortalice had perched his eyrie.  The pale

moon, which had hitherto been contending with flitting clouds,

now shone out, and gave them a view of the solitary and naked

tower, situated on a projecting cliff that beetled on the German

Ocean.  On three sides the rock was precipitous; on the fourth,

which was that towards the land, it had been originally fenced by

an artificial ditch and drawbridge, but the latter was broken

down and ruinous, and the former had been in part filled up, so

as to allow pasage for a horseman into the narrow courtyard,

encircled on two sides with low offices and stables, partly

ruinous, and closed on the landward front by a low embattled

wall, while the remaining side of the quadrangle was occupied by

the tower itself, which, tall and narrow, and built of a greyish

stone, stood glimmering in the moonlight, like the sheeted

spectre of some huge giant.  A wilder or more disconsolate

dwelling it was perhaps difficult to conceive.  The sombrous and

heavy sound of the billows, successively dashing against the

rocky beach at a profound distance beneath, was to the ear what

the landscape was to the eye--a symbol of unvaried and monotonous

melancholy, not unmingled with horror.



Although the night was not far advanced, there was no sign of

living inhabitant about this forlorn abode, excepting that one,

and only one, of the narrow and stanchelled windows which

appeared at irregular heights and distances in the walls of the

building showed a small glimmer of light.



"There," said Ravenswood, "sits the only male domestic that

remains to the house of Ravenswood; and it is well that he does

remain there, since otherwise we had little hope to find either

light or fire.  But follow me cautiously; the road is narrow, and

admits only one horse in front."



In effect, the path led along a kind of isthmus, at the

peninsular extremity of which the tower was situated, with that

exclusive attention to strength and security, in preference to

every circumstances of convenience, which dictated to the

Scottish barons the choice of their situations, as well as their

style of building.



By adopting the cautious mode of approach recommended by the

proprietor of this wild hold, they entered the courtyard in

safety.  But it was long ere the efforts of Ravenswood, though

loudly exerted by knocking at the low-browed entrance, and

repeated shouts to Caleb to open the gate and admit them,

received any answer.



"The old man must be departed," he began to say, "or fallen into

some fit; for the noise I have made would have waked the seven

sleepers."



At length a timid and hesitating voice replied: "Master--Master

of Ravenswood, is it you?"



"Yes, it is I, Caleb; open the door quickly."



"But it is you in very blood and body?  For I would sooner face

fifty deevils as my master's ghaist, or even his wraith;

wherefore, aroint ye, if ye were ten times my master, unless ye

come in bodily shape, lith and limb."

"It is I, you old fool," answered Ravenswood, "in bodily shape

and alive, save that I am half dead with cold."



The light at the upper window disappeared, and glancing from

loophole to loophole in slow succession, gave intimation that the

bearer was in the act of descending, with great deliberation, a

winding staircase occupying one of the turrets which graced the

angles of the old tower.  The tardiness of his descent extracted

some exclamations of impatience from Ravenswood, and several

oaths from his less patient and more mecurial companion.  Caleb

again paused ere he unbolted the door, and once more asked if

they were men of mould that demanded entrance at this time of

night.



"Were I near you, you old fool," said Bucklaw, "I would give you

sufficient proofs of MY bodily condition."



"Open the gate, Caleb," said his master, in a more soothing

tone, partly from his regard to the ancient and faithful

seneschal, partly perhaps because he thought that angry words

would be thrown away, so long as Caleb had a stout iron-clenched

oaken door betwixt his person and the speakers.



At length Caleb, with a trembling hand, undid the bars, opened

the heavy door, and stood before them, exhibiting his thin grey

hairs, bald forehead, and sharp high features, illuminated by a

quivering lamp which he held in one hand, while he shaded and

protected its flame with the other.  The timorous, courteous

glance which he threw around him, the effect of the partial light

upon his white hair and illumined features, might have made a

good painting; but our travellers were too impatient for security

against the rising storm to permit them to indulge themselves in

studying the picturesque.  "Is it you, my dear master?--is it you

yourself, indeed?" exclaimed the old domestic.  "I am wae ye suld

hae stude waiting at your ain gate; but wha wad hae thought o'

seeing ye sae sune, and a strange gentleman with a----  (Here he

exclaimed apart, as it were, and to some inmate of the tower, in

a voice not meant to be heard by those in the court)  Mysie--

Mysie, woman! stir for dear life, and get the fire mended; take

the auld three-legged stool, or ony thing that's readiest that

will make a lowe.  I doubt we are but puirly provided, no

expecting ye this some months, when doubtless ye was hae been

received conform till your rank, as gude right is; but natheless-

---"



"Natheless, Caleb," said the Master, "we must have our horses

put up, and ourselves too, the best way we can.  I hope you are

not sorry to see me sooner than you expected?"



"Sorry, my lord! I am sure ye sall aye be my lord wi' honest

folk, as your noble ancestors hae been these three hundred years,

and never asked a Whig's leave.  Sorry to see the Lord of

Ravenswood at ane o' his ain castles!  (Then again apart to his

unseen associate behind the screen) Mysie, kill the brood-hen

without thinking twice on it; let them care that come ahint.  No

to say it's our best dwelling," he added, turning to Bucklaw;

"but just a strength for the Lord of Ravenswood to flee until--

that is, no to FLEE, but to retreat until in troublous times,

like the present, when it was ill convenient for him to live

farther in the country in ony of his better and mair principal

manors; but, for its antiquity, maist folk think that the outside

of Wolf's Crag is worthy of a large perusal."



"And you are determined we shall have time to make it," said

Ravenswood, somewhat amused with the shifts the old man used to

detain them without doors until his confederate Mysie had made

her preparations within.



"Oh, never mind the outside of the house, my good friend," said

Bucklaw; "let's see the inside, and let our horses see the

stable, that's all."

"Oh yes, sir--ay, sir--unquestionably, sir--my lord and ony of

his honourable companions----"



"But our horses, my friend--our horses; they will be dead-

founded by standing here in the cold after riding hard, and mine

is too good to be spoiled; therefore, once more, our horses!"

exclaimed Bucklaw.



"True--ay--your horses--yes--I will call the grooms"; and

sturdily did Caleb roar till the old tower rang again: "John--

William--Saunders!  The lads are gane out, or sleeping," he

observed, after pausing for an answer, which he knew that he had

no human chance of receiving.  "A' gaes wrang when the Master's

out-bye; but I'll take care o' your cattle mysell."



"I think you had better," said Ravenswood, "otherwise I see

little chance of their being attended to at all."



"Whisht, my lord--whisht, for God's sake," said Caleb, in an

imploring tone, and apart to his master; "if ye dinna regard your

ain credit, think on mine; we'll hae hard eneugh wark to make a

decent night o't, wi' a' the lees I can tell."



"Well, well, never mind," said his master; "go to the stable.

There is hay and corn, I trust?"



"Ou ay, plenty of hay and corn"; this was uttered boldly and

aloud, and, in a lower tone, "there was some half fous o' aits,

and soem taits o' meadow-hay, left after the burial."



"Very well," said Ravenswood, taking the lamp from his

domestic's unwilling hand, "I will show the stranger upstairs

myself."



"I canna think o' that, my lord; if ye wad but have five

minutes, or ten minutes, or, at maist, a quarter of an hour's

patience, and look at the fine moonlight prospect of the Bass and

North Berwick Law till I sort the horses, I would marshal ye up,

as reason is ye suld be marshalled, your lordship and your

honourable visitor.  And I hae lockit up the siller candlesticks,

and the lamp is not fit----"



"It will do very well in the mean time," said Ravenswood, "and

you will have no difficulty for want of light in the stable,

for, if I recollect, half the roof is off."



"Very true, my lord," replied the trusty adherent, and with

ready wit instantly added, "and the lazy sclater loons have never

come to put it on a' this while, your lordship."



"If I were disposed to jest at the calamities of my house," said

Ravenswood, as he led the way upstairs, "poor old Caleb would

furnish me with ample means.  His passion consists in

representing things about our miserable menage, not as they are,

but as, in his opinion, they ought to be; and, to say the truth,

I have been often diverted with the poor wretch's expedients to

supply what he though was essetial for the credit of the family,

and his still more generous apologies for the want of those

articles for which his ingenuity could discover no substitute.

But though the tower is none of the largest, I shall have some

trouble without him to find the apartment in which there is a

fire."



As he spoke thus, he opened the door of the hall.  "Here, at

least," he said, "there is neither hearth nor harbour."



It was indeed a scene of desolation.  A large vaulted room, the

beams fo which, combined like those of Westminster Hall, were

rudely carved at the extremities, remained nearly in the

situation in which it had been left after the entertainment at at

Allan Lord Ravenswood's funeral.  Overturned pitchers, and black-

jacks, and pewter stoups, and flagons still cumbered the large

oaken table; glasses, those more perishable implements of

conviviality, many of which had been voluntarily sacrificed by

the guests in their enthusiastic pledges to favourite toasts,

strewed the stone floor with their fragments.  As for the

articles of plate, lent for the purpose by friends and kinsfolk,

those had been carefully withdrawn so soon as the ostentatious

display of festivity, equally unnecessary and strangely timed,

had been made and ended.  Nothing, in short, remained that

indicated wealth; all the signs were those of recent

wastefulness and present desolation.  The black cloth hangings,

which, on the late mournful occasion, replaced the tattered moth-

eaten tapestries, had been partly pulled down, and, dangling

from the wall in irregular festoons, disclosed the rough

stonework of the building, unsmoothed either by plaster or the

chisel.  The seats thrown down, or left in disorder, intimated

the careless confusion which had concluded the mournful revel.

"This room," said Ravenswood, holding up the lamp--"this room,

Mr. Hayston, was riotous when it should have been sad; it is a

just retribution that it should now be sad when it ought to be

cheerful."



They left this disconsolate apartment, and went upstairs, where,

after opening one or two doors in vain, Ravenswood led the way

into a little matted ante-room, in which, to their great joy,

they found a tolerably good fire, which Mysie, by some such

expedient as Caleb had suggested, had suppied with a reasonable

quantity of fuel.  Glad at the heart to see more of comfort than

the castle had yet seemed to offer, Bucklaw rubbed his hands

heartily over the fire, and now listened with more complacency to

the apologies which the Master of Ravenswood offered.  "Comfort,"

he said, "I cannot provide for you, for I have it not for myself;

it is long since these walls have known it, if, indeed, they were

ever acquainted with it.  Shelter and safety, I think, I can

promise you."



"Excellent matters, Master," replied Bucklaw, "and, with a

mouthful of food and wine, positively all I can require tonight."



"I fear," said the Master, "your supper will be a poor one; I

hear the matter in discussion betwixt Caleb and Mysie.  Poor

Balderstone is something deaf, amongst his other

accomplishments, so that much of what he means should be spoken

aside is overheard by the whole audience, and especially by those

from whom he is most anxious to conceal his private manoeuvres.

Hark!"



They listened, and heard the old domestic's voice in

conversation with Mysie to the following effect:



"Just mak the best o't--make the besto't, woman; it's easy to

put a fair face on ony thing."



"But the auld brood-hen?  She'll be as teugh as bow-strings and

bend-leather!"



"Say ye made a mistake--say ye made a mistake, Mysie," replied

the faithful seneschal, in a soothing and undertoned voice; "tak

it a' on yoursell; never let the credit o' the house suffer."



"But the brood-hen," remonstrated Mysie--"ou, she's sitting some

gate aneath the dais in the hall, and I am feared to gae in in

the dark for the dogle; and if I didna see the bogle, I could as

ill see the hen, for it's pit-mirk, and there's no another light

in the house, save that very blessed lamp whilk the Master has in

his ain hand.  And if I had the hen, she's to pu', and to draw,

and to dress; how can I do that, and them sitting by the only

fire we have?"



"Weel, weel, Mysie," said the butler, "bide ye there a wee, and

I'll try to get the lamp wiled away frae them."



Accordingly, Caleb Balderstone entered the apartment, little

aware that so much of his by-play had been audible there.  "Well,

Caleb, my old friend, is there any chance of supper?" said the

Master of Ravenswood.



"CHANCE of supper, your lordship?" said Caleb, with an

emphasis of strong scorn at the implied doubt.  "How should there

be ony question of that, and us in your lordship's house?

Chance of supper, indeed!  But ye'll no be for butcher-meat?

There's walth o' fat poultry, ready either for spit or brander.

The fat capon, Mysie!" he added, calling out as boldly as if such

a thing had been in existence.



"Quite unnecessary," said Bucklaw, who deemed himself bound in

courtesy to relieve some part of the anxious butler's

perplexity, "if you have anything cold, or a morsel of bread."



"The best of bannocks!" exclaimed Caleb, much relieve; "and, for

cauld meat, a' that we hae is cauld eneugh,--how-beit, maist of

the cauld meat and pastry was gien to the poor folk after the

ceremony of interment, as gude reason was; nevertheless----"



"Come, Caleb," said the Master of Ravenswood, "I must cut this

matter short.  This is the young Laird of Bucklaw; he is under

hiding, and therefore, you know----"



"He'll be nae nicer than your lordship's honour, I'se warrant,"

answered Caleb, cheerfully, with a nod of intelligence; "I am

sorry that the gentleman is under distress, but I am blythe that

he canna say muckle agane our housekeeping, for I believe his ain

pinches may matach ours; no that we are pinched, thank God," he

added, retracting the admission which he had made in his first

burst of joy, "but nae doubt we are waur aff than we hae been, or

suld be.  And for eating--what signifies telling a lee? there's

just the hinder end of the mutton-ham that has been but three

times on the table, and the nearer the bane the sweeter, as your

honours weel ken; and--there's the heel of the ewe-milk kebbuck,

wi' a bit of nice butter, and--and--that's a' that's to trust

to."  And with great alacrity he produced his slender stock of

provisions, and placed them with much formality  upon a small

round table betwixt the two gentlemen, who were not deterred

either by the homely quality or limited quantity of the repast

from doing it full justice.  Caleb in the mean while waited on

them with grave officiousness, as if anxious to make up, by his

own respectful assiduity, for the want of all other attendance.



But, alas! how little on such occasions can form, however

anxiously and scrupulously observed, supply the lack of

substantial fare!  Bucklaw, who had eagerly eaten a considerable

portion of the thrice-sacked mutton-ham, now began to demand ale.



"I wadna just presume to recommend our ale," said Caleb; "the

maut was ill made, and there was awfu' thunner last week; but

siccan water as the Tower well has ye'll seldome see,

Bucklaw, and that I'se engage for."



"But if your ale is bad, you can let us have some wine," said

Bucklaw, making a grimace at the mention of the pure element

which Caleb so earnestly recommended.



"Wine!" answered Caleb, undauntedly, "eneugh of wine!  It was

but twa days syne--wae's me for the cause--there was as much

wine drunk in this house as would have floated a pinnace.

There never was lack of wine at Wolf's Crag."



"Do fetch us some then," said the master, "instead of talking

about it."  And Caleb boldly departed.



Every expended butt in the old cellar did he set a-tilt, and

shake with the desperate expectation of collecting enough of the

grounds of claret to fill the large pewter measure which he

carred in his hand.  Alas! each had been too devoutly drained;

and, with all the squeezing and manoeuvring which his craft as a

butler suggested, he could only collect about half a quart that

seemed presentable.  Still, however, Caleb was too good a general

to renounce the field without a strategem to cover his retreat. 

He undauntedly threw down an empty flagon, as if he had stumbled

at the entrance of the apartment, called upon Mysie to wipe up

the wine that had never been spilt, and placing the other vessel

on the table, hoped there was still enough left for their

honours.  There was indeed; for even Bucklaw, a sworn friend to

the grape, found no encouragement to renew his first attack upon

the vintage of Wolf's Crag, but contented himself, however

reluctantly, with a draught of fair water.  Arrangements were now

made for his repose; and as the secret chamber was assigned for

this purpose, it furnished Caleb with a first-rate and most

plausible apology for all deficiencies of furniture, bedding,

etc.



"For wha," said he, "would have thought of the secret chaumer

being needed?  It has not been used since the time of the Gowrie

Conspiracy, and I durst never let a woman ken of the entrance to

it, or your honour will allow that it wad not hae been a secret

chaumer lang."

