






CHAPTER XXX.



What doth ensue

But moody and dull melancholy,

Kinsman to grim and comfortless despair,

And at her heel, a huge infectious troop

Of pale distemperatures, and foes to life?



Comedy of Errors.





AS some vindication of the ease with which Bucklaw (who

otherwise, as he termed himself, was really a very good-humoured

fellow) resigned his judgment to the management of Lady Ashton,

while paying his addresses to her daughter, the reader must call

to mind the strict domestic discipline which, at this period, was

exercised over the females of a Scottish family.



The manners of the country in this, as in many other

respects, coincided with those of France before the Revolution.

Young women of the higher rank seldom mingled in society until

after marriage, and, both in law and fact, were held to be under

the strict tutelage of their parents, who were too apt to enforce

the views for their settlement in life without paying any regard

to the inclination of the parties chiefly interested.  On such

occasions, the suitor expected little more from his bride than a

silent acquiescence in the will of her parents; and as few

opportunities of acquaintance, far less of intimacy, occurred, he

made his choice by the outside, as the lovers in the Merchant of

Venice select the casket, contented to trust to chance the issue

of the lottery in which he had hazarded a venture.



It was not therefore surprising, such being the general manners

of the age, that Mr. Hayston of Bucklaw, whom dissipated habits

had detached in some degree from the best society, should not

attend particularly to those feelings in his elected bride to

which many men of more sentiment, experience, and reflection

would, in all probability, have been equally indifferent.  He

knew what all accounted the principal point, that her parents and

friends, namely, were decidedly in his favour, and that there

existed most powerful reasons for their predilection.



In truth, the conduct of the Marquis of A----, since

Ravenswood's departure, had been such as almost to bar the

possibility of his kinsman's union with Lucy Ashton.  The Marquis

was Ravenswood's sincere but misjudging friend; or rather, like

many friends and patrons, he consulted what he considered to be

his relation's true interest, although he knew that in doing so

he run counter to his inclinations.



The Marquis drove on, therefore, with the plentitude of

ministerial authority, an appeal to the British House of Peers

against those judgments of the courts of law by which Sir William

became possessed of Ravenswood's hereditary property.  As this

measure, enforced with all the authority of power, was new in

Scottish judicial proceedings, though now so frequently resorted

to, it was exclaimed against by the lawyers on the opposite side

of politics, as an interference with the civil judicature of the

country, equally new, arbitrary, and tyrannical.  And if it thus

affected even strangers connected with them only by political

party, it may be guessed what the Ashton family themselves said

and thought under so gross a dispensation.  Sir William, still

more worldly-minded than he was timid, was reduced to despair by

the loss by which he was threatened.  His son's haughtier spirit

was exalted into rage at the idea of being deprived of his

expected patrimony.  But to Lady Ashton's yet more vindictive

temper the conduct of Ravenswood, or rather of his patron,

appeared to be an offence challenging the deepest and most

immortal revenge.  Even the quiet and confiding temper of Lucy

herself, swayed by the opinions expressed by all around her,

could not but consider the conduct of Ravenswood as precipitate,

and even unkind.  "It was my father," she repeated with a sigh,

"who welcomed him to this place, and encouraged, or at least

allowed, the intimacy between us.  Should he not have remembered

this, and requited it with at least some moderate degree of

procrastination in the assertion of his own alleged rights?  I

would have forfeited for him double the value of these lands,

which he pursues with an ardour that shows he has forgotten how

much I am implicated in the matter."



Lucy, however, could only murmur these things to herself,

unwilling to increase the prejudices against her lover

entertained by all around her, who exclaimed against the steps

pursued on his account as illegal, vexatious, and tyrannical,

resembling the worst measures in the worst times of the worst

Stuarts, and a degradation of Scotland, the decisions of whose

learned judges were thus subjected to the review of a court

composed indeed of men of the highest rank, and who were not

trained to the study of any municipal law, and might be supposed

specially to hold in contempt that of Scotland.  As a natural

consequence of the alleged injustice meditated towards her

father, every means was restored to, and every argument urged to

induce Miss Ashton to break off her engagement with Ravenswood,

as being scandalous, shameful, and sinful, formed with the mortal

enemy of her family, and calculated to add bitterness to the

distress of her parents.



Lucy's spirit, however, was high, and, although unaided and

alone, she could have borne much: she could have endured the

repinings of her father; his murmurs against what he called the

tyrannical usage of the ruling party; his ceaseless charges of

ingratitude against Ravenswood; his endless lectures on the

various means by which contracts may be voided an annulled; his

quotations from the civil, municipal, and the canon law; and his

prelections upon the patria potestas.



She might have borne also in patience, or repelled with scorn,

the bitter taunts and occasional violence of her brother,

Colonel Douglas Ashton, and the impertinent and intrusive

interference of other friends and relations.  But it was beyond

her power effectually to withstand or elude the constant and

unceasing persecution of Lady Ashton, who, laying every other

wish aside, had bent the whol efforts of her powerful mind to

break her daughter's contract with Ravenswood, and to place a

perpetual bar between the lovers, by effecting Lucy's union with

Bucklaw.  Far more deeply skilled than her husband in the

recesses of the human heart, she was aware that in this way she

might strike a blow of deep and decisive vengeance upon one whom

she esteemed as her mortal enemy; nor did she hestitate at

raising her arm, although she knew that the wound must be dealt

through the bosom of her daughter.  With this stern and fixed

purpose, she sounded every deep and shallow of her daughter's

soul, assumed alternately every disguise of manner which could

serve her object, and prepared at leisure every species of dire

machinery by which the human mind can be wrenched from its

settled determination.  Some of these were of an obvious

description, and require only to be cursorily

mentioned; others were characteristic of the time, the country,

and the persons engaged in this singular drama.



It was of the last consequence that all intercourse betwixt the

lovers should be stopped, and, by dint of gold and authority,

Lady Ashton contrived to possess herself of such a complete

command of all who were placed around her daughter, that, if

fact, no leaguered fortress was ever more completely blockaded;

while, at the same time, to all outward appearance Miss Ashton

lay under no restriction.  The verge of her parents' domains

became, in respect to her, like the viewless and enchanted line

drawn around a fairy castle, where nothing unpermitted can either

enter from without or escape from within.  Thus every letter, in

which Ravenswood conveyed to Lucy Ashton the indispensable

reasons which detained him abroad, and more than one note which

poor Lucy had addressed to him through what she thought a secure

channel, fell into the hands of her mother.  It could not be but

that the tenor of these intercepted letters, especially those of

Ravenswood, should contain something to irritate the passions and

fortify the obstinacy of her into whose hands they fell; but Lady

Ashton's passions were too deep-rooted to require this fresh

food.  She burnt the papers as regularly as she perused them; and

as they consumed into vapour and tinder, regarded them with a

smile upon her compressed lips, and an exultation in her steady

eye, which showed her confidence that the hopes of the writers

should soon be rendered equally unsubstantial.



It usually happens that fortune aids the machinations of those

who are prompt to avail themselves of every chance that offers.

A report was wafted from the continent, founded, like others of

the same sort, upon many plausible circumstances, but without any

real basis, stating the Master of Ravenswood to be on the eve of

marriage with a foreign lady of fortune and

distinction.  This was greedily caught up by both the political

parties, who were at once struggling for power and for popular

favour, and who seized, as usual, upon the most private

circumstances in the lives of each other's partisans t convert

them into subjects of political discussion.



The Marquis of A---- gave his opinion aloud and publicly, not

indeed in the coarse terms ascribed to him by Captain

Craigengelt, but in a manner sufficiently offensive to the

Ashtons.  "He thought the report," he said, "highly probably, and

heartily wished it might be true.  Such a match was fitter and

far more creditable for a spirited young fellow than a marriage

with the daughter of an old Whig lawyer, whose chicanery had so

nearly ruined his father."



The other party, of course, laying out of view the

opposition which the Master of Ravenswood received from Miss

Ashton's family, cried shame upon his fickleness and perfidy, as

if he had seduced the young lady into an engagement, and wilfully

and causelessly abandoned her for another.



Sufficient care was taken that this report should find its way

to Ravenswood Castle through every various channel, Lady Ashton

being well aware that the very reiteration of the same rumour,

from so many quarters, could not but give it a semblance of

truth.  By some it was told as a piece of ordinary news, by some

communicated as serious intelligence; now it was whispered to

Lucy Ashton's ear in the tone of malignant pleasantry, and now

transmitted to her as a matter of grave and serious warning.



Even the boy henry was made the instrument of adding to his

sister's torments.  One morning he rushed into the room with a

willow branch in his hand, which he told her had arrived that

instant from Germany for her special wearing.  Lucy, as we have

seen, was remarkably fond of her younger brother, and at that

moment his wanton and thoughtless unkindness seemed more keenly

injurious than even the studied insults of her elder brother.

Her grief, however, had no shade of resentment; she folded her

arms about the boy's neck, and saying faintly, "Poor Henry! you

speak but what they tell you" she burst into a flood of

unrestrained tears.  The boy was moved, notwithstanding the

thoughtlessness of his age and character.  "The devil take me,"

said he, "Lucy, if I fetch you any more of these tormenting

messages again; for I like you better," said he, kissing away the

tears, "than the whole pack of them; and you shall have my grey

pony to ride on, and you shall canter him if you like--ay, and

ride beyond the village, too, if you have a mind."



"Who told you," said Lucy, "that I am not permitted to ride

where I please?"



"That's a secret," said the boy; "but you will find you can

never ride beyond the village but your horse will cast a she, or

fall lame, or the catle bell will ring, or something will happen

to bring you back.  But if I tell you more of these things,

Douglas will nto get me the pair of colours they have promised

me, and so good-morrow to you."



This dialogue plunged Lucy in still deeper dejection, as it


tended to show her plainly what she had for some time suspected,

that she was little better than a prisoner at large in her

father's house.  We have described her in the outsdet of our

story as of a romantic disposition, delighting in tales of love

and wonder, and readily identifying herself with the situation of

those legendary heroines with whose adventures, for want of

better reading, her memory had become stocked.   The fairy wand,

with which in her solitude she had delighted to raise visions of

enchantment, became now the rod of a magician, the bond slave pof

evil genii, serving only to invoke spectres at which the exorcist

trembled.  She felt herself the object of suspicion, of scorn, of

dislike at least, if not of hatred, to her own family; and it

seemed to her that she was abandoned by the very person on whose

account she was exposed to the enmity of all around her.  Indeed,

the evidence of Ravenswood's infidelity began to assume every day

a more determined character.  A soldier of fortune, of the name

of Westenho, an old familiar of Craigengelt's, chanced to arrive

from abroad about this time.  The worthy Captian, though without

any precise communication with Lady Ashton, always acted most

regularly and sedulously in support of her plans, and easily

prevailed upon his friend, by dint of exaggeration of real

circumstances and

coining of others, to give explicit testimony to the truth of

Ravenswood's approaching marriage.



Thus beset on all hands, and in a manner reduced to despair,

Lucy's temper gave way under the pressure of constant affliction

and persecution.  She became gloomy and abstracted, and,

contrary to her natural and ordinary habit of mind, sometimes

turned with spirit, and even fierceness, on those by whom she was

long and closely annoyed.  Her health also began to be shaken,

and her hectic cheek and wandering eye gave symptoms of what is

called a fever upon the spirits.  In most mothers this would have

moved compassion; but Lady Ashton, compact and firm of purpose,

saw these waverings of health and intellect with no greater

sympathy than that with which the hostile engineer regards the

towers of a beleaguered city as they reel under the discharge of

his artillery; or rather, she considered these starts and

inequalities of temper as symptoms of Lucy's expiring resolution;

as the angler, by the throes and convulsive exertions of the fish

which he has hooked, becomes aware that he soon will be able to

land him.  To accelerate the catastrophe in the present case,

Lady Ashton had recourse to an expedient very consistent with the

temper and credulity of those times, but which the reader will

probably pronounce truly detestable and diabolical.

