





CHAPTER VI.



For this are all these warriors come,

To hear an idle tale;

And o'er our death-accustom'd arms

Shall silly tears prevail?



HENRY MACKENZIE.





ON the evening of the day when the Lord Keeper and his daughter

were saved from such imminent peril, two strangers were seated in

the most private apartment of a small obscure inn, or rather

alehouse, called the Tod's Den [Hole], about three or four [five

or six] miles from the Castle of Ravenswood and as far from the

ruinous tower of  Wolf's Crag, betwixt which two places it was

situated.



One of these strangers was about forty years of age, tall, and

thin in the flanks, with an aquiline nose, dark penetrating

eyes, and a shrewd but sinister cast of countenance.  The other

was about fifteen years younger, short, stout, ruddy-faced, and

red-haired, with an open, resolute, and cheerful eye, to which

careless and fearless freedom and inward daring gave fire and

expression, notwithstanding its light grey colour.  A stoup of

wine (for in those days it was erved out from the cask in pewter

flagons) was placed on the table, and each had his quaigh or

bicker before him.  But there was little appearance of

conviviality.  With folded arms, and looks of anxious

expectation, they eyed each other in silence, each wrapt in his

own thoughts, and holding no communication with his neighbour.

At length the younger broke silence by exclaiming: "What the

foul fiend can detain the Master so long?  He must have

miscarried in his enterprise.  Why did you dissuade me from going

with him?"



"One man is enough to right his own wrong," said the taller and

older personage; "we venture our lives for him in coming thus

far on such an errand."



"Yopu are but a craven after all, Craigengelt," answered the

younger, "and that's what many folk have thought you before now."

"But what none has dared to tell me," said Craigengelt,

laying his hand on the hilt of his sword; "and, but that I hold a

hasty man no better than a fool, I would----" he paused for his

companion's answer.



"WOULD you?" said the other, coolly; "and why do you not then?"



Craigengelt drew his cutlass an inch or two, and then returned

it with violence into the scabbard--"Because there is a deeper

stake to be played for than the lives of twenty

harebrained gowks like you."



"You are right there," said his companion, "for it if were not

that these forfeitures, and that last fine that the old

driveller Turntippet is gaping for, and which, I dare say, is

laid on by this time, have fairly driven me out of house and

home, I were a coxcomb and a cuckoo to boot to trust your fair

promises of getting me a commission in the Irish brigade.  What

have I to do with the Irish brigade?  I am a plain Scotchman, as

my father was before me; and my grand-aunt, Lady Girnington,

cannot live for ever."



"Ay, Bucklaw," observed Craigengelt, "but she may live for many

a long day; and for your father, he had land and living, kept

himself close from wadsetters and money-lenders, paid each man

his due, and lived on his own."



"And whose fault it it that I have not done so too?" said

Bucklaw--"whose but the devil's and yours, and such-like as you,

that have led me to the far end of a fair estate?  And now I

shall be obliged, I suppose, to shelter and shift about like

yourself: live one week upon a line of secret intelligence from

Saint Germains; another upon a report of a rising in the

Highlands; get my breakfast and morning draught of sack from old

Jacobite ladies, and give them locks of my old wig for the

Chevalier's hair; second my friend in his quarrel till he comes

to the field, and then flinch from him lest so important a

political agent should perish from the way.  All this I must do

for bread, besides calling myself a captain!"



"You think you are making a fine speech now," said

Craigengelt, "and showing much wit at my expense.  Is starving or

hanging better than the life I am obliged to lead, because the

present fortunes of the king cannot sufficiently support his

envoys?"

"Starving is honester, Craigengelt, and hanging is like to be

the end on't.  But what you mean to make of this poor fellow

Ravenswood, I know not.  He has no money left, any more than I;

his lands are all pawned and pledged, and the interest eats up

the rents, and is not satisfied, and what do you hope to make by

meddling in his affairs?"



"Content yourself, Bucklaw; I know my business," replied

Craigengelt.  "Besides that his name, and his father's services

in 1689, will make such an acquisition sound well both at

Versailles and Saint Germains, you will also please be informed

that the Master of Ravenswood is a very different kind of a young

fellow from you.  He has parts and address, as well as courage

and talents, and will present himself abroad like a young man of

head as well as heart, who knows something more than the speed of

a horse or the flight of a hawk.  I have lost credit of late, by

bringing over no one that had sense to know more than how to

unharbour a stag, or take and reclaim an eyas.  The Master has

education, sense, and penetration."



"And yet is not wise enough to escape the tricks of a kidnapper,

Craigengelt?" replied the younger man.  "But don't be angry; you

know you will nto fight, and so it is as well to leave your hilt

in peace andquiet, and tell me in sober guise how you drew the

Master into your confidence?"



"By flattering his love of vengeance, Bucklaw," answered

Craigengelt.  "He has always distrusted me; but I watched my

time, and struck while his temper was red-hot with the sense of

insult and of wrong.  He goes now to expostulate, as he says, and

perhaps thinks, with Sir William Ashton.  I say, that if they

meet, and the lawyer puts him to his defence, the Master will

kill him; for he had that sparkle in his eye which never deceives

you when you would read a man's purpose.  At any rate, he will

give him such a bullying as will be construed into an assault on

a privy councillor; so there will be a total breach betwixt him

and government.  Scotland will be too hot for him; France will

gain him; and we will all set sail together in the French brig

'L'Espoir,' which is hovering for us off Eyemouth."



"Content am I," said Bucklaw; "Scotland has little left that I

care about; and if carrying the Master with us will get us a

better reception in France, why, so be it, a God's name.  I doubt

our own merits will procure us slender preferment; and I trust he

will send a ball through the Keeper's head before he joins us.

One or two of these scoundrel statesmen should be shot once a

year, just to keep the others on their good behaviour."



"That is very true," replied Craigengelt; "and it reminds me

that I must go and see that our horses have been fed and are in

readiness; for, should such deed be done, it will be no time for

grass to grow beneath their heels."  He proceeded as far as the

door, then turned back with a look of earnestness, and said to

Bucklaw: "Whatever should come of this business, I am sure you

will do me the justice to remember that I said nothing to the

Master which could imply my accession to any act of violence

which he may take it into his head to commit."



"No, no, not a single word like accession," replied Bucklaw;

"you know too well the risk belonging to these two terrible

words, 'art and part.'"  Then, as if to himself, he recited the

following lines:



"The dial spoke not, but it made shrewd signs,

And pointed full upon the stroke of murder.



"What is that you are talking to yourself?" said

Craigengelt, turning back with some anxiety.



"Nothing, only two lines I have heard upon the stage," replied

his companion.



"Bucklaw," said Craigengelt, "I sometimes think you should have

been a stage-player yourself; all is fancy and frolic with you."



"I have often thought so myself," said Bucklaw.  "I believe it

would be safer than acting with you in the Fatal Conspiracy.

But away, play your own part, and look after the horses like a

groom as you are.  A play-actor--a stage-player!" he repeated to

himself; "that would have deserved a stab, but that Craigengelt's

a coward.  And yet I should like the profession well enough. 

Stay, let me see; ay, I would come out in Alexander:



Thus from the grave I  rise to save my love,

Draw all your swords, and quick as lightning move.

When I rush on, sure none will dare to stay:

'Tis love commands, and glory leads the way."



As with a voice of thunder, and his hand upon his sword, Bucklaw

repeated the ranting couplets of poor Lee, Craigengelt re-entered

with a face of alarm.



"We are undone, Bucklaw!  The Master's led horse has cast

himself over his halter in the stable, and is dead lame.  His

hackney will be set up with the day's work, and now he has no

fresh horse; he will never get off."



"Egad, there will be no moving with the speed of lightning this

bout," said Bucklaw, drily.  "But stay, you can give him yours."



"What! and be taken myself?  I thank you for the proposal," said

Craigengelt.



"Why," replied Bucklaw, "if the Lord Keeper should have met with

a mischance, which for my part I cannot suppose, for the Master

is not the lad to shoot an old and unarmed man--but IF there

should have been a fray at the Castle, you are neither art not

part in it, you know, so have nothing to fear."



"True, true," answered the other, with embarrassment; "but

consider my commission from Saint Germains."



"Which many men think is a commission of your own making, noble

Captain.  Well, if you will not give him your horse, why, d----n

it, he must have mine."



"Yours?" said Craigengelt.



"Ay, mine," repeated Bucklaw; "it shall never be said that I

agreed to back a gentleman in a little affair of honour, and

neither helped him on with it nor off from it."



"You will give him your horse? and have you considered the

loss?"



"Loss! why, Grey Gilbert cost me twenty Jacobuses, that's true;

but then his hackney is worth something, and his Black Moor is

worth twice as much were he sound, and I know how to handle him.

Take a fat sucking mastiff whelp,  flay and bowel him, stuff the

body full of black and grey snails, roast a reasonable time, and

baste with oil of spikenard, saffron, cinnamon, and honey, anoint

with the dripping, working it in----"



"Yes, Bucklaw; but in the mean while, before the sprain is

cured, nay, before the whelp is roasted, you will be caught and

hung.  Depend on it, the chase will be hard after Ravenswood.  I

wish we had made our place of rendezvous nearer to the coast."



"On my faith, then," said Bucklaw, "I had best go off just now,

and leave my horse for him.  Stay--stay, he comes: I hear a

horse's feet."



"Are you sure there is only one?" said Craigengelt.  "I fear

there is a chase;  I think I hear three or four galloping

together.  I am sure I hear more horses than one."



"Pooh, pooh, it is the wench of the house clattering to the well

in her pattens.  By my faith, Captain, you should give up both

your captainship and your secret service, for you are as easily

scared as a wild goose.  But here comes the Master alone, and

looking as gloomy as a night in November."



The Master of Ravenswood entered the room accordingly, his cloak

muffled around him, his arms folded, his looks stern, and at the

same time dejected.  He flung his cloak from him as he entered,

threw himself upon a chair, and appeared sunk in a profound

reverie.



"What has happened?  What have you done?" was hastily demanded

by Craigengelt and Bucklaw in the same moment.



"Nothing!" was the short and sullen answer.



"Nothing! and left us, determined to call the old villain to

account for all the injuries that you, we, and the country have

received at his hand?  Have you seen him?"

"I have," replied the Master of Ravenswood.



"Seen him--and come away without settling scores which have been

so long due?" said Bucklaw; "I would not have expected that at

the hand of the Master of Ravenswood."



"No matter what you expected," replied Ravenswood; "it is not to

you, sir, that I shall be disposed to render any reason for my

conduct."



"Patience, Bucklaw," said Craigengelt, interrupting his

companion, who seemed about to make an angry reply.  "The Master

has been interrupted in his purpose by some accident; but he

must excuse the anxious curiosity of friends who are devoted to

his cause like you and me."



"Friends, Captain Craigengelt!" retorted Ravenswood,

haughtily; "I am ignorant what familiarity passed betwixt us to

entitle you to use that expression.  I think our friendship

amounts to this, that we agreed to leave Scotland together so

soon as I should have visited the alienated mansion of my

fathers, and had an interview with its present possessor--I will

not call him proprietor."



"Very true, Master," answered Bucklaw; "and as we thought you

had in mind to do something to put your neck in jeopardy,

Craigie and I very courteously agreed to tarry for you, although

ours might run some risk in consequence.  As to Craigie, indeed,

it does not very much signify: he had gallows written on his brow

in the hour of his birth; but I should not like to discredit my

parentage by coming to such an end in another man's cause."



"Gentlemen," said the Master of Ravenswood, "I am sorry if I

have occasioned you any inconvenience, but I must claim the right

of judging what is best for my own affairs, without rendering

explanations to any one.  I have altered my mind, and do not

design to leave the country this season."



"Not to leave the country, Master!" exclaimed Craigengelt.  "Not

to go over, after all the trouble and expense I have

incurred--after all the risk of discovery, and the expense of

freight and demurrage!"



"Sir," replied the Master of Ravenswood, "when I designed to

leave this country in this haste, I made use of your obliging

offer to procure me means of conveyance; but I do not recollect

that I pledged myself to go off, if I found occasion to alter my

mind.  For your trouble on my account, I am sorry, and I thank

you; your expense," he added, putting his hand into his pocket,

"admits a more solid compensation: freight and demurrage are

matters with which I am unacquainted, Captain Craigengelt, but

take my purse and pay yourself according to your own conscience."

And accordingly he tendered a purse with some gold in it to the

soi-disant captain.



But here Bucklaw interposed in his turn.  "Your fingers,

Craigie, seem to itch for that same piece of green network," said

he; "but I make my vow to God, that if they offer to close upon

it, I will chop them off with my whinger.  Since the Master has

changed his mind, I suppose we need stay here no longer; but in

the first place I beg leave to tell him----"



"Tell him anything you will," said Craigengelt, "if you will

first allow me to state the inconveniences to which he will

expose himself by quitting our society, to remind him of the

obstacles to his remaining here, and of the difficulties

attending his proper introduction at Versailles and Saint

Germains without the countenance of those who have established

useful connexions."



"Besides forfeiting the friendship," said Bucklaw, "of at least

one man of spirit and honour."



"Gentlemen," said Ravenswood, "permit me once more to assure you

that you have been pleased to attach to our temporary

connexion more importance than I ever meant that it should have.

When I repair to foreign courts, I shall not need the

introduction of an intriguing adventurer, nor is it necessary for

me to set value on the friendship of a hot-headed bully."  With

these words, and without waiting for an answer, he left the

apartment, remounted his horse, and was heard to ride off.



"Mortbleu!" said Captain Craigengelt, "my recruit is lost!"



"Ay, Captain," said Bucklaw, "the salmon is off  with hook and

all.  But I will after him, for I have had more of his insolence

than I can well digest."



Craigengelt offered to accompany him; but Bucklaw replied:  "No,

no, Captain, keep you the check of the chimney-nook till I come

back; it's good sleeping in a haill skin.



Little kens the auld wife that sits by the fire,

How cauld the wind blaws in hurle-burle swire."



And singing as he went, he left the apartment.
