






CHAPTER IV.



Through tops of the high trees she did descry

A little smoke, whose vapour, thin and light,

Reeking aloft, uprolled to the sky,

Which cheerful sign did send unto her sight,

That in the same did wonne some living wight.



SPENSER.





LUCY acted as her father's guide, for he was too much engrossed

with his political labours, or with society, to be perfectly

acquainted with his own extensive domains, and,

moreover, was generally an inhabitant of the city of Edinburgh;

and she, on the other hand, had, with her mother, resided the

whole summer in Ravenswood, and, partly from taste, partly from

want of any other amusement, had, by her frequent rambles,

learned to know each lane, alley, dingle, or bushy dell,



And every bosky bourne from side to side.



We have said that the Lord Keeper was not indifferent to the

beauties of nature; and we add, in justice to him, that he felt

them doubly when pointed out by the beautiful, simple, and

interesting girl who, hanging on his arm with filial kindness,

now called him to admire the size of some ancient oak, and now

the unexpected turn where the path, developing its maze from glen

or dingle, suddenly reached an eminence commanding an extensive

view of the plains beneath them, and then gradually glided away

from the prospect to lose itself among rocks and thickets, and

guide to scenes of deeper seclusion.



It was when pausing on one of those points of extensive and

commanding view that Lucy told her father they were close by the

cottage of her blind protegee; and on turning from the little

hill, a path which led around it, worn by the daily steps of the

infirm inmate, brought them in sight of the hut, which, embosomed

in a deep and obscure dell, seemed to have been so situated

purposely to bear a correspondence with the darkened state of its

inhabitant.



The cottage was situated immediately under a tall rock, which in

some measure beetled over it, as if threatening to drop some

detached fragment from its brow on the frail tenement beneath.

The hut itself was constructed of turf and stones, and rudely

roofed over with thatch, much of which was in a

dilapidated condition.  The thin blue smoke rose from it in a

light column, and curled upward along the white face of the

incumbent rock, giving the scene a tint of exquisite softness.

In a small and rude garden, surrounded by straggling elder-

bushes, which formed a sort of imperfect hedge, sat near to the

beehives, by the produce of which she lived, that "woman old"

whom Lucy had brought her father hither to visit.



Whatever there had been which was disastrous in her fortune,

whatever there was miserable in her dwelling, it was easy to

judge by the first glance that neither years, poverty,

misfortune, nor infirmity had broken the spirit of this

remarkable woman.



She occupied a turf seat, placed under a weeping birch of

unusual magnitude and age, as Judah is represented sitting under

her palm-tree, with an air at once of majesty and of dejection.

Her figure was tall, commanding, and but little bent by the

infirmities of old age.  Her dress, though that of a peasant, was

uncommonly clean, forming in that particular a strong contrast to

most of her rank, and was disposed with an attention to neatness,

and even to taste, equally unusual.  But it was her expression of

countenance which chiefly struck the spectator, and induced most

persons to address her with a degree of deference and civility

very inconsistent with the miserable state of her dwelling, and

which, nevertheless, she received with that easy composure which

showed she feelt it to be her due.  She had once been beautiful,

but her beauty had been of a bold and masculine cast, such as

does not survive the bloom of youth; yet her features continued

to express strong sense, deep reflection, and a character of

sober pride, which, as we have already said of her dress,

appeared to argue a conscious superiority to those of her own

rank.  It scarce seemed possible that a face, deprived of the

advantage of sight, could have expressed character so

strongly; but her eyes, which were almost totally closed, did

not, by the display of their sightless orbs, mar the countenance

to which they could add nothing.  She seemed in a ruminating

posture, soothed, perhaps, by the murmurs of the busy tribe

around her to abstraction, though not to slumber.



Lucy undid the latch of the little garden gate, and

solicited the old woman's attention.  "My father, Alice, is come

to see you."



"He is welcome, Miss Ashton, and so are you," said the old

woman, turning and inclining her head towards her visitors.



"This is a fine morning for your beehives, mother," said the

Lord Keeper, who, struck with the outward appearance of Alice,

was somewhat curious to know if her conversation would

correspond with it.



"I believe so, my lord," she replied; "I feel the air breathe

milder than of late."



"You do not," resumed the statesman, "take charge of these bees

yourself, mother?  How do you manage them?"



"By delegates, as kings do their subjects," resumed Alice;  "and

I am fortunate in a prime minister.  Here, Babie."



She whistled on a small silver call which ung around her neck,

and which at that time was sometimes used to summon

domestics, and Babie, a girl of fifteen, made her appearance from

the hut, not altogether so cleanly arrayed as she would probably

have been had Alice had the use of her yees, but with a greater

air of neatness than was upon the whole to have been expected.



"Babie," said her mistress, "offer some bread and honey to the

Lord Keeper and Miss Ashton; they will excuse your

awkwardness if you use cleanliness and despatch."



Babie performed her mistress's command with the grace which was

naturally to have been expected, moving to and fro with a

lobster-like gesture, her feet and legs tending one way, while

her head, turned in a different direction, was fixed in wonder

upon the laird, who was more frequently heard of than seen by his

tenants and dependants.  The bread and honey, however, deposited

on a plantain leaf, was offered and accepted in all due courtesy.

The Lord Keeper, still retaining the place which he had occupied

on the decayed trunk of a fallen tree, looked as if he wished to

prolong the interview, but was at a loss how to introduce a

suitable subject.



"You have been long a resident on this property?" he said, after

a pause.



"It is now nearly sixty years since I first knew

Ravenswood," answered the old dame, whose conversation, though

perfectly civil and respectful, seemed cautiously limited to the

unavoidable and necessary task of replying to Sir William.



"You are not, I should judge by your accent, of this country

originally?" said the Lord Keeper, in continuation.



"No; I am by birth an Englishwoman."

"Yet you seem attached to this country as if it were your own."



"It is here," replied the blind woman, "that I have drank the

cup of joy and of sorrow which Heaven destined for me.  I was

here the wife of an upright and affectionate husband for more

than twenty years; I was here the mother of six promising

children; it was here that God deprived me of all these

blessings; it was here they died, and yonder, by yon ruined

chapel, they lie all buried.  I had no ocuntry but theirs while

they lived; I have none but theirs now they are no more."



"But your house," said the Lord Keeper, looking at it, "is

miserably ruinous?"



"Do, my dear father," said Lucy, eagerly, yet bashfully,

catching at the hint, "give orders to make it better; that is, if

you think it proper."



"It will last my time, my dear Miss Lucy," said the blind woman;

"I would not have my lord give himself the least trouble about

it."



"But," said Lucy, "you once had a much better house, and were

rich, and now in your old age to live in this hovel!"



"It is as good as I deserve, Miss Lucy; if my heart has not

broke with what I have suffered, and seen others suffer, it must

have been strong enough, adn the rest of this old frame has no

right to call itself weaker."



"You have probably witnessed many changes," said the Lord

Keeper; "but your experience must have taught you to expect

them."



"It has taught me to endure them, my lord," was the reply.



"Yet you knew that they must needs arrive in the course of

years?" said the statesman.



"Ay; as I knew that the stump, on or beside which you sit, once

a tall and lofty tree, must needs one day fall by decay, or by

the axe; yet I hoped my eyes might not witness the downfall of

the tree which overshadowed my dwelling."



"Do not suppose," said the Lord Keeper, "that you will lose any

interest with me for looking back with regret to the days when

another family possessed my estates.  You had reason, doubtless,

to love them, and I respect your gratitude.  I will order some

repairs in your cottage, and I hope we shall live to be friends

when we know each other better."

"Those of my age," returned the dame, "make no new friends.  I

thank you for your bounty, it is well intended undoubtedly; but

I have all I want, and I cannot accept more at your lordship's

hand."



"Well, then," continued the Lord Keeper, "at least allow me to

say, that I look upon you as a woman of sense and education

beyond your appearance, and that I hope you will continue to

reside on this property of mine rent-free for your life."



"I hope I shall," said the old dame, composedly; "I believe that

was made an article in the sale of Ravenswood to your lordship,

though such a trifling circumstance may have escaped your

recollection."



"I remember--I recollect," said his lordship, somewhat confused.

"I perceive you are too much attached to your old friends to

accept any benefit from their successor."



"Far from it, my lord; I am grateful for the benefits which I

decline, and I wish I could pay you for offering them, better

than what I am now about to say."  The Lord Keeper looked at her

in some surprise, but said not a word.  "My lord," she continued,

in an impressive and solemn tone, "take care what you do; you are

on the brink of a precipice."



"Indeed?" said the Lord Keeper, his mind reverting to the

political circumstances of the country.  "Has anything come to

your knowledge--any plot or conspiracy?"



"No, my lord; those who traffic in such commodities do not call

to their councils the old, blind, and infirm.  My warning is of

another kind.  You have driven matters hard with the house of

Ravenswood.  Believe a true tale: they are a fierce house, and

there is danger in dealing with men when they become desperate."



"Tush," answered the Keeper; "what has been between us has been

the work of the law, not my doing; and to the law they must

look, if they would impugn my proceedings."



"Ay, but they may think otherwise, and take the law into their

own hand, when they fail of other means of redress."



"What mean you?" said the Lord Keeper.  "Young Ravenswood would

not have recourse to personal violence?"



"God forbid I should say so!  I know nothing of the youth but

what is honourable and open.  Honourable and open, said I?  I

should have added, free, generous, noble.  But he is still a

Ravenswood, and may bide his time.  Remember the fate of Sir

George Lockhart."



The Lord Keeper started as she called to his recollection a

tragedy so deep and so recent.  The old woman proceeded:

"Chiesley, who did the deed, was a relative of Lord Ravenswood.

In the hall of Ravenswood, in my presence and in that of others,

he avowed publicly his determination to do the cruelty which he

afterwards committed.  I could not keep silence, though to speak

it ill became my station.  'You are devising a dreadful crime,' I

said, 'for which you must reckon before the judgment seat.'

Never shall I forget his look, as he replied, 'I must reckon then

for many things, and will reckon for this also.'  Therefore I may

well say, beware of pressing a desperate man with the hand of

authority.  There is blood of Chiesley in the veins of

Ravenswood, and one drop of it were enough to fire him in the

circumstances in which he is placed.  I say, beware of him."



The old dame had, either intentionally or by accident, harped

aright the fear of the Lord Keeper.  The desperate and dark

resource of private assassination, so familiar to a Scottish

baron in former times, had even in the present age been too

frequently resorted to under the pressure of unusual temptation,

or where the mind of the actor was prepared for such a crime.

Sir William Ashton was aware of this; as also that young

Ravenswood had received injuries sufficient to prompt him to that

sort of revenge, which becomes a frequent though fearful

consequence of the partial administration of justice.  He

endeavoured to disguise from Alice the nature of the

apprehensions which he entertained; but so ineffectually, that a

person even of less penetration than nature had endowed her with

must necessarily have been aware that the subject lay near his

bosom.  His voice was changed in its accent as he replied to her,

"That the Master of Ravenswood was a man of honour; and, were it

otherwise, that the fate of Chiesley of Dalry was a sufficient

warning to any one who should dare to assume the office of

avenger of his own imaginary wrongs."  And having hastily uttered

these expressions, he rose and left the place without waiting

for a reply.



