





CHAPTER XXI.



Marall:  Sir, the man of honour's come,                    

Newly alighted----

Overreach:  In without reply,

And do as I command....

Is the loud music I gave order for

Ready to receive him?



New Way to pay Old Debts.





SIR WILLIAM ASHTON, although a man of sense, legal

information, and great practical knowledge of the world, had yet

some points of character which corresponded better with the

timidity of his disposition and the supple arts by which he had

risen in the world, than to the degree of eminence which he had

attained; as they tended to show an original mediocrity of

understanding, however highly it had been cultivated, and a

native meanness of disposition, however carefully veiled.  He

loved the ostentatious display of his wealth, less as a man to

whom habit has made it necessary, than as one to whom it is still

delightful from its novelty.  The most trivial details did not

escape him; and Lucy soon learned to watch the flush of scorn

which crossed Ravenswood's cheek, when he heard her father

gravely arguing with Lockhard, nay, even with the old

housekeeper, upon circumstances which, in families of rank, are

left uncared for, because it is supposed impossible they can be

neglected.



"I could pardon Sir William," said Ravenswood, one evening after

he had left the room, "some general anxiety upon this occasion,

for the Marquis's visit is an honour, and should be received as

such; but I am worn out by these miserable minutiae of the

buttery, and the larder, and the very hencoop--they drive me

beyond my patience; I would rather endure the poverty of Wolf's

Crag than be pestered with the wealth of Ravenswood Castle."



"And yet," said Lucy, "it was by attention to these minutiae

that my father acquired the property----"



"Which my ancestors sold for lack of it," replied

Ravenswood.  "Be it so; a porter still bears but a burden, though

the burden be of gold."



Lucy sighed; she perceived too plainly that her lover held in

scorn the manners and habits of a father to whom she had long

looked up as her best and most partial friend, whose fondness

had often consoled her for her mother's contemptuous harshness.



The lovers soon discovered that they differed upon other and no

less important topics.  Religion, the mother of peace, was, in

those days of discord, so much misconstrued and mistaken, that

her rules and forms were the subject of the most opposite

opinions and the most hotsile animosities.  The Lord Keeper,

being a Whig, was, of course, a Presbyterian, and had found it

convenient, at different periods, to express greater zeal for the

kirk than perhaps he really felt.  His family, equally of course,

were trained under the same institution.  Ravenswood, as we know,

was a High Churchman, or Episcopalian, and frequently objected to

Lucy the fanaticism of some of her own communion, while she

intimated, rather than expressed , horror at the latitudinarian

principles which she had been taught to think connected with the

prelatical form of church government.



Thus, although their mutual affection seemed to increase rather

than to be diminished as their characters opened more fully on

each other, the feelings of each were mingled with some less

agreeable ingredients.  Lucy felt a secret awe, amid all her

affection for Ravenswood.  His soul was of an higher, prouder

character than those with thom she had hitherto mixed in

intercourse; his ideas were more fierce and free; and he

contemned many of the opinions which had been inculcated upon her

as chiefly demanding her veneration.  On the other hand,

Ravenswood saw in Lucy a soft and flexible character, which, in

his eyes at least, seemed too susceptible of being moulded to any

form by those with whom she lived.  He felt that his own temper

required a partner of a more independent spirit, who could set

sail with him on his course of life, resolved as himself to dare

indifferently the storm and the favouring breeze.  But Lucy was

so beautiful, so devoutly attached to him, of a temper so

exquisitely soft and kind, that, while he could have wished it

were possible to inspire her with a greater degree of firmness

and resolution, and while he sometimes became impatient of the

extreme fear which she expressed of their attachment being

prematurely discovered, he felt that the softness of a mind,

amounting almost to feebleness, rendered her even dearer to him,

as a being who had voluntarily clung to him for protection, and

made him the arbiter of her fate for weal or woe.  His feelings

towards her at such moments were those which have been since so

beautifully expressed by our immortal Joanna Baillie:



Thou sweetest thing,

That e'er did fix its lightly-fibred sprays

To the rude rock, ah! wouldst thou cling to me?

Rough and storm-worn I am; yet love me as

Thou truly dost, I will love thee again

With true and honest heart, though all unmeet

To be the mate of such sweet gentleness.





Thus the very points in which they differed seemed, in some

measure, to ensure the continuance of their mutual affection.

If, indeed, they had so fully appreciated each other's character

before the burst of passion in which they hastily pledged their

faith to each other, Lucy might have feared Ravenswood too much

ever to have loved him, and he might have construed her softness

and docile temper as imbecility, rendering her unworthy of his

regard.  But they stood pledged to each other; and Lucy only

feared that her lover's pride might one day teach him to regret

his attachment; Ravenswood, that a mind so ductile as Lucy's

might, in absence or difficulties, be induced, by the entreaties

or influence of those around her, to renounce the engagement she

had formed.



"Do not fear it," said Lucy, when upon one occasion a hint of

such suspicion escaped her lover; "the mirrors which receive the

reflection of all successive objects are framed of hard

materials like glass or steel; the softer substances, when they

receive an impression, retain it undefaced."



"This is poetry, Lucy," said Ravenswood; "and in poetry there is

always fallacy, and sometimes fiction."



"Believe me, then, once more, in honest prose," said Lucy,

"that, though I will never wed man without the consent of my

parents, yet neither force nor persuasion shall dispose of my

hand till you renounce the right I have given you to it."



The lovers had ample time for such explanations.  Henry was now

more seldom their companion, being either a most unwilling

attendant upon the lessons of his tutor, or a forward volunteer

under the instructions of the foresters or grooms.  As for the

Keeper, his mornings were spent in his study, maintaining

correspondences of all kinds, and balancing in his anxious mind

the various intelligence which he collected from every quarter

concerning the expected change of Scottish politics, and the

probable strength of the parties who were about to struggle for

power.  At other times he busied himself about arranging, and

coutermanding, and then again arranging, the preparations which

he judged necessary for the reception of the Marquis of A----,

whose arrival had been twice delayed by some necessary cause of

detention.



In the midst of all these various avocations, political and

domestic, he seemed not to observe how much his daughter and his

guest were thrown into each other's society, and was censured by

many of his neighbours, according to the fashion of neighbours in

all countries, for suffering such an intimate connexion to take

place betwixt two young persons.  The only natural explanation

was, that he designed them for each other; while, in truth, his

only motive was to temporise and procrastinate until he should

discover the real extent of the interest which the Marquis took

in Ravenswood's affairs, and the power which he was likely to

possess of advancing them.  Until these points should be made

both clear and manifest, the Lord Keeper resolved that he would

do nothing to commit himself, either in one shape or other; and,

like many cunning persons, he overreached himself deplorably.



Amongst those who had been disposed to censure, with the

greatest severity, the conduct of Sir William Ashton, in

permitting the prolonged residence of Ravenswood under his roof,

and his constant attendance on Miss Ashton, was the new Laird of

Girnington, and his faithful squire and bottleholder, personages

formerly well known to us by the names of Hayston and Bucklaw,

and his companion Captain Craigengelt.  The former had at length

succeeded to the extensive property of his long-lived grand-aunt,

and to considerable wealth besides, which he had employed in

redeeming his paternal acres (by the title appertaining to which

he still chose to be designated), notwithstanding Captain

Craigengelt had proposed to him a most advantageous mode of

vesting the money in Law's scheme, which was just then broached,

and offered his services to travel express to Paris for the

purpose.  But Bucklaw had so far derived wisdom from adversity,

that he would listen to no proposal which Craigengelt could

invent, which had the slightest tendency to risk his newly-

acquired independence.  He that had once eat pease-bannocks,

drank sour wine, and slept in the secret chamber at Wolf's Crag,

would, he said, prize good cheer and a soft bed as long as he

lived, and take special care never to need such hospitality

again.



Craigengelt, therefore, found himself disappointed in the first

hopes he had entertained of making a good hand of the Laird of

Bucklaw.  Still, however, he reaped many advantages from his

friend's good fortune.  Bucklaw, who had never been at all

scrupulous in choosing his companions, was accustomed to, and

entertained by, a fellow whom he could either laugh with or

laugh at as he had a mind, who would take, according to Scottish

phrase, "the bit and the buffet," understood all sports, whether

within or without doors, and, when the laird had a mind for a

bottle of wine (no infrequent circumstance), was always ready to

save him from the scandal of getting drunk by himself.  Upon

these terms, Craigengelt was the frequent, almost the constant,

inmate of the house of Girnington.



In no time, and under no possibility of circumstances, could

good have been derived from such an intimacy, however its bad

consequences might be qualified by the thorough knowledge which

Bucklaw possessed of his dependant's character, and the high

contempt in which he held it.  But, as circumstances stood, this

evil communication was particularly liable to corrupt what good

principles nature had implanted in the patron.



Craigengelt had never forgiven the scorn with which

Ravenswood had torn the mask of courage and honesty from his

countenance; and to exasperate Bucklaw's resentment against him

was the safest mode of revenge which occurred to his cowardly,

yet cunning and malignant, disposition.



He brought up on all occasions the story of the challenge which

Ravenswood had declined to accept, and endeavoured, by every

possible insinuation, to make his patron believe that his honour

was concerned in bringing that matter to an issue by a present

discussion with Ravenswood.  But respecting this subject Bucklaw

imposed on him, at length, a peremptory command of silence.



"I think," he said, "the Master has treated me unlike a

gentleman, and I see no right he had to send me back a cavalier

answer when I demanded the satisfaction of one.  But he gave me

my life once; and, in looking the matter over at present, I put

myself but on equal terms with him.  Should he cross me again, I

shall consider the old accompt as balanced, and his Mastership

will do well to look to himself."



"That he should," re-echoed Craigengelt; "for when you are in

practice, Bucklaw, I would bet a magnum you are through him

before the third pass."



"Then you know nothing of the matter," said Bucklaw, "and you

never saw him fence."



"And I know nothing of the matter?" said the dependant--"a good

jest, I promise you!  And though I never saw Ravenswood fence,

have I not been at Monsieur Sagoon's school, who was the first

maitre d'armes at Paris; and have I not been at Signor Poco's

at Florence, and Meinheer Durchstossen's at Vienna, and have I

not seen all their play?"



"I don't know whether you have or not," said Bucklaw; "but what

about it, though you had?"



"Only that I will be d--d if ever I saw French, Italian, or

High-Dutchman ever make foot, hand, and eye keep time half so

well as you, Bucklaw."



"I believe you lie, Craigie," said Bucklaw; "however, I can hold

my own, both with single rapier, backsword, sword and dagger,

broadsword, or case of falchions--and that's as much as any

gentleman need know of the matter."



"And the doublt of what ninety-nine out of a hundred know," said

Craigengelt; "they learn to chanage a few thrusts with the small

sword, and then, forsooth, they understand the noble art of

defence!  Now, when I was at Rouen in the year 1695, there was a

Chevalier de Chapon and I went to the opera, where we found three

bits of English birkies----"

"Is it a long story you are going to tell?" said Bucklaw,

interrupting him without ceremony.



"Just as you like," answered the parasite, "for we made short

work of it."



"Then I like it short," said Bucklaw.  "Is it serious or merry?"



"Devilish serious, I assure you, and so they found it; for the

Chevalier and I----"



"Then I don't like it at all," said Bucklaw; "so fill a brimmer

of my auld auntie's claret, rest her heart!   And, as the

Hielandman says, Skioch doch na skiall."



"That was what tough old Sir Even Dhu used to say to me when I

was out with the metall'd lads in 1689.  'Craigengelt,' he used

to say, 'you are as pretty a fellow as ever held steel in his

grip, but you have one fault.'"



"If he had known you as long as I have don," said Bucklaw, "he

would have found out some twenty more; but hand long stories,

give us your toast, man."



Craigengelt rose, went a -tiptoe to the door, peeped out, shut

it carefully, came back again, clapped his tarnished gold-laced

hat on one side of his head, took his glass in one hand, and

touching the hilt of his hanger with the other, named, "The King

over the water."



"I tell you what it is, Captain Craigengelt," said Bucklaw; "I

shall keep my mind to myself on thse subjects, having too much

respect for the memory of my venerable Aunt Girnington to put

her lands and tenements in the way of committing treason against

established authority.  Bring me King James to Edinburgh,

Captain, with thirty thousand men at his back, and I'll tell you

what I think about his title; but as for running my neck into a

noose, and my good broad lands into the statutory penalties, 'in

that case made and provided,' rely upon it, you will find me no

such fool.  So, when you mean to vapour with your hanger and your

dram-cup in support of treasonable toasts, you must find your

liquor and company elsewhere."



"Well, then," said Craigengelt, "name the toast yourself, and be

it what it like, I'll pledge you, were it a mile to the bottom."



"And I'll give you a toast that deserves it, my boy," said

Bucklaw; "what say you to Miss Lucy Ashton?"



"Up with it," said the Captain, as he tossed off his

brimmer, "the bonniest lass in Lothian!  What a pity the old

sneckdrawing Whigamore, her father, is about to throw her away

upon that rag of pride and beggary, the Master of Ravenswood!"



"That's not quite so clear," said Bucklaw, in a tone which,

though it seemed indifferent, excited his companion's eager

curiosity; and not that only, but also his hope of working

himself into soem sort of confidence, which might make him

necessary to his patron, being by no means satisfied to rest on

mere sufferance, if he could form by art or industry a more

permanent title to his favour.



"I thought," said he, after a moment's pause, "that was a

settled matter; they are continually together, and nothing else

is spoken of betwixt Lammer Law and Traprain."



"They may say what they please," replied his patron, "but I know

better; and I'll give you Miss Lucy Ashton's health again, my

boy."



"And I woul drink it on my knee," said Craigengelt, "if I

thought the girl had the spirit to jilt that d--d son of a

Spaniard."



"I am to request you will not use the word 'jilt' and Miss

Ashton's name together," said Bucklaw, gravely.



"Jilt, did I say?  Discard, my lad of acres--by Jove, I meant to

discard," replied Craigengelt; "and I hope she'll discard him

like a small card at piquet, and take in the king of hearts, my

boy!  But yet----"



"But what?" said his patron.



"But yet I know for certain they are hours together alone, and

in the woods and the fields."



"That's her foolish father's dotage; that will be soon put out

of the lass's head, if it ever gets into it," answered Bucklaw.

"And now fill your glass again, Captain; I am going to make you

happy; I am going to let you into a secret--a plot--a noosing

plot--only the noose is but typical."



"A marrying matter?" said Craigengelt, and his jaw fell as he

asked the question, for he suspected that matrimony would render

his situation at Girnington much more precarious than during the

jolly days of his patron's bachelorhood.



"Ay, a marriage, man," said Bucklaw; "but wherefore droops they

might spirit, and why grow the rubies on they cheek so pale?

The board will have a corner, and the corner will have a

trencher, and the trencher will have a glass beside it; and the

board-end shall be filled, and the trencher and the glass shall

be replenished for thee, if all the petticoats in Lothian had

sworn the contrary.  What, man!  I am not the boy to put myself

into leading-strings."



"So says many an honest fellow," said Craigengelt, "and some of

my special friends; but, curse me if I know the reason, the

women could never bear me, and always contrived to trundle me out

of favour before the honeymoon was over."



"If you could have kept your ground till that was over, you

might have made a good year's pension," said Bucklaw.



"But I never could," answered the dejected parasite.  "There was

my Lord Castle-Cuddy--we were hand and glove: I rode his horses,

borrowed money both for him and from him, trained his hawks, and

taught him how to lay his bets; and when he took a fancy of

marrying, I married him to Katie Glegg, whom I thought myself as

sure of as man could be of woman.  Egad, she had me out of the

house, as if I had run on wheels, within the first

fortnight!"



"Well!" replied Bucklaw, "I think I have nothing of Castle-

Cuddy about me, or Lucy of Katie Glegg.  But you see the thing

will go on whether you like it or no; the only question is, will

you be useful?"



"Useful!" exclaimed the Captain, "and to thee, my lad of lands,

my darling boy, whom I would tramp barefooted through the world

for!  Name time, place, mode, and circumstances, and see if I

will not be useful in all uses that can be devised."



"Why, then, you must ride two hundred miles for me," said the

patron.



"A thousand, and call them a flea's leap," answered the

dependant; "I'll cause saddle my horse directly."



"Better stay till you know where you are to go, and what you are

to do," quoth Bucklaw.  "You know I have a kinswoman in

Northumberland, Lady Blenkensop by name, whose old acquaintance I

had the misfortune to lose in the period of my poverty, but the

light of whose countenance shone forth upon me when the sun of my

prosperity began to arise."



"D--n all such double-faced jades!" exclaimed Craigengelt,

heroically; "this I will say for John Craigengelt, that he is his

friend's friend through good report and bad report, poverty and

riches; and you know something of that yourself, Bucklaw."



"I have not forgot your merits," said his patron; "I do remember

that, in my extremities, you had a mind to CRIMP me for the

service of the French king, or of the Pretender; and, moreover,

that you afterwards lent me a score of pieces, when, as I firmly

believe, you had heard the news that old Lady Girnington had a

touch of the dead palsy.  But don't be downcast, John; I

believe, after all, you like me very well in your way, and it is

my misfortune to have no better counsellor at present.  To return

to this Lady Blenkensop, you must know, she is a close

confederate of Duchess Sarah."



"What! of Sall Jennings?" exclaimed Craigengelt; "then she must

be a good one."



"Hold your tongue, and keep your Tory rants to yourself, if it

be possible," said Bucklaw.  "I tell you, that through the

Duchess of Marlborough has this Northumbrian cousin of mine

become a crony of Lady Ashton, the Keeper's wife, or, I may say,

the Lord Keeper's Lady Keeper, and she has favoured Lady

Blenkensop with a visit on her return from London, and is just

now at her old mansion-house on the banks fo the Wansbeck.  Now,

sir, as it has been the use and wont of these ladies to consider

their husbands as of no importance in the management of their own

families, it has been their present pleasure, without consulting

Sir William Ashton, to put on the tapis a matrimonial alliance,

to be concluded between Lucy Ashton and my own right honourable

self, Lady Ashton acting as self-constituted plenipotentiary on

the part of her daughter and husband, and Mother Blenkensop,

equally unaccredited, doing me the honour to be my

representative.  You may suppose I was a little astonished when I

found that a treaty, in which I was so considerably interested,

had advanced a good way before I was even consulted."



"Capot me! if I think that was according to the rules of the

game," said his confidant; "and pray, what answer did you

return?"



"Why, my first thought was to send the treaty to the devil, and

the negotiators along with it, for a couple of meddling old

women; my next was to laugh very hearily; and my third and last

was a settled opinion that the thing was reasonable, and would

suit me well enough."



"Why, I thought you had never seen the wench but once, and then

she had her riding-mask on; I am sure you told me so."



"Ay, but I liked her very well then.  And Ravenswood's dirty

usage of me--shutting me out of doors to dine with the lackeys,

because he had the Lord Keeper, forsooth, and his daughter, to

be guests in his beggarly castle of starvation,--d--n me,

Craigengelt, if I ever forgive him till I play him as good a

trick!"



"No more you should, if you are a lad of mettle," said

Craigengelt, the matter now taking a turn in which he could

sympathise; "and if you carry this wench from him, it will break

his heart."



"That it will not," said Bucklaw; "his heart is all steeled over

with reason and philosophy, things that you, Craigie, know

nothing about more than myself, God help me.  But it will break

his pride, though, and that's what I'm driving at."



"Distance me!" said Craigengelt, "but I know the reason now of

his unmannerly behaviour at his old tumble-down tower yonder.

Ashamed of your company?--no, no!  Gad, he was afraid you would

cut in and carry off the girl."



"Eh!  Craigengelt?" said Bucklaw, "do you really think so? but

no, no! he is a devilish deal prettier man than I am."

"Who--he?" exclaimed the parasite.  "He's as black as the crook;

and for his size--he's a tall fellow, to be sure, but give me a

light, stout, middle-sized----"



"Plague on thee!" said Bucklaw, interrupting him, "and on me for

listening to you!  You would say as much if I were hunch-

backed.  But as to Ravenswood--he has kept no terms with me,

I'll keep none with him; if I CAN win this girl from him,

I WILL win her."



"Win her! 'sblood, you SHALL win her, point, quint,

and quatorze, my king of trumps; you shall pique, repique, and

capot him."



"Prithee, stop thy gambling cant for one instant," said Bucklaw.

"Things have come thus far, that I have entertained the proposal

of my kinswoman, agreed to the terms of jointure, amount of

fortune, and so forth, and that the affair is to go forward when

Lady Ashton comes down, for she takes her daughter and her son in

her own hand.  Now they want me to send up a confidential person

with some writings."



"By this good win, I'll ride to the end of the world--the very

gates of Jericho, and the judgment-seat of Prester John, for

thee!" ejaculated the Captain.



"Why, I believe you would do something for me, and a great deal

for yourself.  Now, any one could carry the writings; but you

will have a little more to do.  You must contrive to drop out

before my Lady Ashton, just as if it were a matter of little

consequence, the residence of Ravenswood at her husband's house,

and his close intercourse with Miss Ashton; and you may tell her

that all the country talks of a visit from the Marquis of A----,

as it is supposed, to make up the match betwixt Ravenswood and

her daughter.  I should like to hear what she says to all this;

for, rat me! if I have any idea of starting for the plate at all

if Ravenswood is to win the race, and he has odds against me

already."



"Never a bit; the wench has too much sense, and in that belief I

drink her health a third time; and, were time and place fitting,

I would drink it on bended knees, and he that would not pledge

me, I would make his guts garter his stockings."



"Hark ye, Craigengelt; as you are going into the society of

women of rank," said Bucklaw, "I'll thank you to forget your

strange blackguard oaths and 'damme's.'  I'll write to them,

though, that you are a blunt, untaught fellow."



"Ay, ay," replied Craigengelt--"a plain, blunt, honest,

downright soldier."



"Not too honest, not too much of the soldier neither; but such

as thou art, it is my luck to need thee, for I must have spurs

put to Lady Ashton's motions."

"I'll dash them up to the rowel-heads," said Craigengelt; "she

shall come here at the gallop, like a cow chased by a whole nest

of hornets, and her tail over her rump like a corkscrew."



"And hear ye, Craigie," said Bucklaw; "your boots and doublet

are good enough to drink in, as the man says in the  play, but

they are somewhat too greasy for tea-table service; prithee, get

thyself a little better rigged out, and here is to pay all

charges."



"Nay, Bucklaw; on my soul, man, you use me ill.  However," added

Craigengelt, pocketing the money, "if you will have me so far

indebted to you, I must be conforming."



"Well, horse and away!" said the patron, "so soon as you have

got your riding livery in trim.  You may ride the black crop-ear;

and, hark ye, I'll make you a present of him to boot."



"I drink to the good luck of my mission," answered the

ambassador, "in a half-pint bumper."



"I thank ye, Craigie, and pledge you; I see nothing against it

but the father or the girl taking a tantrum, and I am told the

mother can wind them both round her little finger.  Take care

not to affront her with any of your Jacobite jargon."



"Oh, ay, true--she is a Whig, and a friend of old Sall of

Marlborough; thank my stars, I can hoist any colours at a pinch!

I have fought as hard under John Churchill as ever I did under

Dundee or the Duke of Berwick."



"I verily believe you, Craigie," said the lord of the mansion;

"but, Craigie, do you, pray, step down to the cellar, and fetch

us up a bottle of the Burgundy, 1678; it is in the fourth bin

from the right-hand turn.  And I say, Craigie, you may fetch up

half a dozen whilst you are about it.  Egad, we'll make a night

on't!"

