






CHAPTER XVIII.



Sir, stay at home and take an old man's counsel;

Seek not to bask you by a stranger's hearth;

Our own blue smoke is warmer than their fire.

Domestic food is wholesome, though 'tis homely,

And foreign dainties poisonous, though tasteful.



The French Courtezan.





THE Master of Ravenswood took an opportunity to leave his guests

to prepare for their departure, while he himself made the brief

arrangements necessary previous to his absence from Wolf's Crag

for a day or two.  It was necessary to communicate with Caleb on

this occasion, and he found that faithful servitor in his sooty

and ruinous den, greatly delighted with the departure of their

visitors, and computing how long, with good management, the

provisions which had been unexpended might furnish the Master's

table.  "He's nae belly god, that's ae blessing; and Bucklaw's

gane, that could have eaten a horse behind the saddle.  Cresses

or water-purpie, and a bit ait-cake, can serve the Master for

breakfast as weel as Caleb.  Then for dinner--there's no muckle

left on the spule-bane; it will brander, though--it will brander

very weel."



His triumphant calculations were interrupted by the Master, who

communicated to him, not without some hesitation, his purpose to

ride with the Lord Keeper as far as Ravenswood Castle, and to

remain there for a day or two.



"The mercy of Heaven forbid!" said the old serving-man, turning

as pal as the table-cloth which he was folding up.



"And why, Caleb?" said his master--"why should the mercy of

Heaven forbid my returning the Lord Keeper's visit?"



"Oh, sir!" replied Caleb--"oh, Mr. Edgar!  I am your

servant, and it ill becomes me to speak; but I am an auld

servant--have served baith your father and gudesire, and mind to

have seen Lord Randal, your great-grandfather, but that was when

I was a bairn."



"And what of all this, Balderstone?" said the Master; "what can

it possibly have to do with my paying some ordinary civility to a

neighbour."



"Oh, Mr. Edgar,--that is, my lord!" answered the butler, "your

ain conscience tells you it isna for your father's son to be

neighbouring wi' the like o' him; it isna for the credit of the

family.  An he were ance come to terms, and to gie ye back your

ain, e'en though ye suld honour his house wi' your alliance, I

suldna say na; for the young leddy is a winsome sweet creature.

But keep your ain state wi' them--I ken the race o' them weel--

they will think the mair o' ye."



"Why, now, you go father than I do, Caleb," said the Master,

drowning a certain degree of consciousness in a forced laugh;

"you are for marrying me into a family that you will nto allow me

to visit, how this? and you look as pale as death besides."



"Oh, sir," repeated Caleb again, "you would but laugh if I tauld

it; but Thomas the Rhymer, whose tongue couldna be fause, spoke

the word of your house that will e'en prove ower true if you go

to Ravenswood this day.  Oh,  that it should e'er have been

fulfilled in my time!"



"And what is it, Caleb?" said Ravenswood, wishing to soothe the

fears of his old servant.



Caleb replied:  "He had never repeated the lines to living

mortal; they were told to him by an auld priest that had been

confessor to Lord Allan's father when the family were Catholic.

But mony a time," he said, "I hae soughed thae dark words ower to

myself, and, well-a-day! little did I think of their coming round

this day."



"Truce with your nonsense, and let me hear the doggerel which

has put it into your head," said the Master, impatiently.



With a quivering voice, and a cheek pale with apprehension,

Caleb faltered out the following lines:



"When the last Laird of Ravenswood to Ravenswood shall ride,

And woo a dead maiden to be his bride,

He shall stable his steed in the Kelpie's flow,

And his name shall be lost for evermoe!"



"I know the Kelpie's flow well enough," said the Master; "I

suppose, at least, you mean the quicksand betwixt this tower and

Wolf's Hope; but why any man in his senses should stable a steed

there----"



"Oh, ever speer ony thing about that, sir--God forbid we should

ken what the prophecy means--but just bide you at hame, and let

the strangers ride to Ravenswood by themselves.  We have done

eneugh for them; and to do mair would be mair against the credit

of the family than in its favour."



"Well, Caleb," said the Master, "I give you the best

possible credit for your good advice on this occasion; but as I

do not go to Ravenswood to seek a bride, dead or alive, I hope I

shall choose a better stable for my horse than the Kelpie's

quicksand, and especially as I have always had a particular dread

of it since the patrol of dragoons were lost there ten years

since.  My father and I saw them from the tower struggling

against the advancing tide, and they were lost long before any

help could reach them."



"And they deserved it weel, the southern loons!" said Caleb;

"what had they ado capering on our sands, and hindering a wheen

honest folk frae bringing on shore a drap brandy?  I hae seen

them that busy, that I wad hae fired the auld culverin or the

demi-saker that's on the south bartizan at them, only I was

feared they might burst in the ganging aff."



Caleb's brain was now fully engaged with abuse of the English

soldiery and excisemen, so that his master found no great

difficulty in escaping from him and rejoining his guests.  All

was now ready for their departure; and one of the Lord Keeper's

grooms having saddled the Master's steed, they mounted in the

courtyard.



Caleb had, with much toil, opened the double doors of the

outward gate, and thereat stationed himself, endeavouring, by the

reverential, and at the same time consequential, air which he

assumed, to supply, by his own gaunt, wasted, and thin person,

the absence of a whole baronial establishment of porters,

warders, and liveried menials.



The Keeper returned his deep reverence with a cordial farewell,

stooping at the same time from his horse, and sliding into the

butler's hand the remuneration which in those days was always

given by a departing guest to the domestics of the family where

he had been entertained.   Lucy smiled on the old man with her

usual sweetness, bade him adieu, and deposited her guerdon with a

grace of action and a gentleness of accent which could not have

failed to have won the faithful retainer's heart, but for Thomas

the Rhymer, and the successful lawsuit against his master.  As it

was, he might have adopted the language of the Duke in As You

Like It:



Thou wouldst have better pleased me with this deed,

If thou hadst told me of another father.



Ravenswood was at the lady's bridle-rein, encouraging her

timidity, and guiding her horse carefully down the rocky path

which led to the moor, when one of the servants announed from the

rear that Caleb was calling loudly after them, desiring to speak

with his master.  Ravenswood felt it would look singular to

neglect this summons, although inwardly cursing Caleb for his

impertinent officiousness; therefore he was compelled to

relinquish to Mr. Lockhard the aggreeable duty in which he was

engaged, and to ride back to the gate of the courtyard.  Here he

was beginning, somewhat peevishly, to ask Caleb the cause of his

clamour, when the good old man exclaimed: "Whisht, sir!--whisht,

and let me speak just ae word that I couldna say afore folk;

there (putting into his lord's hand the money he had just

received)--there's three gowd pieces; and ye'll want siller up-

bye yonder.  But stay, whisht, now!" for the Master was beginning

to exclaim against this transference, "never say a word, but just

see to get them changed in the first town ye ride through, for

they are bran new frae the mint, and ken-speckle a wee bit."



"You forget, Caleb," said his master, striving to force back the

money on his servant, and extricate the bridle from his hold--

"you forget that I have some gold pieces left of my own.  Keep

these to yourself, my old friend; and, once more, good day to

you.  I assure you, I have plenty.  You know you have managed

that our living should cost us little or nothing."



"Aweel," said Caleb, "these will serve for you another time; but

see ye hae eneugh, for, doubtless, for the credit of the family,

there maun be some civility to the servants, and ye maun hae

something to mak a show with when they say, 'Master, will you

bet a broad piece?'  Then ye maun tak out your purse, and say, 'I

carena if I do'; and tak care no to agree on the articles of the

wager, and just put up your purse again, and----"



"This is intolerable, Caleb; I really must be gone."



"And you will go, then?" said Caleb, loosening his hold upon the

Master's cloak, and changing his didactics into a pathetic and

mournful tone--"and you WILL go, for a' I have told you about

the prophecy, and the dead bride, and the Kelpie's

quicksand?  Aweel! a wilful man maun hae his way: he that will to

Cupar maun to Cupar.  But pity of your life, sir, if ye be

fowling or shooting in the Park, beware of drinking at the

Mermaiden's Well----  He's gane! he's down the path arrow-flight

after her!  The head is as clean taen aff the Ravenswood family

this day as I wad chap the head aff a sybo!"



The old butler looked long after his master, often clearing away

the dew as it rose to his eyes, that he might, as long as

possible, distinguish his stately form from those of the other

horsemen.  "Close to her bridle-rein--ay, close to her bridle-

rein!  Wisely saith the holy man, 'By this also you may know that

woman hath dominion over all men'; and without this lass would

not our ruin have been a'thegither fulfilled."



With a heart fraught with such sad auguries did Caleb return to

his necessary duties at Wofl's Crag, as soon as he could no

longer distinguish the object of his anxiety among the group fo

riders, which diminished in the distance.



In the mean time the party pursued their route joyfully.  Having

once taken his resolution, the Master of Ravenswood  was not of a

character to hesitate or pause upon it.  He abandoned himself to

the pleasure he felt in Miss Ashton's company, and displayed an

assiduous gallantry which approached as nearly to gaiety as the

temper of his mind and state of his family

permitted.  The Lord Keeper was much struck with his depth of

observation, and the unusual improvement which he had derived

from his studies.  Of these accomplishments Sir William Ashton's

profession and habits of society rendered him an excellent judge;

and he well knew how to appreciate a quality to which he himself

was a total stranger--the brief and decided dauntlessness of the

Master of Ravenswood's fear.  In his heart the Lord Keeper

rejoiced at having conciliated an adversary so formidable, while,

with a mixture of pleasure and anxiety, he anticipated the great

things his young companion might achieve, were the breath of

court-favour to fill his sails.



"What could she desire," he thought, his mind always

conjuring up opporition in the person of Lady Ashton to his new

prevailing wish--"what could a woman desire in a match more than

the sopiting of a very dangerous claim, and the alliance of a

son-in-law, noble, brave, well-gifted, and highly connected; sure

to float whenever the tide sets his way; strong, exactly where we

are weak, in pedigree and in the temper of a swordsman?  Sure, no

reasonable woman would hesitate.  But alas----!"  Here his

argument was stopped by the consciousness that Lady Ashton was

not always reasonable, in his sense of the word.  "To prefer some

clownish Merse laird to the gallant young nobleman, and to the

secure possession of Ravenswood upon terms of easy compromise--it

would be the act of a madwoman!"



Thus pondered the veteran politician, until they reached

Bittlebrains House, where it had been previously settled they

were to dine and repose themselves, and prosecute their journey

in the afternoon.



They were received with an excess of hospitality; and the most

marked attention was offered to the Master of Ravenswood, in

particular, by their noble entertainers.  The truth was, that

Lord Bittlebrains had obtained his peerage by a good deal of

plausibility, an art of building up a character for wisdom upon a

very trite style of commonplace eloquence, a steady observation

of the changes of the times, and the power of rendering certain

political services to those who could best reward them.  His lady

and he, not feeling quite easy under their new honours, to which

use had not adapted their feelings, were very desirous to procure

the fraternal countenance of those who were born denizens of the

regions into which they had been exalted from a lower sphere.

The extreme attention which they paid to the Master of Ravenswood

had its usual effect in exalting his importance in the eyes of

the Lord Keeper, who, although he had a reasonable degree of

contempt for Lord Bittlebrains's general parts, entertained a

high opinion of the acuteness of his judgment in all matters of

self-interest.



"I wish Lady Ashton had seen this," was his internal

reflection; "no man knows so well as Bittlebrains on which side

his bread is buttered; and he fawns on the Master like a beggar's

messan on a cook.  And my lady, too, bringing forward her beetle-

browed misses to skirl and play upon the virginals, as if she

said, 'Pick and choose.'  They are no more comparable to Lucy

than an owl is to a cygnet, and so they may carry their black

brows to a farther market."



The entertainment being ended, our travellers, who had still to

measure the longest part of their journey, resumed their horses;

and after the Lord Keeper, the Master, and the domestics had

drunk doch-an-dorroch, or the stirrup-cup, in the liquors

adapted to their various ranks, the cavalcade resumed its

progress.



It was dark by the time they entered the avenue of

Ravenswood Castle, a long straight line leading directly to the

front of the house, flanked with huge elm-trees, which sighed to

the night-wind, as if they compassionated the heir of their

ancient proprietors, who now returned to their shades in the

society, and almost in the retinue, of their new master.  Some

feelings of the same kind oppressed the mind of the Master

himself.  He gradually became silent, adn dropped a little

behind the lady, at whose bridle-rein he had hitherto waited with

such devotion.  He well recollected the period when, at the same

hour in the evening, he had accompanied his father, as that

nobleman left, never again to return to it, the mansion from

which he derived his name and title.  The extensive front of the

old castle, on which he remembered having often looked back, was

then "as black as mourning weed."  The same front now glanced

with many lights, some throwing far forward into the night a

fixed and stationary blaze, and others hurrying from one window

to another, intimating the bustle and busy preparation preceding

their arrival, which had been intimated by an avant-courier.  The

contrast pressed so strongly upon the Master's heart as to

awaken some of the sterner feelings with which he had been

accustomed to regard the new lord of his paternal domain, and to

impress his countenance with an air of servere gravity, when,

alighted from his horse, he stood in the hall no longer his own,

surrounded by the numerous menials of its present owner.



The Lord Keeper, when about to welcome him with the

cordiality which their late intercourse seemed to render proper,

became aware of the change, refrained from his purpose, and only

intimated the ceremony of reception by a deep reverence to his

guest, seeming thus delicately to share the feelings which

predominated on his brow.



Two upper domestics, bearing each a huge pair of silver

candlesticks, now marshalled the company into a large saloon, or

withdrawing-room, where new alterations impressed upon

Ravenswood the superior wealth of the present inhabitants of the

castle.  The mouldering tapestry, which, in his father's time,

had half covered the walls of this stately apartment, and half

streamed from them in tatters, had given place to a complete

finishing of wainscot, the cornice of which, as well as the

frames of the various compartments, were ornamented with festoons

of flowers and with birds, which, though carved in oak, seemed,

such was the art of the chisel, actually to swell their throats

and flutter their wings.  Several old family portraits of armed

heroes of the house of Ravenswood, together with a suit or two of

old armour and some military weapons, had given place to those of

King William and Queen Mary, or Sir Thomas Hope and Lord Stair,

two distinguished Scottish lawyers.  The pictures of the Lord

Keeper's father and mother were also to be seen; the latter,

sour, shrewish, and solemn, in her black hood and close pinners,

with a book of devotion in her hand; the former, exhibiting

beneath a black silk Geneva cowl, or skull-cap, which sate as

close to the head as if it had been shaven, a pinched, peevish,

Puritanical set of features, terminating in a hungry, reddish,

peaked beard, forming on the whole a countenance in the

expression of which the hypocrite seemed to contend with the

miser and the knave.  "And it is to make room for such scarecrows

as these," thought Ravenswood, "that my ancestors have been torn

down from the walls which they erected!"  he looked at them

again, and, as he looked, the recollection of Lucy Ashton, for

she had not entered the apartment with them, seemed less lively

in his imagination.  There were also two or three Dutch

drolleries, as the pictures of Ostade and Teniers were then

termed, with one good painting of the Italian school.  There was,

besides, a noble full-length of the Lord Keeper in his robes of

office, placed beside his lady in silk and ermine, a haughty

beauty, bearing in her looks all the pride of the house of

Douglas, from which she was descended.  The painter,

notwithstanding his skill, overcome by the reality, or, perhaps,

from a suppressed sense of humour, had not been able to give the

husband on the canvas that air of awful rule and right supremacy

which indicates the full possession of domestic authority.  It

was obvious at the first glance that, despite mace and gold

frogs, the Lord Keeper was somewhat henpecked.  The floor of this

fine saloon was laid with rich carpets, huge fires blazed in the

double chimneys, and ten silver sconces, reflecting with their

bright plates the lights which they supported, made the whole

seem as brilliant as day.



"Would you choose any refreshment, Master?" said Sir William

Ashton, not unwilling to break the awkward silence.



He received no answer, the Master being so busily engaged in

marking the various changes which had taken place in the

apartment, that he hardly heard the Lord Keeper address him.  A

repetition of the offer of refreshment, with the addition, that

the family meal would be presently ready, compelled his

attention, and reminded him that he acted a weak, perhaps even a

ridiculous, part in suffering himself to be overcome by the

circumstances in which he found himself.  He compelled himself,

therefore, to enter into conversation with Sir William Ashton,

with as much appearance of indifference as he could well command.



"You will not be surprised, Sir William, that I am

interested in the changes you have made for the better in this

apartment.  In my father's time, after our misfortunes compelled

him to live in retirement, it was little used, except by me as a

play-room, when the weather would not permit me to go abroad.  In

that recess was my little workshop, where I treasured the few

carpenters' tools which old Caleb procured for me, and taught me

how to use; there, in yonder corner, under that handsome silver

sconce, I kept my fishing-rods and hunting poles, bows and

arrows."



"I have a young birkie," said the Lord Keeper, willing to change

the tone of the conversation, "of much the same turn.  He is

never happy save when he is in the field.  I wonder he is not

here.  Here, Lockhard; send William Shaw for Mr. Henry.  I

suppose he is, as usual, tied to Lucy's apron-string; that

foolish girl, Master, draws the whole family after her at her

pleasure."



Even this allusion to his daughter, though artfully thrown out,

did not recall Ravenswood from his own topic.

"We were obliged to leave," he said, "some armour and portraits

in this apartment; may I ask where they have been removed to?"



"Why," answered the Keeper, with some hesitation, "the room was

fitted up in our absence, and cedant arma togae is the maxim of

lawyers, you know: I am afraid it has been here somewhat too

literally complied with.  I hope--I believe they are safe,

I am sure I gave orders; may I hope that when they are recovered,

and put in proper order, you will do me the honour to accept them

at my hand, as an atonement for their accidental derangement?"



The Master of Ravenswood bowed stiffly, and, with folded arms,

again resumed his survey of the room.



Henry, a spoilt boy of fifteen, burst into the room, and ran up

to his father.  "Think of Lucy, papa; she has come home so cross

and so fractious, that she will not go down to the stable to see

my new pony, that Bob Wilson brought from the Mull of Galloway."



"I think you were very unreasonable to ask her," said the

Keeper.



"Then you are as cross as she is," answered the boy; "but when

mamma comes home, she'll claw up both your mittens."



"Hush your impertinence, you little forward imp!" said his

father; "where is your tutor?"



"Gone to a wedding at Dunbar; I hope he'll get a haggis to his

dinner"; and he began to sing the old Scottish song:



"There was a haggis in Dunbar,

Fal de ral, etc.

Mony better and few waur,

Fal de ral," etc.



"I am much obliged to Mr. Cordery for his attentions," said the

Lord Keeper; "and pray who has had the charge of you while I was

away, Mr. Henry?"



"Norman and Bob Wilson, forbye my own self."



"A groom and a gamekeeper, and your own silly self--proper

guardians for a young advocate!  Why, you will never know any

statutes but those against shooting red-deer, killing salmon,

and----"



"And speaking of red-game," said the young scapegrace,

interrupting his father without scruple or hesitation, "Norman

has shot a buck, and I showed the branches to Lucy, and she says

they have but eight tynes; and she says that you killed a deer

with Lord Bittlebrains's hounds, when you were west away, and, do

you know, she says it had ten tynes; is it true?"



"It may have had twenty, Henry, for what I know; but if you go

to that gentleman, he can tell you all about it.  Go speak to

him, Henry; it is the Master of Ravenswood."



While they conversed thus, the father and son were standing by

the fire; and the Master, having walked towards the upper end of

the apartment, stood with his back towards them, apparently

engaged in examining one of the paintings.  The boy ran up to

him, and pulled him by the skirt of the coat with the freedom of

a spoilt child, saying, "I say, sir, if you please to tell me----

" but when the Master turned round, and Henry saw his face, he

became suddenly and totally disconcerted; walked two or three

steps backward, and still gazed on Ravenswood with an air of

fear and wonder, which had totally banished from his features

their usual expression of pert vivacity.



"Come to me, young gentleman," said the Master, "and I will tell

you all I know about the hunt."



"Go to the gentleman, Henry," said his father; "you are not used

to be so shy."



But neither invitation nor exhortation had any effect on the

boy.  On the contrary, he turned round as soon as he had

completed his survey of the Master, and walking as cautiously as

if he had been treading upon eggs, he glided back to his father,

and pressed as close to him as possible.  Ravenswood, to avoid

hearing the dispute betwixt the father and the overindulged boy,

thought it most polite to turn his face once more towards the

pictures, and pay no attention to what they said.



"Why do you not speak to the Master, you little fool?" said the

Lord Keeper.



"I am afraid," said Henry, in a very low tone of voice.



"Afraid, you goose!" said his father, giving him a slight shake

by the collar.  "What makes you afraid?"



"What makes him to like the picture of Sir Malise Ravenswood

then?" said the boy, whispering.



"What picture, you natural?" said his father.  "I used to think

you only a scapegrace, but I believe you will turn out a born

idiot."



"I tell you, it is the picture of old Malise of Ravenswood, and

he is as like it as if he had loupen out of the canvas; and it is

up in the old baron's hall that the maids launder the clothes in;

and it has armour, and not a coat like the gentleman; and he has

not a beard and whiskers like the picture; and it has another

kind of thing about the throat, and no band-strings as he has;

and----"



"And why should not the gentleman be like his ancestor, you

silly boy?" said the Lord Keeper.



"Ay; but if he is come to chase us all out of the castle," said

the boy, "and has twenty men at his back in disguise; and is

come to say, with a hollow voice, 'I bide my time'; and is to

kill you on the hearth as Malise did the other man, and whose

blood is still to be seen!"



"Hush! nonsense!" said the Lord Keeper, not himself much pleased

to hear these disagreeable coicidences forced on his notice.

"Master, here comes Lockhard to say supper is served."



And, at the same instant, Lucy entered at another door, having

changed her dress since her return.  The exquisite

feminine beauty of her countenance, now shaded only by a

profusion of sunny tresses; the sylph-like form, disencumbered of

her heavy riding-skirt and mantled in azure silk; the grace of

her manner and of her smile, cleared, with a celerity which

surprised the Master himself, all the gloomy and unfavourable

thoughts which had for some time overclouded his fancy.  In those

features, so simply sweet, he could trace no alliance with the

pinched visage of the peak-bearded, black-capped Puritan, or his

starched, withered spouse, with the craft expressed in the Lord

Keeper's countenance, or the haughtiness which predominated in

that of his lady; and, while he gazed on Lucy Ashton, she seemed

to be an angel descended on earth, unallied to the coarses

mortals among whom she deigned to dwell for a season.  Such is

the power of beauty over a youthful and enthusiastic fancy.

