





CHAPTER XVI.



A slight note I have about me for you, for the delivery of which

you must excuse me.  It is an offer that friendship calls upon me

to do, and no way offensive to you, since I desire nothing but

right upon both sides.



King and no King.





WHEN Ravenswood and his guest met in the morning, the gloom of

the Master's spirit had in part returned.  He, also, had passed a

night rather of reflection that of slumber; and the feelings

which he could not but entertain towards Lucy Ashton had to

support a severe conflict against those which he had so long

nourished against her father.  To clasp in friendship the hand of

the enemy of his house, to entertain him under his roof, to

exchange with him the courtesies and the kindness of domestic

familiarity, was a degradation which his proud spirit could not

be bent to without a struggle.



But the ice being once broken, the Lord Keeper was resolved it

should not have time against to freeze.  It had been part of his

plan to stun and confuse Ravenswood's ideas, by a

complicated and technical statement of the matters which had been

in debate betwixt their families, justly thinking that it would

be difficult for a youth of his age to follow the expositions of

a practical lawyer, concerning actions of compt and reckoning,

and of multiplepoindings, and adjudications and wadsets, proper

and improper, and poindings of the ground, and declarations of

the expiry of the legal.  "Thus," thought Sir William, "I shall

have all the grace of appearing perfectly communicative, while my

party will derive very little advantage from anything I may tell

him."  He therefore took Ravenswood aside into the deep recess of

a window in the hall, and resuming the discourse of the proceding

evening, expressed a hope that his young friend would assume some

patience, in order to hear him enter in a minute and explanatory

detail of those unfortunate circumstances in which his late

honourable father had stood at variance with the Lord Keeper.

The Master of Ravenswood  coloured highly, but was silent; and

the Lord Keeper, though not greatly approving the sudden

heightening of his auditor's complexion, commenced the history

of a bond for twenty thousand merks, advanced by his father to

the father of Allan Lord Ravenswood, and was proceeding to detail

the executorial proceedings by which this large sum had been

rendered a debitum fundi, when he was interrupted by the Master.



"It is not in this place," he said, "that I can hear Sir William

Ashton's explanation of the matters in question between us.  It

is not here, where my father died of a broken heart, that I can

with decency or temper investigate the cause of his distress.  I

might remember that I was a son, and forget the duties of a host.

A time, however, there must come, when these things shall be

discussed, in a place and in a presence where both of us will

have equal freedom to speak and to hear."



"Any time," the Lord Keeper said, "any place, was alike to those

who sought nothing but justice.  Yet it would seem he was, in

fairness, entitled to some premonition respecting the grounds

upon which the Master proposed to impugn the whole train of legal

proceedings, which had been so well and ripely advised in the

only courts competent."



"Sir William Ashton," answered the Master, with warmth, "the

lands which you now occupy were granted to my remote ancestor for

services done with his sword against the English invaders.  How

they have glided from us by a train of proceedings that seem to

be neither sale, nor mortgage, nor adjudication for debt, but a

nondescript and entangled mixture of all these rights; how annual

rent has been accumulated upon principal, and no nook or coign of

legal advantage left unoccupied, until our interest in our

hereditary property seems to have melted away like an icicle in

thaw--all this you understand better than I do.  I am willing,

however, to suppose, from the frankness of your conduct towards

me, that I may in a great measure have mistaken your personal

character, and that things may have appeared right and fitting to

you, a skilful and practised lawyer, which to my ignorant

understanding seem very little short of injustice and gross

oppression."



"And you, my dear Master," answered Sir William--"you, permit me

to say, have been equally misrepresented to me.  I was taught to

believe you a fierce, imperious, hot-headed youth, ready, at the

slightest provocation, to throw your sword into the scales of

justice, and to appeal to those rude and forcible measures from

which civil polity has long protected the people of Scotland.

Then, since we were mutually mistaken in each other, why should

not the young nobleman be willing to listen to the old lawyer,

while, at least, he explains the points of difference betwixt

them?"



"No, my lord," answered Ravenswood; "it is in the House of

British Peers, whose honour must be equal to their rank--it is in

the court of last resort that we must parley together.  The

belted lords of Britain, her ancient peers, must decide, if it is

their will that a house, not the least noble of their members,

shall be stripped of their possessions, the reward of the

patriotism of generations, as the pawn of a wretched mechanic

becomes forfeit to the usurer the instant the hour of redemption

has passed away.  If they yield to the grasping severity of the

creditor, and to the gnawing usury that eats into our lands as

moths into a raiment, it will be of more evil consequence to them

and their posterity than to Edgar Ravenswood.  I shall still have

my sword and my cloak, and can follow the profession of arms

wherever a trumpet shall sound."



As he pronounced these words, in a firm yet melancholy tone, he

raised his eyes, and suddenly encountered those of Lucy Ashton,

who had stolen unawares on their interview, and observed her

looks fastened on them with an expression of enthusiastic

interest and admiration, which had wrapt her for the moment

beyond the fear of discovery.  The noble form and fine features

of Ravenswood, fired with the pride of birth and sense of

internal dignity, the mellow and expressive tones of his voice,

the desolate state of his fortunes, and the indifference with

which he seemed to endure and to dare the worst that might

befall, rendered him a dangerous object of contemplation for a

maiden already too much disposed to dwell upon recollections

connected with him.  When their eyes encountered each other, both

blushed deeply, conscious of some strong internal emotion, an

shunned again to meet each other's looks.  Sir William Ashton

had, of course, closely watched the expression of their

countenances.  "I need fear," said he internally, "neither

Parliament nor protestation; I have an effectual mode of

reconciling myself with this hot-tempered young fellow, in case

he shall become formidable.  The present object is, at all

events, to avoid committing ourselves.   The hook is fixed; we

will nto strain the line too soon: it is as well to reserve the

privilege of slipping it loose, if we do not find the fish worth

landing."



In this selfish and cruel calculation upon the supposed

attachment of Ravenswood to Lucy, he was so far from considering

the pain he might give to the former, by thus dallying with his

affections, that he even did not think upon the risk of involving

his own daughter in the perils of an unfortunate passion; as if

her predilection, which could not escape his attention, were like

the flame of a taper which might be lighted or extinguished at

pleasure.  But Providence had prepared a dreadful requital for

this keen observer of human passions, who had spent his life in

securing advantages to himself by artfully working upon the

passions of others.



Caleb Balderstone now came to announce that breakfast was

prepared; for in those days of substantial feeding, the relics of

the supper simply furnished forth the morning meal.  Neither did

he forget to present to the Lord Keeper, with great reverence, a

morning draught in a large pewter cup, garnished with leaves of

parsley and scurvy-grass.  He craved pardon, of course, for

having omitted to serve it in the great silver standing cup as

behoved, being that it was at present in a silversmith's in

Edinburgh, for the purpose of being overlaid with gilt.



"In Edinburgh like enough," said Ravenswood; "but in what place,

or for what purpose, I am afraid neither you nor I know."



"Aweel!" said Caleb, peevishly, "there's a man standing at the

gate already this morning--that's ae thing that I ken.  Does

your honour ken whether ye will speak wi' him or no?"



"Does he wish to speak with me, Caleb?"



"Less will no serve him," said Caleb; "but ye had best take a

visie of him through the wicket before opening the gate; it's no

every ane we suld let into this castle."



"What! do you suppose him to be a messenger come to arrest me

for debt?" said Ravenswood.



"A messenger arrest your honour for debt, and in your Castle of

Wolf's Crag!  Your honour is jesting wi' auld Caleb this

morning."  However, he whispered in his ear, as he followed him

out, "I would be loth to do ony decent man a

prejudice in your honour's gude opinion; but I would tak twa

looks o' that chield before I let him within these walls."



He was not an officer of the law, however; being no less a

person than Captain Craigengelt, with his nose as red as a

comfortable cup of brandy could make it, his laced cocked hat set

a little aside upon the top of his black riding periwig, a sword

by his side and pistols at his holsters, and his person arrayed

in a riding suit, laid over with tarnished lace--the very moral

of one who would say, "Stand to a true man."



When the Master had recognised him, he ordered the gates to be

opened.  "I suppose," he said, "Captain Craigengelt, there are

no such weighty matters betwixt you and me, but may be discussed

in this place.  I have company in the castle at present, and the

terms upon which we last parted must excuse my asking you to make

part of them."



Craigengelt, although possessing the very perfection of

impudence, was somewhat abashed by this unfavourable reception.

"He had no intention," he said, "to force himself upon the

Master of Ravenswood's hospitality; he was in the honourable

service of bearing a message to him from a friend, otherwise the

Master of Ravenswood should not have had reason to complain of

this intrusion."



"Let it be short, sir," said the Master, "for that will be the

best apology.  Who is the gentleman who is so fortunate as to

have your services as a messenger?"



"My friend, Mr. Hayston of Bucklaw," answered Craigengelt, with

conscious importance, and that confidence which the

acknowledged courage of his principal inspired, "who conceives

himself to have been treated by you with something much short of

the respect which he had reason to demand, and, therefore is

resolved to exact satisfaction.  I bring with me," said he,

taking a piece of paper out of his pocket, "the precise length of

his sword; and he requests you will meet him, accompanied by a

friend, and equally armed, at any place within a mile of the

castle, when I shall give attendance as umpire, or second, on his

behoof."



"Satisfaction! and equal arms!" repeated Ravenswood, who, the

reader will recollect, had no reason to suppose he had given the

slightest offence to his late intimate; "upon my word, Captain

Craigengelt, either you have invented the most improbable

falsehood that ever came into the mind of such a person, or your

morning draught has been somewhat of the strongest.  What could

persuade Bucklaw to send me such a message?"



"For that, sir," replied Craigengelt, "I am desired to refer you

to what, in duty to my friend, I am to term your

inhospitality in excluding him from your house, without reasons

assigned."



"It is impossible," replied the Master; "he cannot be such a

fool as to interpret actual necessity as an insult.  Nor do I

believe that, knowing my opinion of you, Captain, he would have

employed the services of so slight and inconsiderable a person as

yourself upon such an errand, as I certainly could expect no man

of honour to act with you in the office of umpire."



"I slight and inconsiderable?" said Craigengelt, raising his

voice, and laying his hand on his cutlass; "if it were not that

the quarrel of my friend craves the precedence, and is in

dependence before my own, I would give you to understand----"



"I can understand nothing upon your explanation, Captain

Craigengelt.  Be satisfied of that, and oblige me with your

departure."



"D----n!" muttered the bully; "and is this the answer which I am

to carry back to an honourable message?"



"Tell the Laird of Bucklaw," answered Ravenswood, "if you are

really sent by him, that, when he sends me his cause of

grievance by a person fitting to carry such an errand betwixt him

and me, I will either explain it or maintain it."



"Then, Master, you will at least cause to be returned to

Hayston, by my hands, his property which is remaining in your

possession."



"Whatever property Bucklaw may have left behind him, sir,"

replied the Master, "shall be returned to him by my servant, as

you do not show me any credentials from him which entitle you to

receive it."



"Well, Master," said Captain Craigengelt, with malice which even

his fear of the consequences could not suppress, "you have this

morning done me an egregious wrong adn dishonour, but far more to

yourself.  A castle indeed!" he continued, looking around him;

"why, this is worse than a coupe-gorge house, where they

receive travellers to plunder them of their property."



"You insolent rascal," said the Master, raising his cane, and

making a grasp at the Captain's bridle, "if you do not depart

without uttering another syllable, I will batoon you to death!"



At the motion of the Master towards him, the bully turned so

rapidly round, that with some difficulty he escaped throwing down

his horse, whose hoofs struck fire from the rocky pavement in

every direction.  Recovering him, however, with the bridle, he

pushed for the gate, and rode sharply back again in the direction

of the village.



As Ravenswood turned round to leave the courtyard after this

dialogue, he found that the Lord Keeper had descended from the

hall, and witnessed, though at the distance prescribed by

politeness, his interview with Craigengelt.



"I have seen," said the Lord Keeper, "that gentleman's face, and

at no great distance of time; his name is Craig--Craig--

something, is it not?"



"Craigengelt is the fellow's name," said the Master, "at least

that by which he passes at present."



"Craig-in-guilt," said Caleb, punning upon the word "craig,"

which in Scotch signifies throat; "if he is Craig-in-guilt just

now, he is as likely to be Craig-in-peril as ony chield I ever

saw; the loon has woodie written on his very visnomy, and I wad

wager twa and a plack that hemp plaits his cravat yet."



"You understand physiognomy, good Mr. Caleb," said the Keeper,

smiling; "I assure you the gentleman has been near such a

consummation before now; for I most distinctly recollect that,

upon occasion of a journey which I made about a fortnight ago to

Edinburgh, I saw Mr. Craigengelt, or whatever is his name,

undergo a severe examination before the privy council."



"Upon what account?" said the Master of Ravenswood, with some

interest.



The question led immediately to a tale which the Lord Keeper had

been very anxious to introduce, when he could find a graceful

and fitting opportunity.  He took hold of the Master's arm, and

led him back towards the hall.  "The answer to your question," he

said, "though it is a ridiculous business, is only fit for your

own ear."



As they entered the hall, he again took the Master apart into

one of the recesses of the window, where it will be easily

believed that Miss Ashton did not venture again to intrude upon

their conference.
