





CHAPTER XXVII.



Why, now I have Dame Fortune by the Forelock,

And if she escapes my grasp, the fault is mine;

He that hath buffeted with stern adversity

Best knows the shape his course to favouring breezes.



Old Play.





OUR travellers reach Edinburgh without any farther

adventure, and the Master of Ravenswood, as had been previously

settled, took up his abode with his noble friend.



In the mean time, the political crisis which had been expected

took place, and the Tory party obtained in the Scottish, as in

the English, councils of Queen Anne a short-lived

ascendency, of which it is not our business to trace either the

cause or consequences.  Suffice it to say, that it affected the

different political parties according to the nature of their

principles.  In England, many of the High Church party, with

Harley, afterwards Earl of Oxford, at their head, affected to

separate their principles from those of the Jacobites, and, on

that account, obtained the denomination of Whimsicals.  The

Scottish High Church party, on the contrary, or, as they termed

themselves, the Cavaliers, were more consistent, if not so

prudent, in their politics, and viewed all the changes now made

as preparatory to calling to the throne, upon the queen's demise,

her brother the Chevalier de St. George.  Those who had suffered

in his service now entertained the most unreasonable hopes, not

only of indemnification, but of vengeance upon their political

adversaries; while families attached to the Whig interest saw

nothing before them but a renewal of the hardships they had

undergone during the reigns of Charles the Second and his

brother, and a retaliation of the confiscation which had been

inflicted upon the Jacobites during that of King William.



But the most alarmed at the change of system was that prudential

set of persons, some of whom are found in all

governments, but who abound in a provincial administration like

that of Scotland during the period, and who are what Cromwell

called waiters upon Providence, or, in other words, uniform

adherents to the party who are uppermost.  Many of these hastened

to read their recantation to the Marquis of A----; and, as it was

easily seen that he took a deep interest in the affairs of his

kinsman, the Master of Ravenswood, they were the first to suggest

measures for retrieving at least a part of his property, and for

restoring him in blood against his father's attainder.



Old Lord Turntippet professed to be one of the most anxious for

the success of these measures; for "it grieved him to the very

saul," he said, "to see so brave a young gentleman, of sic auld

and undoubted nobility, and, what was mair than a' that, a bluid

relation of the Marquis of A----, the man whom," he swore, "he

honoured most upon the face of the earth, brougth to so severe a

pass.  For his ain puir peculiar," as he said, "and to

contribute something to the rehabilitation of sae auld ane

house," the said Turntippet sent in three family pictures lacking

the frames, and six high-backed chairs, with worked Turkey

cushions, having the crest of Ravenswood broidered thereon,

without charging a penny either of the principal or interest they

had cost him, when he bought them, sixteen years before, at a

roup of the furniture of Lord Ravenswood's lodgings in the

Canongate.



Much more to Lord Turntippet's dismay than to his surprise,

although he affected to feel more of the latter than the former,

the Marquis received his gift very drily, and observed, that his

lordship's restitution, if he expected it to be received by the

Master of Ravenswood and his friends, must comprehend a pretty

large farm, which, having been mortgaged to Turntippet for a very

inadequate sum, he had contrived, during the confusion of the

family affairs, and by means well understood by the lawyers of

that period, to acquire to himself in absolute property.



The old time-serving lord winced excessively under the

requisition, protesting to God, that he saw no occasion the lad

could have for the instant possession of the land, seeing he

would doubtless now recover the bulk of his estate from Sir

William Ashton, to which he was ready to contribute by every

means in his power, as was just and reasonable; and finally

declaring, that he was willing to settle the land on the young

gentleman after his own natural demise.



But all these excuses availed nothing, and he was compelled to

disgorge the property, on receiving back the sum for which it

had been mortgaged.  Having no other means of making peace with

the higher powers, he returned home sorrowful and malcontent,

complaining to his confidants, "That every mutation or change in

the state had hitherto been productive of some sma' advantage to

him in his ain quiet affairs; but that the present had--pize upon

it!--cost him one of the best penfeathers o' his wing."



Similar measures were threatened against others who had profited

by the wreck of the fortune of Ravenswood; and Sir William

Ashton, in particular, was menaced with an appeal to the House of

Peers, a court of equity, against the judicial

sentences, proceeding upon a strict and severe construction of

the letter of the law, under which he held the castle and barony

of Ravenswood.  With him, however, the Master, as well for Lucy's

sake as on account of the hospitality he had received from him,

felt himself under the necessity of proceeding with great

candor.  He wrote to the late Lord Keeper, for he no longer held

that office, stating frankly the engagement which existed between

him and Miss Ashton, requesting his permission for their union,

and assuring him of his willingness to put the settlement of all

matters between them upon such a footing as Sir William himself

should think favourable.



The same messenger was charged with a letter to Lady Ashton,

deprecating any cause of displeasure which the Master might

unintentionally have given her, enlarging upon his attachment to

Miss Ashton, and the length to which it had proceeded, and

conjuring the lady, as a Douglas in nature as well as in name,

generously to forget ancient prejudices and misunderstandings,

and to believe that the family had acquired a friend, and she

herself a respectful and attached humble servant, in him who

subscribed himself, "Edgar, Master of Ravenswood."

A third letter Ravenswood addressed to Lucy, and the

messenger was instructed to find some secret and secure means of

delivering it into her own hands.  It contained the strongest

protestations of continued affection, and dwelt upon the

approaching change of the writer's fortunes, as chiefly valuable

by tending to remove the impediments to their union.  He related

the steps he had taken to overcome the prejudices of her parents,

and especially of her mother, and expressed his hope they might

prove effectual.  If not, he still trusted that his absence from

Scotland upon an important and honourable mission might give time

for prejudices to die away; while he hoped and trusted Miss

Ashton's constancy, on which he had the most implicit reliance,

would baffle any effort that might be used to divert her

attachment.  Much more there was, which, however interesting to

the lovers themselves, would afford the reader neither interest

nor information.  To each of these three letters the Master of

Ravenswood received an answer, but by different means of

conveyance, and certainly couched in very different styles.



Lady Ashton answered his leetter by his own messenger, who was

not allowed to remain at Ravenswood a moment longer than she was

engaged in penning these lines.  "For the hand of Mr.

Ravenswood of Wolf's Crag--These:



"SIR, UNKNOWN:

"I have received a letter, signed 'Edgar, Master of

Ravenswood,' concerning the writer whereof I am uncertain, seeing

that the honours of such a family were forfeited for high reason

in the person of Allan, late Lord Ravenswood.  Sir, if you shall

happen to be the person so subscribing yourself, you will please

to know, that I claim the full interest of a parent in Miss Lucy

Ashton, which I have disposed of irrevocably in behalf of a

worthy person.  And, sir, were this otherwise, I would not listen

to a proposal from you, or any of your house, seeing their hand

has been uniformly held up against the freedom of the subject and

the immunities of God's kirk.  Sir, it is not a flightering blink

of prosperity which can change my constant opinion in this

regard, seeing it has been my lot before now, like holy David, to

see the wicked great in power and flourishing like a green bay-

tree; nevertheless I passed, and they were not, and the place

thereof knew them no more.  Wishing you to lay these things to

your heart for your own sake, so far as they may concern you, I

pray you to take no farther notice of her who desires to remain

your unknown servant,

"MARGARET DOUGLAS,

"otherwise ASHTON."



About two days after he had received this very

unsatisfactory epistle, the Master of Ravenswood, while walking

up the High Street of Edinburgh, was jostled by a person, in

whom, as the man pulled off his hat to make an apology, he

recognized Lockhard, the confidential domestic of Sir William

Ashton.  The man bowed, slipt a letter into his hand, and

disappeared.  The packet contained four close-written folios,

from which, however, as is sometimes incident to the compositions

of great lawyers, little could be extracted, excepting that the

writer felt himself in a very puzzling predicament.



Sir William spoke at length of his high value and regard for his

dear young friend, the Master of Ravenswood, and of his very

extreme high value and regard for the Marquis of A----, his very

dear old friend; he trusted that any measures that they might

adopt, in which he was concerned, would be carred on with due

regard to the sanctity of decreets and judgments obtained in

foro contentioso; protesting, before men and angels, that if the

law of Scotland, as declared in her supreme courts, were to

undergo a reversal in the English House of Lords, the evils which

would thence arise to the public would inflict a greater wound

upon his heart than any loss he might himself sustain by such

irregular proceedings.  He flourished much on generosity and

forgiveness of mutual injuries, and hinted at the mutability of

human affairs, always favourite topics with the weaker party in

politics.  He pathetically lamented, and gently censured, the

haste which had been used in depriving him of his situation of

Lord Keeper, which his experience had enabled him to fill with

some advantage to the public, without so much as giving him an

opportunity of explaining how far his own views of general

politics might essentially differ from those now in power.  He

was convinced the Marquis of A---- had as sincere intentions

towards the public as himself or any man; and if, upon a

conference, they could have agreed upon the measures by which it

was to be pursued, his experience and his interest should have

gone to support the present administration.  Upon the engagement

betwixt Ravenswood and his daughter, he spoke in a dry and

confused manner.  He regretted so premature a step as the

engagement of the young people should have been taken, and

conjured the Master to remember he had never given any

encouragement thereunto; and observed that, as a transaction

inter minores, and without concurrence of his daughter's

natural curators, the engagement was inept, and void in law.

This precipitate measure, he added, had produced a very bad

effect upon Lady Ashton's mind, which it was impossible at

present to remove.  Her son, Colonel Douglas Ashton, had embraced

her prejudices in the fullest extent, and it was impossible for

Sir William to adopt a course disagreeable to them without a

fatal and irreconcilable breach in his family; which was not at

present to be thought of.  Time, the great physician, he hoped,


would mend all.



In a postscript, Sir William said something more explicitly,

which seemed to intimate that, rather than the law of Scotland

should sustain a severe wound through his sides, by a reversal of

the judgment of her supreme courts, in the case of the barony of

Ravenswood, through the intervention of what, with all

submission, he must term a foreign court of appeal, he himself

would extrajudically consent to considerable sacrifices.



From Lucy Ashton, by some unknown conveyance, the Master

received the following lines:  "I received yours, but it was at

the utmost risk; do not attempt to write again till better

times.  I am sore beset, but I will be true to my word, while the

exercise of my reason is vouchsafed to me.  That you are happy

and prosperous is some consolation, and my situation requires it

all."  The note was signed "L.A."



This letter filled Ravenswood with the most lively alarm.  He

made many attempts, notwithstanding her prohibition, to convey

letters to Miss Ashton, and even to obtain an interview; but his

plans were frustrated, and he had only the mortification to learn

that anxious and effectual precautions had been taken to prevent

the possibility of their correspondence.  The Master was the

more distressed by these circumstances, as it became impossible

to delay his departure from Scotland, upon the important mission

which had been confided to him.  Before his departure, he put Sir

William Ashton's letter into the hands of the Marquis of A----,

who observed with a smile, that Sir William's day of grace was

past, and that he had now to learn which side of the hedge the

sun had got to.  It was with the greatest difficulty that

Ravenswood extorted from the Marquis a promise that he would

compromise the proceedings in Parliament, providing Sir William

should be disposed to acquiesce in a union between him and Lucy

Ashton.



"I would hardly," said the Marquis, "consent to your

throwing away your birthright in this manner, were I not

perfectly confident that Lady Ashton, or Lady Douglas, or

whatever she calls herself, will, as Scotchmen say, keep her

threep; and that her husband dares not contradict her."



"But yet," said the Master, "I trust your lordship will consider

my engagement as sacred."



"Believe my word of honour," said the Marquis, "I would be a

friend even to your follies; and having thus told you MY

opinion, I will endeavour, as occasion offers, to serve you

according to your own."



The master of Ravenswood could but thank his generous kinsman

and patron, and leave him full power to act in all his affairs.

He departed from Scotland upon his mission, which, it was

supposed, might detain him upon the continent for some months.
