





CHAPTER XIX.



I do too ill in this,

And must not think but that a parent's plaint

Will move the heavens to pour forth misery

Upon the head of disobediency.

Yet reason tells us, parents are o'erseen,

When with too strict a rein they do hold in

Their child's affection, and control that love,

Which the high powers divine inspire them with.



The Hog hath lost his Pearl.







THE feast of Ravenswood Castle was as remarkable for its

profusion as that of Wolf's Crag had been for its ill-veiled

penury.  The Lord Keeper might feel internal pride at the

contrast, but he had too much tact to suffer it to appear.  On

the contrary, he seemed to remember with pleasure what he called

Mr. Balderstone's bachelor's meal, and to be rather disgusted

than pleaseed with the display upon his own groaning board.



"We do these things," he said, "because others do them; but I

was bred a plain man at my father's frugal table, and I should

like well would my wife and family permit me to return to my

sowens and my poor-man-of-mutton."



This was a little overstretched.  The Master only answered,

"That different ranks--I mean," said he, correcting himself,

"different degrees of wealth require a different style of

housekeeping."



This dry remark put a stop to further conversation on the

subject, nor is it necessary to record that which was substituted

in its place.  The evening was spent with freedom, and even

cordiality; and Henry had so far overcome his first

apprehensions, that he had settled a party for coursing a stag

with the representative and living resemblance of grim Sir Malise

of Ravenswood, called the Revenger.  The next morning was the

appointed time.  It rose upon active sportsmen and successful

sport.  The banquet came in course; and a pressing invitation to

tarry yet another day was given and accepted.  This Ravenswood

had resolved should be the last of his stay; but he recollected

he had not yet visited the ancient and devoted servant of his

house, Old Alice, and it was but kind to dedicate one morning to

the gratification of so ancient an adherent.



To visit Alice, therefore, a day was devoted, and Lucy was the

Master's guide upon the way.  Henry, it is true, accompanied

them, and took from their walk the air of a tete-a-tete,

while, in reality, it was little else, considering the variety of

circumstances which occurred to prevent the boy from giving the

least attention to what passed between his companions.  Now a

rook settled on a branch within shot; anon a hare crossed their

path, and Henry and his greyhound went astray in pursuit of it;

then he had to hold a long conversation with the forester, which

detained him a while behind his companions; and again he went to

examine the earth of a badger, which carriued him on a good way

before them.



The conversation betwixt the Master and his sister,

meanwhile, took an interesting, and almost a confidential, turn.

She could not help mentioning her sense of the pain he must feel

in visiting scenes so well known to him, bearing now an aspect so

different; and so gently was her sympathy expressed, that

Ravenswood felt it for a moment as a full requital of all his

misfortunes.  Some such sentiment escaped him, which Lucy heard

with more of confusion than displeasure; and she may be forgiven

the imprudence of listening to such langauge, considering that

the situation in which she was placed by her father seemed to

authorise Ravenswood to use it.  Yet she made an effort to turn

the conversation, and she succeeded; for the Master also had

advanced farther than he intended, and his conscience had

instantly checked him when he found himself on the verge of

speaking of love to the daughter of Sir William Ashton.



They now approached the hut of Old Alice, which had of late been

rendered more comfortable, and presented an appearance less

picturesque, perhaps, but far neater than before.  The old woman

was on her accustomed seat beneath the weeping birch, basking,

with the listless enjoyment of age and infirmity, in the beams of

the autumn sun.  At the arrival of her visitors she turned her

head towards them.  "I hear your step, Miss Ashton," she said,

"but the gentleman who attends you is not my lord, your father."



"And why should you think so, Alice?" said Lucy; "or how is it

possible for you to judge so accurately by the sound of a step,

on this firm earth, and in the open air?"



"My hearing, my child, has been sharpened by my blindness, and I

can now draw conclusions from the slightest sounds, which

formerly reached my ears as unheeded as they niw approach yours.

Necessity is a stern but an excellent schoolmistress, and she

that has lost her sight must collect her information from other

sources."



"Well, you hear a man's step, I grant it," said Lucy; "but why,

Alice, may it not be my father's?"



"The pace of age, my love, is timid and cautious: the foot takes

leave of the earth slowly, and is planted down upon it with

hesitation; it is the hasty and determined step of youth that I

now hear, and --could I give credit to so strange a thought--I

should say is was the step of a Ravenswood."



"This is indeed," said Ravenswood, "an acuteness of organ which

I could not have credited had I not witnessed it.  I am indeed

the Master of Ravenswood, Alice,--the son of your old master."



"You!" said the old woman, with almost a scream of surprise--

"you the Master of Ravenswood--here--in this place, and thus

accompanied!  I cannot believe it.  let me pass my old hand over

your face, that my touch may bear witness to my ears."



The Master sate down beside her on the earthen bank, and

permitted her to touch his features with her trembling hand.



"It is indeed!" she said--"it is the features as well as the

voice of Ravenswood--the high lines of pride, as well as the bold

and haughty tone.  But what do you here, Master of Ravenwsood?--

what do you in your enemy's domain, and in company with his

child?"

As Old Alice spoke, her face kindled, as probably that of an

ancient feudal vassal might have done in whose presence his

youthful liege-lord had showed some symptom of degenerating from

the spirit of his ancestors.



"The Master of Ravenswood," said Lucy, who liked not the tone of

this expostulation, and was desirous to abridge it, "is upon a

visit to my father."



"Indeed!" said the old blind woman, in an accent of

surprise.



"I knew," continued Lucy, "I should do him a pleasure by

conducting him to your cottage."



"Where, to say the truth, Alice," said Ravenswood, "I expected a

more cordial reception."



"It is most wonderful!" said the old woman, muttering to

herself; "but the ways of Heaven are not like our ways, and its

judgments are brought about by means far beyond our fathoming.

Hearken, young man," she said; "your fathers were implacable, but

they were honourable, foes; they sought not to ruin their enemies

under the mast of hospitality.  "What have you to do with Lucy

Ashton?  why should your steps move in the same footpath with

hers? why should your voice sound in the same chord and time with

those of Sir William Ashton's daughter?  Young man, he who aims

at revenge by dishonourable means----"



"Be silent, woman!" said Ravenswood, sternly; "it is the devil

that prompts your voice?  Know that this young lady has not on

earth a friend who would venture farther to save her from injury

or from insult."



"And is it even so?" said the old woman, in an altered but

melancholy tone, "then God help you both!"



"Amen!  Alice," said Lucy, who had not comprehended the import

of what the blind woman had hinted, "and send you your senses,

Alice, and your good humour.  If you hold this mysterious

language, instead of welcoming your friends, they will think of

you as other people do."



"And how do other people think?" said Ravenswood, for he also

began to believe the old woman spoke with incoherence.



"They think," said Henry Ashton, who came up at that moment, and

whispered into Ravenswood's ear, "that she is a witch, that

should have been burned with them that suffered at Haddington."



"What is it you say?" said Alice, turning towards the boy, her

sightless visage inflamed with passion; "that I am a witch, and

ought to have suffered with the helpless old wretches who were

murdered at Haddington?"



"Hear to that now," again whispered Henry, "and me

whispering lower than a wren cheeps!"



"If the usurer, and the oppressor, and the grinder of the poor

man's face, and the remover of ancient landmarks, and the

subverter of ancient houses, were at the same stake with me, I

could say, 'Light the fire, in God's name!'"



"This is dreadful," said Lucy; "I have never seen the poor

deserted woman in this state of mind; but age and poverty can ill

bear reproach.  Come, Henry, we will leave her for the present;

she wishes to speak with the Master alone.  We will walk

homeward, and rest us," she added, looking at Ravenswood, "by the

Mermaiden's Well."

"And Alice," said the boy, "if you know of any hare that comes

through among the deer, and makes them drop their calves out of

season, you may tell her, with my compliments to command, that if

Norman has not got a silver bullet ready for her, I'll lend him

one of my doublet-buttons on purpose."



Alice made no answer till she was aware that the sister and

brother were out of hearing.  She then said to Ravenswood:  "And

you, too, are angry with me for my love?  It is just that

strangers should be offended, but you, too, are angry!"



"I am not angry, Alice," said the Master, "only surprised that

you, whose good sense I have ehard so often praised, should give

way to offensive and unfounded suspicions."



"Offensive!" said Alice.   "Ay, trust is ever offensive; but,

surely, not unfounded."



"I tell you, dame, most groundless," replied Ravenswood.



"Then the world has changed its wont, and the Ravenswoods their

hereditary temper, and the eyes of Old Alice's

understanding are yet more blind than those of her countenance.

When did a Ravenswood seek the house of his enemy but with the

purpose of revenge? and hither are you come, Edgar Ravenswood,

either in fatal anger or in still more fatal love."



"In neither," said Ravenswood, "I give you mine honour--I mean,

I assure you."



Alice could not see his blushing cheek, but she noticed his

hestitation, and that he retracted the pledge which he seemed at

first disposed to attach to his denial.



"It is so, then," she said, "and therefore she is to tarry by

the Mermaiden's Well!  Often has it been called a place fatal to

the race of Ravenswood--often has it proved so; but never was it

likely to verify old sayings as much as on this day."



"You drive me to madness, Alice," said Ravenswood; "you are more

silly and more superstitious than old Balderstone.  Are you such

a wretched Christian as to suppose I would in the present day

levy war against the Ashton family, as was the sanguinary custom

in elder times? or do you suppose me so foolish, that I cannot

walk by a young lady's side without plunging headlong in love

with her?"



"My thoughts," replied Alice, "are my own; and if my mortal

sight is closed to objects present with me, it may be I can look

with more steadiness into future events.  Are you prepared to

sit lowest at the board which was once your father's own,

unwillingly, as a connexion and ally of his proud successor?  Are

you ready to live on his bounty; to follow him in the bye-paths

of intrigue and chicane, which none can better point out to you;

to gnaw the bones of his prey when he has devoured the substance?

Can you say as Sir William Ashton says, think as he thinks, vote

as he votes, and call your father's murderer your worshipful

father-in-law and revered patron?  Master of Ravenswood, I am

the eldest servant of your house, and I would rather see you

shrouded and coffined!"



The tumult in Ravenswood's mind was uncommonly great; she struck

upon and awakened a chord which he had for some time

successfully silenced.  He strode backwards and forwards through

the little garden with a hasty pace; and at length checking

himself, and stopping right opposite to Alice, he exclaimed:

"Woman! on the verge of the grave, dare you urge the son of your

master to blood and to revenge?"



"God forbid!" said Alice, solemnly; "and therefore I would have

you depart these fatal bounds, where your love, as well as your

hatred, threatens sure mischief, or at least disgrace, both to

yourself and others.  I would shield, were it in the power of

this withered hand, the Ashtons from you, and you from them, and

both from their own passions.  You can have nothing--ought to

have nothing, in common with them.   Begone from among them; and

if God has destined vengeance on the oppressor's house, do not

you be the instrument."



"I will think on what you have said, Alice," said

Ravenswood, more composedly.  "I believe you mean truly and

faithfully by me, but you urge the freedom of an ancient domestic

somewhat too far.  But farewell; and if Heaven afford me better

means, I will not fail to contribute to your comfort."



He attempted to put a piece of gold into her hand, which she

refused to receive; and, in the slight struggle attending his

wish to force it upon her, it dropped to the earth.



"Let it remain an instant on the ground," said Alice, as the

Master stooped to raise it; "and believe me, that piece of gold

is an emblem of her whom you love; she is as precious, I grant,

but you must stoop even to abasement before you can win her.  For

me, I have as little to do with gold as with earthly passions;

and the best news that the world has in store for me is, that

Edgar Ravenswood is an hundred miles distant from the seat of his

ancestors, with the determination never again to behold it."



"Alice," said the Master, who began  to think this

earnestness had some more secret cause than arose from anything

that the blind woman could have gathered from this casual visit,

"I have heard you praised by my mother for your sense, acuteness,

and fidelity; you are no fool to start at shadows, or to dread

old superstitious saws, like Caleb Balderstone; tell me

distinctly where my danger lies, if you are aware of any which is

tending towards me.  If I know myself, I am free from all such

views respecting Miss Ashton as you impute to me.  I have

necessary business to settle with Sir William; that arranged, I

shall depart, and with as little wish, as you may easily believe,

to return to a place full of melancholy subjects of reflection,

as you have to see me here."

Alice bent her sightless eyes on the ground, and was for some

time plunged in deep meditation.  "I will speak the truth," she

said at length, raising up her head--"I will tell you the source

of my apprehensions, whether my candour be for good or for evil.

Lucy Ashton loves you, Lord of Ravenswood!"



"It is impossible," said the Master.



"A thousand circumstances have proved it to me," replied the

blind woman.  "Her thoughts have turned on no one else since you

saved her from death, and that my experienced judgment has won

from her own conversation.  Having told you this--if you are

indeed a gentleman and your father's son--you will make it a

movtive for flying from her presence.  Her passion will die like

a lamp for want of that the flame should feed upon; but, if you

remain here, her destruction, or yours, or that of both, will be

the inevitable consequence of her misplaced attachment.  I tell

you this secret unwillingly, but it could not have been hid long

from your own observation, and it is better you learn it from

mine.  Depart, Master of Ravenswood; you have my secret.  If you

remain an hour under Sir William Ashton's roof without the

resolution to marry his daughter, you are a villain; if with the

purpose of allying yourself with kin, you are an infatuated and

predestined fool."



So saying, the old blind woman arose, asumed her staff, and,

tottering to her hut, entered it and closed the door, leaving

Ravenswood to his own reflections.

