




Bride of Lammermoor



	by Sir Walter Scott







INTRODUCTION TO THE BRIDE OF LAMMERMOOR





THE Author, on a former occasion, declined giving the real source

from which he drew the tragic subject of this history, because,

though occurring at a distant period, it might possibly be

unpleasing to the feelings of the descendants of the parties.

But as he finds an account of the circumstances given in the

Notes to Law's Memorials, by his ingenious friend, Charles

Kirkpatrick Sharpe, Esq., and also indicated in his reprint of

the Rev. Mr. Symson's poems appended to the Large Description of

Galloway, as the original of the Bride of Lammermoor, the

Author feels himself now at liberty to tell the tale as he had it

from  connexions of his own, who lived very near the period, and

were closely related to the family of the bride.



It is well known that the family of Dalrymple, which has

produced, within the space of two centuries, as many men of

talent, civil and military, and of literary, political, and

professional eminence, as any house in Scotland, first rose into

distinction in the person of James Dalrymple, one of the most

eminent lawyers that  ever lived, though the labours of his

powerful mind were unhappily exercised on a subject so limited as

Scottish jurisprudence, on which he has composed an admirable

work.



He married Margaret, daughter to Ross of Balneel, with whom he

obtained a considerable estate.  She was an able, politic, and

high-minded woman, so successful in what she undertook, that the

vulgar, no way partial to her husband or her family, imputed her

success to necromancy.  According to the popular belief, this

Dame Margaret purchased the temporal prosperity of her family

from the Master whom she served under a singular condition, which

is thus narrated by the historian of her grandson, the great Earl

of Stair:  "She lived to a great age, and at her death desired

that she might not be put under ground, but that her coffin

should stand upright on one end of it, promising that while she

remained in that situation the Dalrymples should continue to

flourish.  What was the old lady's motive for the request, or

whether she really made such a promise, I shall not take upon me

to determine; but it's certain her coffin stands upright in the

isle of the church of Kirklistown, the burial-place belonging to

the family."  The talents of this accomplished race were

suifficient to have accounted for the dignities which many

members of the family attained, without any supernatural

assistance.  But their extraordinary prosperity was attended by

some equally singular family misfortunes, of which that which

befell their eldest daughter was at once unaccountable and

melancholy.



Miss Janet Dalrymple, daughter of the first Lord Stair and Dame

Margaret Ross, had engaged herself without the knowledge of her

parents to the Lord Rutherford, who was not acceptable to them

either on account of his political principles or his want of

fortune.  The young couple broke a piece of gold together, and

pledged their troth in the most solemn manner; and it is said the

young lady imprecated dreadful evils on herself should she break

her plighted faith.  Shortly after, a suitor who was favoured by

Lord Stair, and still more so by his lady, paid his addresses to

Miss Dalrymple.  The young lady refused the proposal, and being

pressed on the subject, confessed her secret engagement.  Lady

Stair, a woman accustomed to universal submission, for even her

husband did not dare to contradict her, treated this objection as

a trifle, and insisted upon her daughter yielding her consent to

marry the new suitor, David Dunbar, son and heir to David Dunbar

of Baldoon, in Wigtonshire.  The first lover, a man of very high

spirit, then interfered by letter, and insisted on the right he

had acquired by his troth plighted with the young lady.  Lady

Stair sent him for answer, that her daughter, sensible of her

undutiful behaviour in entering into a contract unsanctioned by

her parents, had retracted her unlawful vow, and now refused to

fulfil her engagement with him.



The lover, in return, declined positively to receive such an

answer from any one but his mistress in person; and as she had to

deal with a man who was both of a most determined character and

of too high condition to be trifled with, Lady Stair was obliged

to consent to an interview between Lord Rutherford and her

daughter.  But she took care to be present in person, and argued

the point with the disappointed and incensed lover with

pertinacity equal to his own.  She particularly insisted on the

Levitical law, which declares that a woman shall be free of a vow

which her parents dissent from.  This is the passage of Scripture

she founded on:



"If a man vow a vow unto the Lord, or swear an oath to bind his

soul with a bond; he shall not break his word, he shall do

according to all that proceedeth out of his mouth.



"If a woman also vow a vow unto the Lord, and bind herself by a

bond, being in her father's house in her youth;

"And her father hear her vow, and her bond wherewith she hath

bound her soul, and her father shall hold his peace at her: then

all her vows shall stand, and every bond wherewith she hath

bound her soul shall stand.



"But if her father disallow her in the day that he heareth; not

any of her vows, or of her bonds wherewith she hath bound her

soul, shall stand: and the Lord shall forgive her, because her

father disallowed her."--Numbers xxx. 2-5.



While the mother insisted on these topics, the lover in vain

conjured the daughter to declare her own opinion and feelings.

She remained totally overwhelmed, as it seemed--mute, pale, and

motionless as a statue.  Only at her mother's command, sternly

uttered, she summoned strength enough to restore to her plighted

suitor the piece of broken gold which was the emblem of her

troth.  On this he burst forth into a tremendous passion, took

leave of the mother with maledictions, and as he left the

apartment, turned back to say to his weak, if not fickle,

mistresss:  "For you, madam, you will be a world's wonder"; a

phrase by which some remarkable degree of calamity is usually

implied.  He went abroad, and returned not again.  If the last

Lord Rutherford was the unfortunate party, he must have been the

third who bore that title, and who died in 1685.



The marriage betwixt Janet Dalrymple  and David Dunbar of

Baldoon now went forward, the bride showing no repugnance, but

being absolutely passive in everything her mother commanded or

advised.  On the day of the marriage, which, as was then usual,

was celebrated by  a great assemblage of friends and relations,

she was the same--sad, silent, and resigned, as it seemed, to her

destiny.  A lady, very nearly connected with the family, told the

Author that she had conversed on the subject with one of the

brothers of the bride, a mere lad at the time, who had ridden

before his sister to church.  He said her hand, which lay on his

as she held her arm around his waist, was as cold and damp as

marble.  But, full of his new dress and the part he acted in the

procession, the circumstance, which he long afterwards remembered

with bitter sorrow and compunction, made no impression on him at

the time.



The bridal feast was followed by dancing.  The bride and

bridegroom retired as usual, when of a sudden the most wild and

piercing cries were heard from the nuptial chamber.  It was then

the custom, to prevent any coarse pleasantry which old times

perhaps admitted, that the key of the nuptial chamber should be

entrusted to the bridesman.  He was called  upon, but refused at

first to give it up, till the shrieks became so hideous that he

was compelled to hasten with others to learn the cause.  On

opening the door, they found the bridegroom lying across the

threshold, dreadfully wounded, and streaming with blood.  The

bride was then sought for.  She was found in the corner of the

large chimney, having no covering save her shift, and that

dabbled in gore.  There she sat grinning at them, mopping and

mowing, as I heard the expression used; in a word, absolutely

insane.  The only words she spoke were, "Tak up your bonny

bridegroom."  She survived this horrible scene little more than a

fortnight, having been married on the 24th of August, and dying

on the 12th of September 1669.



The unfortunate Baldoon recovered from his wounds, but sternly

prohibited all inquiries respecting the manner in which he had

received them.  "If a lady," he said, "asked him any question

upon the subject, he would neither answer her nor speak to her

again while he lived; if a gentleman, he would consider it as a

mortal affront, and demand satisfaction as having received

such."  He did not very long survive the dreadful catastrophe,

having met with a fatal injury by a fall from his horse, as he

rode between Leith and Holyrood House, of which he died the next

day, 28th March 1682.  Thus a few years removed all the principal

actors in this frightful tragedy.



Various reports went abroad on this mysterious affair, many of

them very inaccurate, though they could hardly be said to be

exaggerated.  It was difficult at that time to become acquainted

with the history of a Scottish family above the lower rank; and

strange things sometimes took place there, into which even the

law did not scrupulously inquire.



The credulous Mr. Law says, generally, that the Lord

President Stair had a daughter, who, "being married, the night

she was bride in, was taken from her bridegroom and harled

through the house (by spirits, we are given to understand) and

afterward died.  Another daughter," he says, "was supposed to be

possessed with an evil spirit."



My friend, Mr. Sharpe, gives another edition of the tale.

According to his information, ti was the bridegroom who wounded

the bride.  The marriage, according to this account, had been

against her mother's inclination, who had given her consent in

these ominous words:  "Weel, you may marry him, but sair shall

you repent it."



I find still another account darkly insinuated in some highly

scurrilous and abusive verses, of which I have an original copy.

They are docketed as being written "Upon the late Viscount Stair

and his family, by Sir William Hamilton of Whitelaw.  The

marginals by William Dunlop, writer in Edinburgh, a son of the

Laird of Househill, and nephew to the said Sir William

Hamilton."  There was a bitter and personal quarrel and rivalry

betwixt the author of this libel, a name which it richly

deserves, and Lord President Stair; and the lampoon, which is

written with much more malice than art, bears the following

motto:



Stair's neck, mind, wife, songs, grandson, and the rest,

Are wry, false, witch, pests, parricide, possessed.



This malignant satirist, who calls up all the misfortunes of the

family, does not forget the fatal bridal of Baldoon.  He seems,

though his verses are as obscure as unpoetical, to

intimate that the violence done to the bridegroom was by the

intervention of the foul fiend, to whom the young lady had

resigned herself, in case she should break her contract with her

first lover.  His hypothesis is inconsistent with the account

given in the note upon Law's Memorials, but easily

reconcilable to the family tradition.



In all Stair's offspriung we no difference know,

They do the females as the males bestow;

So he of one of his daughters' marriages gave the ward,

Like a true vassal, to Glenluce's Laird;

He knew what she did to her master plight,

If she her faith to Rutherfurd should slight,

Which, like his own, for greed he broke outright.

Nick did Baldoon's posterior right deride,

And, as first substitute, did seize the bride;

Whate'er he to his mistress did or said,

He threw the bridegroom from the nuptial bed,

Into the chimney did so his rival maul,

His bruised bones ne'er were cured but by the fall.



One of the marginal notes ascribed to William Dunlop

applies to the above lines.  "She had betrothed herself to Lord

Rutherfoord under horrid imprecations, and afterwards married

Baldoon, his nevoy, and her mother was the cause of her breach of

faith."



The same tragedy is alluded to in the following couplet and

note:



What train of curses that base brood pursues,

When the young nephew weds old uncle's spouse.



The note on the word "uncle" explains it as meaning

"Rutherfoord, who should have married the Lady Baldoon, was

Baldoon's uncle."  The poetry of this satire on Lord Stair and

his family was, as already noticed, written by Sir William

Hamilton of Whitelaw, a rival of Lord Stair for the situation of

President of the Court of Session; a person much inferior to that

great lawyer in talents, and equally ill-treated by the calumny

or just satire of his contemporaries as an unjust and partial

judge.  Some of the notes are by that curious and laborious

antiquary, Robert Milne, who, as a virulent Jacobite, willingly

lent a hand to blacken the family of Stair.



Another poet of the period, with a very different purpose, has

left an elegy, in which he darkly hints at and bemoans the fate

of the ill-starred young person, whose very uncommon

calamity Whitelaw, Dunlop, and Milne thought a fitting subject

for buffoonery and ribaldry.  This bard of milder mood was Andrew

Symson, before the Revolution minister of Kirkinner, in

Galloway, and after his expulsion as an Episcopalian following

the humble occupation of a printer in Edinburgh.  He furnished

the family of Baldoon, with which he appears to have been

intimate, with an elegy on the tragic event in their family.   In

this piece he treats the mournful occasion of the bride's death

with mysterious solemnity.



The verses bear this title, "On the unexpected death of the

virtuous Lady Mrs. Janet Dalrymple, Lady Baldoon, younger," and

afford us the precise dates of the catastrophe, which could not

otherwise have been easily ascertained.  "Nupta August 12.

Domum Ducta August 24.  Obiit September 12.  Sepult.  September

30, 1669."  The form of the elegy is a dialogue betwixt a

passenger and a domestic servant.  The first, recollecting that

he had passed that way lately, and seen all around enlivened by

the appearances of mirth and festivity, is desirous to know what

had changed so gay a scene into mourning.  We preserve the reply

of the servant as a specimen of Mr. Symson's verses, which are

not of the first quality:



Sir, 'tis truth you've told.

We did enjoy great mirth; but now, ah me!

Our joyful song's turn'd to an elegie.

A virtuous lady, not long since a bride,

Was to a hopeful plant by marriage tied,

And brought home hither.  We did all rejoice,

Even for her sake.  But presently our voice

Was turn'd to mourning for that little time

That she'd enjoy: she waned in her prime,

For Atropus, with her impartial knife,

Soon cut her thread, and therewithal her life;

And for the time we may it well remember,

It being in unfortunate September;

.                   .                       .

Where we must leave her till the resurrection.

'Tis then the Saints enjoy their full perfection.



Mr. Symson also poured forth his elegiac strains upon the fate

of the widowed bridegroom, on which subject, after a long and

querulous effusion, the poet arrives at the sound conclusion,

that if Baldoon had walked on foot, which it seems was his

general custom, he would have escaped perishing by a fall from

horseback.  As the work in which it occurs is so scarce as almost

to be unique, and as it gives us the most full account of one of

the actors in this tragic tale which we have rehearsed, we will,

at the risk of being tedious, insert some short specimens of Mr.

Symson's composition.  It is entitled:



"A Funeral Elegie, occasioned by the sad and much lamented death

of that worthily respected, and very much accomplished

gentleman, David Dunbar, younger, of Baldoon, only son and

apparent heir to the right worshipful Sir David Dunbar of

Baldoon, Knight Baronet.  He departed this life on March 28,

1682, having received a bruise by a fall, as he was riding the

day preceding betwixt Leith and Holyrood House; and was

honourably interred in the Abbey Church of Holyrood House, on

April 4, 1682."



Men might, and very justly too, conclude

Me guilty of the worst ingratitude,

Should I be silent, or should I forbear

At this sad accident to shed a tear;

A tear! said I? ah! that's a petit thing,

A very lean, slight, slender offering,

Too mean, I'm sure, for me, wherewith t'attend

The unexpected funeral of my friend:

A glass of briny tears charged up to th' brim.

Would be too few for me to shed for him.



The poet proceeds to state his intimacy with the deceased, and

the constancy of the young man's attendance on public

worship, which was regular, and had such effect upon two or three

other that were influenced by his example:



So that my Muse 'gainst Priscian avers,

He, only he, WERE my parishioners;

Yea, and my only hearers.



He then describes the deceased in person and manners, from which

it appears that more accomplishments were expected in the

composition of a fine gentleman in ancient than modern times:



His body, though not very large or tall,

Was sprightly, active, yea and strong withal.

His constitution was, if right I've guess'd,

Blood mixt with choler, said to be the best.

In's gesture, converse, speech, discourse, attire,

He practis'd that which wise men still admire,

Commend, and recommend.  What's that? you'll say.

'Tis this: he ever choos'd the middle way

'Twixt both th' extremes.  Amost in ev'ry thing

He did the like, 'tis worth our noticing:

Sparing, yet not a niggard; liberal,

And yet not lavish or a prodigal,

As knowing when to spend and when to spare;

And that's a lesson which not many are

Acquainted with.  He bashful was, yet daring

When he saw cause, and yet therein not sparing;

Familiar, yet not common, for he knew

To condescend, and keep his distance too.

He us'd, and that most commonly, to go

On foot; I wish that he had still done so.

Th' affairs of court were unto him well known;

And yet meanwhile he slighted not his own.

He knew full well how to behave at court,

And yet but seldom did thereto resort;

But lov'd the country life, choos'd to inure

Himself to past'rage and agriculture;

Proving, improving, ditching, trenching, draining,

Viewing, reviewing, and by those means gaining;

Planting, transplanting, levelling, erecting

Walls, chambers, houses, terraces; projecting

Now this, now that device, this draught, that measure,

That might advance his profit with his pleasure.

Quick in his bargains, honest in commerce,

Just in his dealings, being much adverse

From quirks of law, still ready to refer

His cause t' an honest country arbiter.

He was acquainted with cosmography,

Arithmetic, and modern history;

With architecture and such arts as these,

Which I may call specifick sciences

Fit for a gentleman; and surely he

That knows them not, at least in some degree,

May brook the title, but he wants the thing,

Is but a shadow scarce worth noticing.

He learned the French, be't spoken to his praise,

In very little more than fourty days."



Then comes the full burst of woe, in which, instead of saying

much himself, the poet informs us what the ancients would have

said on such an occasion:



A heathen poet, at the news, no doubt,

Would have exclaimed, and furiously cry'd out

Against the fates, the destinies and starrs,

What! this the effect of planetarie warrs!

We might have seen him rage and rave, yea worse,

'Tis very like we might have heard him curse

The year, the month, the day, the hour, the place,

The company, the wager, and the race;

Decry all recreations, with the names

Of Isthmian, Pythian, and Olympick games;

Exclaim against them all both old and new,

Both the Nemaean and the Lethaean too:

Adjudge all persons, under highest pain,

Always to walk on foot, and then again

Order all horses to be hough'd, that we

Might never more the like adventure see.



Supposing our readers have had enough of Mr. Symson's woe, and

finding nothing more in his poem worthy of transcription, we

return to the tragic story.



It is needless to point out to the intelligent reader that the

witchcraft of the mother consisted only in the ascendency of a

powerful mind over a weak and melancholy one, adn that the

harshness with which she exercised her superiority in a case of

delicacy had driven her daughter first to despair, then to

frenzy.  Accordingly, the Author has endeavoured to explain the

tragic tale on this principle.  Whatever resemblance Lady Ashton

may be supposed to possess to the celebrated Dame Margaret Ross,

the reader must not suppose that there was any idea of tracing

the portrait of the first Lord Viscount Stair in the tricky and

mean-spirited Sir William Ashton.  Lord Stair, whatever might be

his moral qualities, was certainly one of the first statesmen and

lawyers of his age.



The imaginary castle of Wolf's Crag has been identified by some

lover of locality with that of Fast Castle.  The Author is not

competent to judge of the resemblance betwixt the real and

imaginary scenes, having never seen Fast Castle except from the

sea.  But fortalices of this description are found occupying,

like ospreys' nests, projecting rocks, or promontories, in many

parts of the eastern coast of Scotland, and the position of Fast

Castle seems certainly to resemble that of Wolf's Crag as much as

any other, while its vicinity to the mountain ridge of Lammermoor

renders the assimilation a probable one.



We have only to add, that the death of the unfortunate

bridegroom by a fall from horseback has been in the novel

transferred to the no less unfortunate lover.

