




Chapter XIX



'Love was in the next degree.'





Knight had none of those light familiarities of speech which, by

judicious touches of epigrammatic flattery, obliterate a woman's

recollection of the speaker's abstract opinions.  So no more was

said by either on the subject of hair, eyes, or development.

Elfride's mind had been impregnated with sentiments of her own

smallness to an uncomfortable degree of distinctness, and her

discomfort was visible in her face.  The whole tendency of the

conversation latterly had been to quietly but surely disparage

her; and she was fain to take Stephen into favour in self-defence.

He would not have been so unloving, she said, as to admire an

idiosyncrasy and features different from her own.  True, Stephen

had declared he loved her: Mr. Knight had never done anything of

the sort.  Somehow this did not mend matters, and the sensation of

her smallness in Knight's eyes still remained.  Had the position

been reversed--had Stephen loved her in spite of a differing

taste, and had Knight been indifferent in spite of her resemblance

to his ideal, it would have engendered far happier thoughts.  As

matters stood, Stephen's admiration might have its root in a

blindness the result of passion.  Perhaps any keen man's judgment

was condemnatory of her.



During the remainder of Saturday they were more or less thrown

with their seniors, and no conversation arose which was

exclusively their own.  When Elfride was in bed that night her

thoughts recurred to the same subject.  At one moment she insisted

that it was ill-natured of him to speak so decisively as he had

done; the next, that it was sterling honesty.



'Ah, what a poor nobody I am!' she said, sighing.  'People like

him, who go about the great world, don't care in the least what I

am like either in mood or feature.'



Perhaps a man who has got thoroughly into a woman's mind in this

manner, is half way to her heart; the distance between those two

stations is proverbially short.



'And are you really going away this week?' said Mrs. Swancourt to

Knight on the following evening, which was Sunday.



They were all leisurely climbing the hill to the church, where a

last service was now to be held at the rather exceptional time of

evening instead of in the afternoon, previous to the demolition of

the ruinous portions.



'I am intending to cross to Cork from Bristol,' returned Knight;

'and then I go on to Dublin.'



'Return this way, and stay a little longer with us,' said the

vicar.  'A week is nothing.  We have hardly been able to realize

your presence yet.  I remember a story which----'



The vicar suddenly stopped.  He had forgotten it was Sunday, and

would probably have gone on in his week-day mode of thought had

not a turn in the breeze blown the skirt of his college gown

within the range of his vision, and so reminded him.  He at once

diverted the current of his narrative with the dexterity the

occasion demanded.



'The story of the Levite who journeyed to Bethlehem-judah, from

which I took my text the Sunday before last, is quite to the

point,' he continued, with the pronunciation of a man who, far

from having intended to tell a week-day story a moment earlier,

had thought of nothing but Sabbath matters for several weeks.

'What did he gain after all by his restlessness? Had he remained

in the city of the Jebusites, and not been so anxious for Gibeah,

none of his troubles would have arisen.'



'But he had wasted five days already,' said Knight, closing his

eyes to the vicar's commendable diversion.  'His fault lay in

beginning the tarrying system originally.'



'True, true; my illustration fails.'



'But not the hospitality which prompted the story.'



'So you are to come just the same,' urged Mrs. Swancourt, for she

had seen an almost imperceptible fall of countenance in her

stepdaughter at Knight's announcement.



Knight half promised to call on his return journey; but the

uncertainty with which he spoke was quite enough to fill Elfride

with a regretful interest in all he did during the few remaining

hours.  The curate having already officiated twice that day in the

two churches, Mr. Swancourt had undertaken the whole of the

evening service, and Knight read the lessons for him.  The sun

streamed across from the dilapidated west window, and lighted all

the assembled worshippers with a golden glow, Knight as he read

being illuminated by the same mellow lustre.  Elfride at the organ

regarded him with a throbbing sadness of mood which was fed by a

sense of being far removed from his sphere.  As he went

deliberately through the chapter appointed--a portion of the

history of Elijah--and ascended that magnificent climax of the

wind, the earthquake, the fire, and the still small voice, his

deep tones echoed past with such apparent disregard of her

existence, that his presence inspired her with a forlorn sense of

unapproachableness, which his absence would hardly have been able

to cause.



At the same time, turning her face for a moment to catch the glory

of the dying sun as it fell on his form, her eyes were arrested by

the shape and aspect of a woman in the west gallery.  It was the

bleak barren countenance of the widow Jethway, whom Elfride had

not seen much of since the morning of her return with Stephen

Smith.  Possessing the smallest of competencies, this unhappy

woman appeared to spend her life in journeyings between Endelstow

Churchyard and that of a village near Southampton, where her

father and mother were laid.



She had not attended the service here for a considerable time, and

she now seemed to have a reason for her choice of seat.  From the

gallery window the tomb of her son was plainly visible--standing

as the nearest object in a prospect which was closed outwardly by

the changeless horizon of the sea.



The streaming rays, too, flooded her face, now bent towards

Elfride with a hard and bitter expression that the solemnity of

the place raised to a tragic dignity it did not intrinsically

possess.  The girl resumed her normal attitude with an added

disquiet.



Elfride's emotion was cumulative, and after a while would assert

itself on a sudden.  A slight touch was enough to set it free--a

poem, a sunset, a cunningly contrived chord of music, a vague

imagining, being the usual accidents of its exhibition.  The

longing for Knight's respect, which was leading up to an incipient

yearning for his love, made the present conjuncture a sufficient

one.  Whilst kneeling down previous to leaving, when the sunny

streaks had gone upward to the roof, and the lower part of the

church was in soft shadow, she could not help thinking of

Coleridge's morbid poem 'The Three Graves,' and shuddering as she

wondered if Mrs. Jethway were cursing her, she wept as if her

heart would break.



They came out of church just as the sun went down, leaving the

landscape like a platform from which an eloquent speaker has

retired, and nothing remains for the audience to do but to rise

and go home.  Mr. and Mrs. Swancourt went off in the carriage,

Knight and Elfride preferring to walk, as the skilful old

matchmaker had imagined.  They descended the hill together.



'I liked your reading, Mr. Knight,' Elfride presently found

herself saying.  'You read better than papa.'



'I will praise anybody that will praise me.  You played

excellently, Miss Swancourt, and very correctly.'



'Correctly--yes.'



'It must be a great pleasure to you to take an active part in the

service.'



'I want to be able to play with more feeling.  But I have not a

good selection of music, sacred or secular.  I wish I had a nice

little music-library--well chosen, and that the only new pieces

sent me were those of genuine merit.'



'I am glad to hear such a wish from you.  It is extraordinary how

many women have no honest love of music as an end and not as a

means, even leaving out those who have nothing in them.  They

mostly like it for its accessories.  I have never met a woman who

loves music as do ten or a dozen men I know.'



'How would you draw the line between women with something and

women with nothing in them?'



'Well,' said Knight, reflecting a moment, 'I mean by nothing in

them those who don't care about anything solid.  This is an

instance: I knew a man who had a young friend in whom he was much

interested; in fact, they were going to be married.  She was

seemingly poetical, and he offered her a choice of two editions of

the British poets, which she pretended to want badly.  He said,

"Which of them would you like best for me to send?" She said, "A

pair of the prettiest earrings in Bond Street, if you don't mind,

would be nicer than either." Now I call her a girl with not much

in her but vanity; and so do you, I daresay.'



'Oh yes,' replied Elfride with an effort.



Happening to catch a glimpse of her face as she was speaking, and

noticing that her attempt at heartiness was a miserable failure,

he appeared to have misgivings.



'You, Miss Swancourt, would not, under such circumstances, have

preferred the nicknacks?'



'No, I don't think I should, indeed,' she stammered.



'I'll put it to you,' said the inflexible Knight.  'Which will you

have of these two things of about equal value--the well-chosen

little library of the best music you spoke of--bound in morocco,

walnut case, lock and key--or a pair of the very prettiest

earrings in Bond Street windows?'



'Of course the music,' Elfride replied with forced earnestness.



'You are quite certain?' he said emphatically.



'Quite,' she faltered; 'if I could for certain buy the earrings

afterwards.'



Knight, somewhat blamably, keenly enjoyed sparring with the

palpitating mobile creature, whose excitable nature made any such

thing a species of cruelty.



He looked at her rather oddly, and said, 'Fie!'



'Forgive me,' she said, laughing a little, a little frightened,

and blushing very deeply.



'Ah, Miss Elfie, why didn't you say at first, as any firm woman

would have said, I am as bad as she, and shall choose the same?'



'I don't know,' said Elfride wofully, and with a distressful

smile.



'I thought you were exceptionally musical?'



'So I am, I think.  But the test is so severe--quite painful.'



'I don't understand.'



'Music doesn't do any real good, or rather----'



'That IS a thing to say, Miss Swancourt! Why, what----'



'You don't understand! you don't understand!'



'Why, what conceivable use is there in jimcrack jewellery?'



'No, no, no, no!' she cried petulantly; 'I didn't mean what you

think.  I like the music best, only I like----'



'Earrings better--own it!' he said in a teasing tone.  'Well, I

think I should have had the moral courage to own it at once,

without pretending to an elevation I could not reach.'



Like the French soldiery, Elfride was not brave when on the

defensive.  So it was almost with tears in her eyes that she

answered desperately:



'My meaning is, that I like earrings best just now, because I lost

one of my prettiest pair last year, and papa said he would not buy

any more, or allow me to myself, because I was careless; and now I

wish I had some like them--that's what my meaning is--indeed it

is, Mr. Knight.'



'I am afraid I have been very harsh and rude,' said Knight, with a

look of regret at seeing how disturbed she was.  'But seriously,

if women only knew how they ruin their good looks by such

appurtenances, I am sure they would never want them.'



'They were lovely, and became me so!'



'Not if they were like the ordinary hideous things women stuff

their ears with nowadays--like the governor of a steam-engine, or

a pair of scales, or gold gibbets and chains, and artists'

palettes, and compensation pendulums, and Heaven knows what

besides.'



'No; they were not one of those things.  So pretty--like this,'

she said with eager animation.  And she drew with the point of her

parasol an enlarged view of one of the lamented darlings, to a

scale that would have suited a giantess half-a-mile high.



'Yes, very pretty--very,' said Knight dryly.  'How did you come to

lose such a precious pair of articles?'



'I only lost one--nobody ever loses both at the same time.'



She made this remark with embarrassment, and a nervous movement of

the fingers.  Seeing that the loss occurred whilst Stephen Smith

was attempting to kiss her for the first time on the cliff, her

confusion was hardly to be wondered at.  The question had been

awkward, and received no direct answer.



Knight seemed not to notice her manner.



'Oh, nobody ever loses both--I see.  And certainly the fact that

it was a case of loss takes away all odour of vanity from your

choice.'



'As I never know whether you are in earnest, I don't now,' she

said, looking up inquiringly at the hairy face of the oracle.  And

coming gallantly to her own rescue, 'If I really seem vain, it is

that I am only vain in my ways--not in my heart.  The worst women

are those vain in their hearts, and not in their ways.'



'An adroit distinction.  Well, they are certainly the more

objectionable of the two,' said Knight.



'Is vanity a mortal or a venial sin? You know what life is: tell

me.'



'I am very far from knowing what life is.  A just conception of

life is too large a thing to grasp during the short interval of

passing through it.'



'Will the fact of a woman being fond of jewellery be likely to

make her life, in its higher sense, a failure?'



'Nobody's life is altogether a failure.'



'Well, you know what I mean, even though my words are badly

selected and commonplace,' she said impatiently.  'Because I utter

commonplace words, you must not suppose I think only commonplace

thoughts.  My poor stock of words are like a limited number of

rough moulds I have to cast all my materials in, good and bad; and

the novelty or delicacy of the substance is often lost in the

coarse triteness of the form.'



'Very well; I'll believe that ingenious representation.  As to the

subject in hand--lives which are failures--you need not trouble

yourself.  Anybody's life may be just as romantic and strange and

interesting if he or she fails as if he or she succeed.  All the

difference is, that the last chapter is wanting in the story.  If

a man of power tries to do a great deed, and just falls short of

it by an accident not his fault, up to that time his history had

as much in it as that of a great man who has done his great deed.

It is whimsical of the world to hold that particulars of how a lad

went to school and so on should be as an interesting romance or as

nothing to them, precisely in proportion to his after renown.'



They were walking between the sunset and the moonrise.  With the

dropping of the sun a nearly full moon had begun to raise itself.

Their shadows, as cast by the western glare, showed signs of

becoming obliterated in the interest of a rival pair in the

opposite direction which the moon was bringing to distinctness.



'I consider my life to some extent a failure,' said Knight again

after a pause, during which he had noticed the antagonistic

shadows.



'You! How?'



'I don't precisely know.  But in some way I have missed the mark.'



'Really? To have done it is not much to be sad about, but to feel

that you have done it must be a cause of sorrow.  Am I right?'



'Partly, though not quite.  For a sensation of being profoundly

experienced serves as a sort of consolation to people who are

conscious of having taken wrong turnings.  Contradictory as it

seems, there is nothing truer than that people who have always

gone right don't know half as much about the nature and ways of

going right as those do who have gone wrong.  However, it is not

desirable for me to chill your summer-time by going into this.'



'You have not told me even now if I am really vain.'



'If I say Yes, I shall offend you; if I say No, you'll think I

don't mean it,' he replied, looking curiously into her face.



'Ah, well,' she replied, with a little breath of distress, '"That

which is exceeding deep, who will find it out?" I suppose I must

take you as I do the Bible--find out and understand all I can; and

on the strength of that, swallow the rest in a lump, by simple

faith.  Think me vain, if you will.  Worldly greatness requires so

much littleness to grow up in, that an infirmity more or less is

not a matter for regret.'



'As regards women, I can't say,' answered Knight carelessly; 'but

it is without doubt a misfortune for a man who has a living to

get, to be born of a truly noble nature.  A high soul will bring a

man to the workhouse; so you may be right in sticking up for

vanity.'



'No, no, I don't do that,' she said regretfully.



Mr. Knight, when you are gone, will you send me something you have

written? I think I should like to see whether you write as you

have lately spoken, or in your better mood.  Which is your true

self--the cynic you have been this evening, or the nice

philosopher you were up to to-night?'



'Ah, which? You know as well as I.'



Their conversation detained them on the lawn and in the portico

till the stars blinked out.  Elfride flung back her head, and said

idly--



'There's a bright star exactly over me.'



'Each bright star is overhead somewhere.'



'Is it? Oh yes, of course.  Where is that one?' and she pointed

with her finger.



'That is poised like a white hawk over one of the Cape Verde

Islands.'



'And that?'



'Looking down upon the source of the Nile.'



'And that lonely quiet-looking one?'



'He watches the North Pole, and has no less than the whole equator

for his horizon.  And that idle one low down upon the ground, that

we have almost rolled away from, is in India--over the head of a

young friend of mine, who very possibly looks at the star in our

zenith, as it hangs low upon his horizon, and thinks of it as

marking where his true love dwells.'



Elfride glanced at Knight with misgiving.  Did he mean her? She

could not see his features; but his attitude seemed to show

unconsciousness.



'The star is over MY head,' she said with hesitation.



'Or anybody else's in England.'



'Oh yes, I see:' she breathed her relief.



'His parents, I believe, are natives of this county.  I don't know

them, though I have been in correspondence with him for many years

till lately.  Fortunately or unfortunately for him he fell in

love, and then went to Bombay.  Since that time I have heard very

little of him.'



Knight went no further in his volunteered statement, and though

Elfride at one moment was inclined to profit by the lessons in

honesty he had just been giving her, the flesh was weak, and the

intention dispersed into silence.  There seemed a reproach in

Knight's blind words, and yet she was not able to clearly define

any disloyalty that she had been guilty of.

