




Chapter XXXVII



'After many days.'





Knight roamed south, under colour of studying Continental

antiquities.



He paced the lofty aisles of Amiens, loitered by Ardennes Abbey,

climbed into the strange towers of Laon, analyzed Noyon and

Rheims.  Then he went to Chartres, and examined its scaly spires

and quaint carving then he idled about Coutances.  He rowed

beneath the base of Mont St. Michel, and caught the varied skyline

of the crumbling edifices encrusting it.  St. Ouen's, Rouen, knew

him for days; so did Vezelay, Sens, and many a hallowed monument

besides.  Abandoning the inspection of early French art with the

same purposeless haste as he had shown in undertaking it, he went

further, and lingered about Ferrara, Padua, and Pisa.  Satiated

with mediaevalism, he tried the Roman Forum.  Next he observed

moonlight and starlight effects by the bay of Naples.  He turned

to Austria, became enervated and depressed on Hungarian and

Bohemian plains, and was refreshed again by breezes on the

declivities of the Carpathians.



Then he found himself in Greece.  He visited the plain of

Marathon, and strove to imagine the Persian defeat; to Mars Hill,

to picture St. Paul addressing the ancient Athenians; to

Thermopylae and Salamis, to run through the facts and traditions

of the Second Invasion--the result of his endeavours being more or

less chaotic.  Knight grew as weary of these places as of all

others.  Then he felt the shock of an earthquake in the Ionian

Islands, and went to Venice.  Here he shot in gondolas up and down

the winding thoroughfare of the Grand Canal, and loitered on calle

and piazza at night, when the lagunes were undisturbed by a

ripple, and no sound was to be heard but the stroke of the

midnight clock.  Afterwards he remained for weeks in the museums,

galleries, and libraries of Vienna, Berlin, and Paris; and thence

came home.



Time thus rolls us on to a February afternoon, divided by fifteen

months from the parting of Elfride and her lover in the brown

stubble field towards the sea.



Two men obviously not Londoners, and with a touch of foreignness

in their look, met by accident on one of the gravel walks leading

across Hyde Park.  The younger, more given to looking about him

than his fellow, saw and noticed the approach of his senior some

time before the latter had raised his eyes from the ground, upon

which they were bent in an abstracted gaze that seemed habitual

with him.



'Mr. Knight--indeed it is!' exclaimed the younger man.



'Ah, Stephen Smith!' said Knight.



Simultaneous operations might now have been observed progressing

in both, the result being that an expression less frank and

impulsive than the first took possession of their features.  It

was manifest that the next words uttered were a superficial

covering to constraint on both sides.



'Have you been in England long?' said Knight.



'Only two days,' said Smith.  India ever since?'



'Nearly ever since.'



'They were making a fuss about you at St. Launce's last year.  I

fancy I saw something of the sort in the papers.'



'Yes; I believe something was said about me.'



'I must congratulate you on your achievements.'



'Thanks, but they are nothing very extraordinary.  A natural

professional progress where there was no opposition.'



There followed that want of words which will always assert itself

between nominal friends who find they have ceased to be real ones,

and have not yet sunk to the level of mere acquaintance.  Each

looked up and down the Park.  Knight may possibly have borne in

mind during the intervening months Stephen's manner towards him

the last time they had met, and may have encouraged his former

interest in Stephen's welfare to die out of him as misplaced.

Stephen certainly was full of the feelings begotten by the belief

that Knight had taken away the woman he loved so well.



Stephen Smith then asked a question, adopting a certain

recklessness of manner and tone to hide, if possible, the fact

that the subject was a much greater one to him than his friend had

ever supposed.



'Are you married?'



'I am not.'



Knight spoke in an indescribable tone of bitterness that was

almost moroseness.



'And I never shall be,' he added decisively.  'Are you?'



'No,' said Stephen, sadly and quietly, like a man in a sick-room.

Totally ignorant whether or not Knight knew of his own previous

claims upon Elfride, he yet resolved to hazard a few more words

upon the topic which had an aching fascination for him even now.



'Then your engagement to Miss Swancourt came to nothing,' he said.

'You remember I met you with her once?'



Stephen's voice gave way a little here, in defiance of his firmest

will to the contrary.  Indian affairs had not yet lowered those

emotions down to the point of control.



'It was broken off,' came quickly from Knight.  'Engagements to

marry often end like that--for better or for worse.'



'Yes; so they do.  And what have you been doing lately?'



'Doing? Nothing.'



'Where have you been?'



'I can hardly tell you.  In the main, going about Europe; and it

may perhaps interest you to know that I have been attempting the

serious study of Continental art of the Middle Ages.  My notes on

each example I visited are at your service.  They are of no use to

me.'



'I shall be glad with them....Oh, travelling far and near!'



'Not far,' said Knight, with moody carelessness.  'You know, I

daresay, that sheep occasionally become giddy--hydatids in the

head, 'tis called, in which their brains become eaten up, and the

animal exhibits the strange peculiarity of walking round and round

in a circle continually.  I have travelled just in the same way--

round and round like a giddy ram.'



The reckless, bitter, and rambling style in which Knight talked,

as if rather to vent his images than to convey any ideas to

Stephen, struck the young man painfully.  His former friend's days

had become cankered in some way: Knight was a changed man.  He

himself had changed much, but not as Knight had changed.



'Yesterday I came home,' continued Knight, 'without having, to the

best of my belief, imbibed half-a-dozen ideas worth retaining.'



'You out-Hamlet Hamlet in morbidness of mood,' said Stephen, with

regretful frankness.



Knight made no reply.



'Do you know,' Stephen continued, 'I could almost have sworn that

you would be married before this time, from what I saw?'



Knight's face grew harder.  'Could you?' he said.



Stephen was powerless to forsake the depressing, luring subject.



'Yes; and I simply wonder at it.'



'Whom did you expect me to marry?'



'Her I saw you with.'



'Thank you for that wonder.'



'Did she jilt you?'



'Smith, now one word to you,' Knight returned steadily.  'Don't

you ever question me on that subject.  I have a reason for making

this request, mind.  And if you do question me, you will not get

an answer.'



'Oh, I don't for a moment wish to ask what is unpleasant to you--

not I.  I had a momentary feeling that I should like to explain

something on my side, and hear a similar explanation on yours.

But let it go, let it go, by all means.'



'What would you explain?'



'I lost the woman I was going to marry: you have not married as

you intended.  We might have compared notes.'



'I have never asked you a word about your case.'



'I know that.'



'And the inference is obvious.'



'Quite so.'



'The truth is, Stephen, I have doggedly resolved never to allude

to the matter--for which I have a very good reason.'



'Doubtless.  As good a reason as you had for not marrying her.'



'You talk insidiously.  I had a good one--a miserably good one!'



Smith's anxiety urged him to venture one more question.



'Did she not love you enough?' He drew his breath in a slow and

attenuated stream, as he waited in timorous hope for the answer.



'Stephen, you rather strain ordinary courtesy in pressing

questions of that kind after what I have said.  I cannot

understand you at all.  I must go on now.'



'Why, good God!' exclaimed Stephen passionately, 'you talk as if

you hadn't at all taken her away from anybody who had better

claims to her than you!'



'What do you mean by that?' said Knight, with a puzzled air.

'What have you heard?'



'Nothing.  I too must go on.  Good-day.'



'If you will go,' said Knight, reluctantly now, 'you must, I

suppose.  I am sure I cannot understand why you behave so.'



'Nor I why you do.  I have always been grateful to you, and as far

as I am concerned we need never have become so estranged as we

have.'



'And have I ever been anything but well-disposed towards you,

Stephen? Surely you know that I have not! The system of reserve

began with you: you know that.'



'No, no! You altogether mistake our position.  You were always

from the first reserved to me, though I was confidential to you.

That was, I suppose, the natural issue of our differing positions

in life.  And when I, the pupil, became reserved like you, the

master, you did not like it.  However, I was going to ask you to

come round and see me.'



'Where are you staying?'



'At the Grosvenor Hotel, Pimlico.'



'So am I.'



'That's convenient, not to say odd.  Well, I am detained in London

for a day or two; then I am going down to see my father and

mother, who live at St. Launce's now.  Will you see me this

evening?'



'I may; but I will not promise.  I was wishing to be alone for an

hour or two; but I shall know where to find you, at any rate.

Good-bye.'
