




Chapter XIII



'He set in order many proverbs.'





It is London in October--two months further on in the story.



Bede's Inn has this peculiarity, that it faces, receives from, and

discharges into a bustling thoroughfare speaking only of wealth

and respectability, whilst its postern abuts on as crowded and

poverty-stricken a network of alleys as are to be found anywhere

in the metropolis.  The moral consequences are, first, that those

who occupy chambers in the Inn may see a great deal of shirtless

humanity's habits and enjoyments without doing more than look down

from a back window; and second they may hear wholesome though

unpleasant social reminders through the medium of a harsh voice,

an unequal footstep, the echo of a blow or a fall, which

originates in the person of some drunkard or wife-beater, as he

crosses and interferes with the quiet of the square.  Characters

of this kind frequently pass through the Inn from a little foxhole

of an alley at the back, but they never loiter there.



It is hardly necessary to state that all the sights and movements

proper to the Inn are most orderly.  On the fine October evening

on which we follow Stephen Smith to this place, a placid porter is

sitting on a stool under a sycamore-tree in the midst, with a

little cane in his hand.  We notice the thick coat of soot upon

the branches, hanging underneath them in flakes, as in a chimney.

The blackness of these boughs does not at present improve the

tree--nearly forsaken by its leaves as it is--but in the spring

their green fresh beauty is made doubly beautiful by the contrast.

Within the railings is a flower-garden of respectable dahlias and

chrysanthemums, where a man is sweeping the leaves from the grass.



Stephen selects a doorway, and ascends an old though wide wooden

staircase, with moulded balusters and handrail, which in a country

manor-house would be considered a noteworthy specimen of

Renaissance workmanship.  He reaches a door on the first floor,

over which is painted, in black letters, 'Mr. Henry Knight'--

'Barrister-at-law' being understood but not expressed.  The wall

is thick, and there is a door at its outer and inner face.  The

outer one happens to be ajar: Stephen goes to the other, and taps.



'Come in!' from distant penetralia.



First was a small anteroom, divided from the inner apartment by a

wainscoted archway two or three yards wide.  Across this archway

hung a pair of dark-green curtains, making a mystery of all within

the arch except the spasmodic scratching of a quill pen.  Here was

grouped a chaotic assemblage of articles--mainly old framed prints

and paintings--leaning edgewise against the wall, like roofing

slates in a builder's yard.  All the books visible here were

folios too big to be stolen--some lying on a heavy oak table in

one corner, some on the floor among the pictures, the whole

intermingled with old coats, hats, umbrellas, and walking-sticks.



Stephen pushed aside the curtain, and before him sat a man writing

away as if his life depended upon it--which it did.



A man of thirty in a speckled coat, with dark brown hair, curly

beard, and crisp moustache: the latter running into the beard on

each side of the mouth, and, as usual, hiding the real expression

of that organ under a chronic aspect of impassivity.



'Ah, my dear fellow, I knew 'twas you,' said Knight, looking up

with a smile, and holding out his hand.



Knight's mouth and eyes came to view now.  Both features were

good, and had the peculiarity of appearing younger and fresher

than the brow and face they belonged to, which were getting

sicklied o'er by the unmistakable pale cast. The mouth had not

quite relinquished rotundity of curve for the firm angularities of

middle life; and the eyes, though keen, permeated rather than

penetrated: what they had lost of their boy-time brightness by a

dozen years of hard reading lending a quietness to their gaze

which suited them well.



A lady would have said there was a smell of tobacco in the room: a

man that there was not.



Knight did not rise.  He looked at a timepiece on the mantelshelf,

then turned again to his letters, pointing to a chair.



'Well, I am glad you have come.  I only returned to town

yesterday; now, don't speak, Stephen, for ten minutes; I have just

that time to the late post. At the eleventh minute, I'm your man.'



Stephen sat down as if this kind of reception was by no means new,

and away went Knight's pen, beating up and down like a ship in a

storm.



Cicero called the library the soul of the house; here the house

was all soul.  Portions of the floor, and half the wall-space,

were taken up by book-shelves ordinary and extraordinary; the

remaining parts, together with brackets, side-tables, &c., being

occupied by casts, statuettes, medallions, and plaques of various

descriptions, picked up by the owner in his wanderings through

France and Italy.



One stream only of evening sunlight came into the room from a

window quite in the corner, overlooking a court.  An aquarium

stood in the window.  It was a dull parallelopipedon enough for

living creatures at most hours of the day; but for a few minutes

in the evening, as now, an errant, kindly ray lighted up and

warmed the little world therein, when the many-coloured zoophytes

opened and put forth their arms, the weeds acquired a rich

transparency, the shells gleamed of a more golden yellow, and the

timid community expressed gladness more plainly than in words.



Within the prescribed ten minutes Knight flung down his pen, rang

for the boy to take the letters to the post, and at the closing of

the door exclaimed, 'There; thank God, that's done.  Now, Stephen,

pull your chair round, and tell me what you have been doing all

this time.  Have you kept up your Greek?'



'No.'



'How's that?'



'I haven't enough spare time.'



'That's nonsense.'



'Well, I have done a great many things, if not that.  And I have

done one extraordinary thing.'



Knight turned full upon Stephen.  'Ah-ha! Now, then, let me look

into your face, put two and two together, and make a shrewd

guess.'



Stephen changed to a redder colour.



'Why, Smith,' said Knight, after holding him rigidly by the

shoulders, and keenly scrutinising his countenance for a minute in

silence, 'you have fallen in love.'



'Well--the fact is----'



'Now, out with it.' But seeing that Stephen looked rather

distressed, he changed to a kindly tone.  'Now Smith, my lad, you

know me well enough by this time, or you ought to; and you know

very well that if you choose to give me a detailed account of the

phenomenon within you, I shall listen; if you don't, I am the last

man in the world to care to hear it.'



'I'll tell this much: I HAVE fallen in love, and I want to be

MARRIED.'



Knight looked ominous as this passed Stephen's lips.



'Don't judge me before you have heard more,' cried Stephen

anxiously, seeing the change in his friend's countenance.



'I don't judge.  Does your mother know about it?'



'Nothing definite.'



'Father?'



'No.  But I'll tell you.  The young person----'



'Come, that's dreadfully ungallant.  But perhaps I understand the

frame of mind a little, so go on.  Your sweetheart----'



'She is rather higher in the world than I am.'



'As it should be.'



'And her father won't hear of it, as I now stand.'



'Not an uncommon case.'



'And now comes what I want your advice upon.  Something has

happened at her house which makes it out of the question for us to

ask her father again now.  So we are keeping silent.  In the

meantime an architect in India has just written to Mr. Hewby to

ask whether he can find for him a young assistant willing to go

over to Bombay to prepare drawings for work formerly done by the

engineers.  The salary he offers is 350 rupees a month, or about

35 Pounds.  Hewby has mentioned it to me, and I have been to Dr.

Wray, who says I shall acclimatise without much illness.  Now,

would you go?'



'You mean to say, because it is a possible road to the young

lady.'



'Yes; I was thinking I could go over and make a little money, and

then come back and ask for her.  I have the option of practising

for myself after a year.'



'Would she be staunch?'



'Oh yes! For ever--to the end of her life!'



'How do you know?'



'Why, how do people know? Of course, she will.'



Knight leant back in his chair.  'Now, though I know her

thoroughly as she exists in your heart, Stephen, I don't know her

in the flesh.  All I want to ask is, is this idea of going to

India based entirely upon a belief in her fidelity?'



'Yes; I should not go if it were not for her.'



'Well, Stephen, you have put me in rather an awkward position.  If

I give my true sentiments, I shall hurt your feelings; if I don't,

I shall hurt my own judgment.  And remember, I don't know much

about women.'



'But you have had attachments, although you tell me very little

about them.'



'And I only hope you'll continue to prosper till I tell you more.'



Stephen winced at this rap.  'I have never formed a deep

attachment,' continued Knight.  'I never have found a woman worth

it.  Nor have I been once engaged to be married.'



'You write as if you had been engaged a hundred times, if I may be

allowed to say so,' said Stephen in an injured tone.



'Yes, that may be.  But, my dear Stephen, it is only those who

half know a thing that write about it.  Those who know it

thoroughly don't take the trouble.  All I know about women, or men

either, is a mass of generalities.  I plod along, and occasionally

lift my eyes and skim the weltering surface of mankind lying

between me and the horizon, as a crow might; no more.'



Knight stopped as if he had fallen into a train of thought, and

Stephen looked with affectionate awe at a master whose mind, he

believed, could swallow up at one meal all that his own head

contained.



There was affective sympathy, but no great intellectual

fellowship, between Knight and Stephen Smith.  Knight had seen his

young friend when the latter was a cherry-cheeked happy boy, had

been interested in him, had kept his eye upon him, and generously

helped the lad to books, till the mere connection of patronage

grew to acquaintance, and that ripened to friendship.  And so,

though Smith was not at all the man Knight would have deliberately

chosen as a friend--or even for one of a group of a dozen friends--

he somehow was his friend.  Circumstance, as usual, did it all.

How many of us can say of our most intimate alter ego, leaving

alone friends of the outer circle, that he is the man we should

have chosen, as embodying the net result after adding up all the

points in human nature that we love, and principles we hold, and

subtracting all that we hate? The man is really somebody we got to

know by mere physical juxtaposition long maintained, and was taken

into our confidence, and even heart, as a makeshift.



'And what do you think of her?' Stephen ventured to say, after a

silence.



'Taking her merits on trust from you,' said Knight, 'as we do

those of the Roman poets of whom we know nothing but that they

lived, I still think she will not stick to you through, say, three

years of absence in India.'



'But she will!' cried Stephen desperately.  'She is a girl all

delicacy and honour.  And no woman of that kind, who has committed

herself so into a man's hands as she has into mine, could possibly

marry another.'



'How has she committed herself?' asked Knight cunously.



Stephen did not answer.  Knight had looked on his love so

sceptically that it would not do to say all that he had intended

to say by any means.



'Well, don't tell,' said Knight.  'But you are begging the

question, which is, I suppose, inevitable in love.'



'And I'll tell you another thing,' the younger man pleaded.  'You

remember what you said to me once about women receiving a kiss.

Don't you? Why, that instead of our being charmed by the

fascination of their bearing at such a time, we should immediately

doubt them if their confusion has any GRACE in it--that awkward

bungling was the true charm of the occasion, implying that we are

the first who has played such a part with them.'



'It is true, quite,' said Knight musingly.



It often happened that the disciple thus remembered the lessons of

the master long after the master himself had forgotten them.



'Well, that was like her!' cried Stephen triumphantly.  'She was

in such a flurry that she didn't know what she was doing.'



'Splendid, splendid!' said Knight soothingly.  'So that all I have

to say is, that if you see a good opening in Bombay there's no

reason why you should not go without troubling to draw fine

distinctions as to reasons.  No man fully realizes what opinions

he acts upon, or what his actions mean.'



'Yes; I go to Bombay.  I'll write a note here, if you don't mind.'



'Sleep over it--it is the best plan--and write to-morrow.

Meantime, go there to that window and sit down, and look at my

Humanity Show.  I am going to dine out this evening, and have to

dress here out of my portmanteau.  I bring up my things like this

to save the trouble of going down to my place at Richmond and back

again.'



Knight then went to the middle of the room and flung open his

portmanteau, and Stephen drew near the window.  The streak of

sunlight had crept upward, edged away, and vanished; the zoophytes

slept: a dusky gloom pervaded the room.  And now another volume of

light shone over the window.



'There!' said Knight, 'where is there in England a spectacle to

equal that? I sit there and watch them every night before I go

home.  Softly open the sash.'



Beneath them was an alley running up to the wall, and thence

turning sideways and passing under an arch, so that Knight's back

window was immediately over the angle, and commanded a view of the

alley lengthwise.  Crowds--mostly of women--were surging,

bustling, and pacing up and down.  Gaslights glared from butchers'

stalls, illuminating the lumps of flesh to splotches of orange and

vermilion, like the wild colouring of Turner's later pictures,

whilst the purl and babble of tongues of every pitch and mood was

to this human wild-wood what the ripple of a brook is to the

natural forest.



Nearly ten minutes passed.  Then Knight also came to the window.



'Well, now, I call a cab and vanish down the street in the

direction of Berkeley Square,' he said, buttoning his waistcoat

and kicking his morning suit into a corner.  Stephen rose to

leave.



'What a heap of literature!' remarked the young man, taking a

final longing survey round the room, as if to abide there for ever

would be the great pleasure of his life, yet feeling that he had

almost outstayed his welcome-while.  His eyes rested upon an arm-

chair piled full of newspapers, magazines, and bright new volumes

in green and red.



'Yes,' said Knight, also looking at them and breathing a sigh of

weariness; 'something must be done with several of them soon, I

suppose.  Stephen, you needn't hurry away for a few minutes, you

know, if you want to stay; I am not quite ready.  Overhaul those

volumes whilst I put on my coat, and I'll walk a little way with

you.'



Stephen sat down beside the arm-chair and began to tumble the

books about.  Among the rest he found a novelette in one volume,

THE COURT OF KELLYON CASTLE.  By Ernest Field.



'Are you going to review this?' inquired Stephen with apparent

unconcern, and holding up Elfride's effusion.



'Which? Oh, that! I may--though I don't do much light reviewing

now.  But it is reviewable.'



'How do you mean?'



Knight never liked to be asked what he meant.  'Mean! I mean that

the majority of books published are neither good enough nor bad

enough to provoke criticism, and that that book does provoke it.'



'By its goodness or its badness?' Stephen said with some anxiety

on poor little Elfride's score.



'Its badness.  It seems to be written by some girl in her teens.'



Stephen said not another word.  He did not care to speak plainly

of Elfride after that unfortunate slip his tongue had made in

respect of her having committed herself; and, apart from that,

Knight's severe--almost dogged and self-willed--honesty in

criticizing was unassailable by the humble wish of a youthful

friend like Stephen.



Knight was now ready.  Turning off the gas, and slamming together

the door, they went downstairs and into the street.
