




Chapter XXXVIII



'Jealousy is cruel as the grave.'





Stephen pondered not a little on this meeting with his old friend

and once-beloved exemplar.  He was grieved, for amid all the

distractions of his latter years a still small voice of fidelity

to Knight had lingered on in him.  Perhaps this staunchness was

because Knight ever treated him as a mere disciple--even to

snubbing him sometimes; and had at last, though unwittingly,

inflicted upon him the greatest snub of all, that of taking away

his sweetheart.  The emotional side of his constitution was built

rather after a feminine than a male model; and that tremendous

wound from Knight's hand may have tended to keep alive a warmth

which solicitousness would have extinguished altogether.



Knight, on his part, was vexed, after they had parted, that he had

not taken Stephen in hand a little after the old manner.  Those

words which Smith had let fall concerning somebody having a prior

claim to Elfride, would, if uttered when the man was younger, have

provoked such a query as, 'Come, tell me all about it, my lad,'

from Knight, and Stephen would straightway have delivered himself

of all he knew on the subject.



Stephen the ingenuous boy, though now obliterated externally by

Stephen the contriving man, returned to Knight's memory vividly

that afternoon.  He was at present but a sojourner in London; and

after attending to the two or three matters of business which

remained to be done that day, he walked abstractedly into the

gloomy corridors of the British Museum for the half-hour previous

to their closing.  That meeting with Smith had reunited the

present with the past, closing up the chasm of his absence from

England as if it had never existed, until the final circumstances

of his previous time of residence in London formed but a yesterday

to the circumstances now.  The conflict that then had raged in him

concerning Elfride Swancourt revived, strengthened by its sleep.

Indeed, in those many months of absence, though quelling the

intention to make her his wife, he had never forgotten that she

was the type of woman adapted to his nature; and instead of trying

to obliterate thoughts of her altogether, he had grown to regard

them as an infirmity it was necessary to tolerate.



Knight returned to his hotel much earlier in the evening than he

would have done in the ordinary course of things.  He did not care

to think whether this arose from a friendly wish to close the gap

that had slowly been widening between himself and his earliest

acquaintance, or from a hankering desire to hear the meaning of

the dark oracles Stephen had hastily pronounced, betokening that

he knew something more of Elfride than Knight had supposed.



He made a hasty dinner, inquired for Smith, and soon was ushered

into the young man's presence, whom he found sitting in front of a

comfortable fire, beside a table spread with a few scientific

periodicals and art reviews.



'I have come to you, after all,' said Knight.  'My manner was odd

this morning, and it seemed desirable to call; but that you had

too much sense to notice, Stephen, I know.  Put it down to my

wanderings in France and Italy.'



'Don't say another word, but sit down.  I am only too glad to see

you again.'



Stephen would hardly have cared to tell Knight just then that the

minute before Knight was announced he had been reading over some

old letters of Elfride's.  They were not many; and until to-night

had been sealed up, and stowed away in a corner of his leather

trunk, with a few other mementoes and relics which had accompanied

him in his travels.  The familiar sights and sounds of London, the

meeting with his friend, had with him also revived that sense of

abiding continuity with regard to Elfride and love which his

absence at the other side of the world had to some extent

suspended, though never ruptured.  He at first intended only to

look over these letters on the outside; then he read one; then

another; until the whole was thus re-used as a stimulus to sad

memories.  He folded them away again, placed them in his pocket,

and instead of going on with an examination into the state of the

artistic world, had remained musing on the strange circumstance

that he had returned to find Knight not the husband of Elfride

after all.



The possibility of any given gratification begets a cumulative

sense of its necessity.  Stephen gave the rein to his imagination,

and felt more intensely than he had felt for many months that,

without Elfride, his life would never be any great pleasure to

himself, or honour to his Maker.



They sat by the fire, chatting on external and random subjects,

neither caring to be the first to approach the matter each most

longed to discuss.  On the table with the periodicals lay two or

three pocket-books, one of them being open.  Knight seeing from

the exposed page that the contents were sketches only, began

turning the leaves over carelessly with his finger. When, some

time later, Stephen was out of the room, Knight proceeded to pass

the interval by looking at the sketches more carefully.



The first crude ideas, pertaining to dwellings of all kinds, were

roughly outlined on the different pages.  Antiquities had been

copied; fragments of Indian columns, colossal statues, and

outlandish ornament from the temples of Elephanta and Kenneri,

were carelessly intruded upon by outlines of modern doors,

windows, roofs, cooking-stoves, and household furniture;

everything, in short, which comes within the range of a practising

architect's experience, who travels with his eyes open.  Among

these occasionally appeared rough delineations of mediaeval

subjects for carving or illumination--heads of Virgins, Saints,

and Prophets.



Stephen was not professedly a free-hand draughtsman, but he drew

the human figure with correctness and skill.  In its numerous

repetitions on the sides and edges of the leaves, Knight began to

notice a peculiarity.  All the feminine saints had one type of

feature.  There were large nimbi and small nimbi about their

drooping heads, but the face was always the same.  That profile--

how well Knight knew that profile!



Had there been but one specimen of the familiar countenance, he

might have passed over the resemblance as accidental; but a

repetition meant more.  Knight thought anew of Smith's hasty words

earlier in the day, and looked at the sketches again and again.



On the young man's entry, Knight said with palpable agitation--



'Stephen, who are those intended for?'



Stephen looked over the book with utter unconcern, 'Saints and

angels, done in my leisure moments.  They were intended as designs

for the stained glass of an English church.'



'But whom do you idealize by that type of woman you always adopt

for the Virgin?'



'Nobody.'



And then a thought raced along Stephen's mind and he looked up at

his friend.



The truth is, Stephen's introduction of Elfride's lineaments had

been so unconscious that he had not at first understood his

companion's drift.  The hand, like the tongue, easily acquires the

trick of repetition by rote, without calling in the mind to assist

at all; and this had been the case here.  Young men who cannot

write verses about their Loves generally take to portraying them,

and in the early days of his attachment Smith had never been weary

of outlining Elfride.  The lay-figure of Stephen's sketches now

initiated an adjustment of many things.  Knight had recognized

her.  The opportunity of comparing notes had come unsought.



'Elfride Swancourt, to whom I was engaged,' he said quietly.



'Stephen!'



'I know what you mean by speaking like that.'



'Was it Elfride? YOU the man, Stephen?'



'Yes; and you are thinking why did I conceal the fact from you

that time at Endelstow, are you not?'



'Yes, and more--more.'



'I did it for the best; blame me if you will; I did it for the

best.  And now say how could I be with you afterwards as I had

been before?'



'I don't know at all; I can't say.'



Knight remained fixed in thought, and once he murmured--



'I had a suspicion this afternoon that there might be some such

meaning in your words about my taking her away.  But I dismissed

it.  How came you to know her?' he presently asked, in almost a

peremptory tone.



'I went down about the church; years ago now.'



'When you were with Hewby, of course, of course.  Well, I can't

understand it.' His tones rose.  'I don't know what to say, your

hoodwinking me like this for so long!'



'I don't see that I have hoodwinked you at all.'



'Yes, yes, but'----



Knight arose from his seat, and began pacing up and down the room.

His face was markedly pale, and his voice perturbed, as he said--



'You did not act as I should have acted towards you under those

circumstances.  I feel it deeply; and I tell you plainly, I shall

never forget it!'



'What?'



'Your behaviour at that meeting in the family vault, when I told

you we were going to be married.  Deception, dishonesty,

everywhere; all the world's of a piece!'



Stephen did not much like this misconstruction of his motives,

even though it was but the hasty conclusion of a friend disturbed

by emotion.



'I could do no otherwise than I did, with due regard to her,' he

said stiffly.



'Indeed!' said Knight, in the bitterest tone of reproach.  'Nor

could you with due regard to her have married her, I suppose! I

have hoped--longed--that HE, who turns out to be YOU, would

ultimately have done that.'



'I am much obliged to you for that hope.  But you talk very

mysteriously.  I think I had about the best reason anybody could

have had for not doing that.'



'Oh, what reason was it?'



'That I could not.'



'You ought to have made an opportunity; you ought to do so now, in

bare justice to her, Stephen!' cried Knight, carried beyond

himself.  'That you know very well, and it hurts and wounds me

more than you dream to find you never have tried to make any

reparation to a woman of that kind--so trusting, so apt to be run

away with by her feelings--poor little fool, so much the worse for

her!'



'Why, you talk like a madman! You took her away from me, did you

not?'



'Picking up what another throws down can scarcely be called

"taking away." However, we shall not agree too well upon that

subject, so we had better part.'



'But I am quite certain you misapprehend something most

grievously,' said Stephen, shaken to the bottom of his heart.

'What have I done; tell me? I have lost Elfride, but is that such

a sin?'



'Was it her doing, or yours?'



'Was what?'



'That you parted.'



'I will tell you honestly.  It was hers entirely, entirely.'



'What was her reason?'



'I can hardly say.  But I'll tell the story without reserve.'



Stephen until to-day had unhesitatingly held that she grew tired

of him and turned to Knight; but he did not like to advance the

statement now, or even to think the thought.  To fancy otherwise

accorded better with the hope to which Knight's estrangement had

given birth: that love for his friend was not the direct cause,

but a result of her suspension of love for himself.



'Such a matter must not be allowed to breed discord between us,'

Knight returned, relapsing into a manner which concealed all his

true feeling, as if confidence now was intolerable.  'I do see

that your reticence towards me in the vault may have been dictated

by prudential considerations.' He concluded artificially, 'It was

a strange thing altogether; but not of much importance, I suppose,

at this distance of time; and it does not concern me now, though I

don't mind hearing your story.'



These words from Knight, uttered with such an air of renunciation

and apparent indifference, prompted Smith to speak on--perhaps

with a little complacency--of his old secret engagement to

Elfride.  He told the details of its origin, and the peremptory

words and actions of her father to extinguish their love.



Knight persevered in the tone and manner of a disinterested

outsider.  It had become more than ever imperative to screen his

emotions from Stephen's eye; the young man would otherwise be less

frank, and their meeting would be again embittered.  What was the

use of untoward candour?



Stephen had now arrived at the point in his ingenuous narrative

where he left the vicarage because of her father's manner.

Knight's interest increased.  Their love seemed so innocent and

childlike thus far.



'It is a nice point in casuistry,' he observed, 'to decide whether

you were culpable or not in not telling Swancourt that your

friends were parishioners of his.  It was only human nature to

hold your tongue under the circumstances.  Well, what was the

result of your dismissal by him?'



'That we agreed to be secretly faithful.  And to insure this we

thought we would marry.'



Knight's suspense and agitation rose higher when Stephen entered

upon this phase of the subject.



'Do you mind telling on?' he said, steadying his manner of speech.



'Oh, not at all.'



Then Stephen gave in full the particulars of the meeting with

Elfride at the railway station; the necessity they were under of

going to London, unless the ceremony were to be postponed.  The

long journey of the afternoon and evening; her timidity and

revulsion of feeling; its culmination on reaching London; the

crossing over to the down-platform and their immediate departure

again, solely in obedience to her wish; the journey all night;

their anxious watching for the dawn; their arrival at St. Launce's

at last--were detailed.  And he told how a village woman named

Jethway was the only person who recognized them, either going or

coming; and how dreadfully this terrified Elfride.  He told how he

waited in the fields whilst this then reproachful sweetheart went

for her pony, and how the last kiss he ever gave her was given a

mile out of the town, on the way to Endelstow.



These things Stephen related with a will.  He believed that in

doing so he established word by word the reasonableness of his

claim to Elfride.



'Curse her! curse that woman!--that miserable letter that parted

us! O God!'



Knight began pacing the room again, and uttered this at further

end.



'What did you say?' said Stephen, turning round.



'Say? Did I say anything? Oh, I was merely thinking about your

story, and the oddness of my having a fancy for the same woman

afterwards.  And that now I--I have forgotten her almost; and

neither of us care about her, except just as a friend, you know,

eh?'



Knight still continued at the further end of the room, somewhat in

shadow.



'Exactly,' said Stephen, inwardly exultant, for he was really

deceived by Knight's off-hand manner.



Yet he was deceived less by the completeness of Knight's disguise

than by the persuasive power which lay in the fact that Knight had

never before deceived him in anything.  So this supposition that

his companion had ceased to love Elfride was an enormous

lightening of the weight which had turned the scale against him.



'Admitting that Elfride COULD love another man after you,' said

the elder, under the same varnish of careless criticism, 'she was

none the worse for that experience.'



'The worse? Of course she was none the worse.'



'Did you ever think it a wild and thoughtless thing for her to

do?'



'Indeed, I never did,' said Stephen.  'I persuaded her.  She saw

no harm in it until she decided to return, nor did I; nor was

there, except to the extent of indiscretion.'



'Directly she thought it was wrong she would go no further?'



'That was it.  I had just begun to think it wrong too.'



'Such a childish escapade might have been misrepresented by any

evil-disposed person, might it not?'



'It might; but I never heard that it was.  Nobody who really knew

all the circumstances would have done otherwise than smile.  If

all the world had known it, Elfride would still have remained the

only one who thought her action a sin.  Poor child, she always

persisted in thinking so, and was frightened more than enough.'



'Stephen, do you love her now?'



'Well, I like her; I always shall, you know,' he said evasively,

and with all the strategy love suggested.  'But I have not seen

her for so long that I can hardly be expected to love her.  Do you

love her still?'



'How shall I answer without being ashamed? What fickle beings we

men are, Stephen! Men may love strongest for a while, but women

love longest.  I used to love her--in my way, you know.'



'Yes, I understand.  Ah, and I used to love her in my way.  In

fact, I loved her a good deal at one time; but travel has a

tendency to obliterate early fancies.'



'It has--it has, truly.'



Perhaps the most extraordinary feature in this conversation was

the circumstance that, though each interlocutor had at first his

suspicions of the other's abiding passion awakened by several

little acts, neither would allow himself to see that his friend

might now be speaking deceitfully as well as he.



'Stephen.' resumed Knight, 'now that matters are smooth between

us, I think I must leave you.  You won't mind my hurrying off to

my quarters?'



'You'll stay to some sort of supper surely? didn't you come to

dinner!'



'You must really excuse me this once.'



'Then you'll drop in to breakfast to-morrow.'



'I shall be rather pressed for time.'



'An early breakfast, which shall interfere with nothing?'



'I'll come,' said Knight, with as much readiness as it was

possible to graft upon a huge stock of reluctance.  'Yes, early;

eight o'clock say, as we are under the same roof.'



'Any time you like.  Eight it shall be.'



And Knight left him.  To wear a mask, to dissemble his feelings as

he had in their late miserable conversation, was such torture that

he could support it no longer.  It was the first time in Knight's

life that he had ever been so entirely the player of a part.  And

the man he had thus deceived was Stephen, who had docilely looked

up to him from youth as a superior of unblemished integrity.



He went to bed, and allowed the fever of his excitement to rage

uncontrolled.  Stephen--it was only he who was the rival--only

Stephen! There was an anti-climax of absurdity which Knight,

wretched and conscience-stricken as he was, could not help

recognizing.  Stephen was but a boy to him.  Where the great grief

lay was in perceiving that the very innocence of Elfride in

reading her little fault as one so grave was what had fatally

misled him.  Had Elfride, with any degree of coolness, asserted

that she had done no harm, the poisonous breath of the dead Mrs.

Jethway would have been inoperative.  Why did he not make his

little docile girl tell more? If on that subject he had only

exercised the imperativeness customary with him on others, all

might have been revealed.  It smote his heart like a switch when

he remembered how gently she had borne his scourging speeches,

never answering him with a single reproach, only assuring him of

her unbounded love.



Knight blessed Elfride for her sweetness, and forgot her fault.

He pictured with a vivid fancy those fair summer scenes with her.

He again saw her as at their first meeting, timid at speaking, yet

in her eagerness to be explanatory borne forward almost against

her will.  How she would wait for him in green places, without

showing any of the ordinary womanly affectations of indifference!

How proud she was to be seen walking with him, bearing legibly in

her eyes the thought that he was the greatest genius in the world!



He formed a resolution; and after that could make pretence of

slumber no longer.  Rising and dressing himself, he sat down and

waited for day.



That night Stephen was restless too.  Not because of the

unwontedness of a return to English scenery; not because he was

about to meet his parents, and settle down for awhile to English

cottage life.  He was indulging in dreams, and for the nonce the

warehouses of Bombay and the plains and forts of Poonah were but a

shadow's shadow.  His dream was based on this one atom of fact:

Elfride and Knight had become separated, and their engagement was

as if it had never been.  Their rupture must have occurred soon

after Stephen's discovery of the fact of their union; and, Stephen

went on to think, what so probable as that a return of her errant

affection to himself was the cause?



Stephen's opinions in this matter were those of a lover, and not

the balanced judgment of an unbiassed spectator.  His naturally

sanguine spirit built hope upon hope, till scarcely a doubt

remained in his mind that her lingering tenderness for him had in

some way been perceived by Knight, and had provoked their parting.



To go and see Elfride was the suggestion of impulses it was

impossible to withstand.  At any rate, to run down from St.

Launce's to Castle Poterel, a distance of less than twenty miles,

and glide like a ghost about their old haunts, making stealthy

inquiries about her, would be a fascinating way of passing the

first spare hours after reaching home on the day after the morrow.



He was now a richer man than heretofore, standing on his own

bottom; and the definite position in which he had rooted himself

nullified old local distinctions.  He had become illustrious, even

sanguine clarus, judging from the tone of the worthy Mayor of St.

Launce's.

