




Chapter XX



'A distant dearness in the hill.'





Knight turned his back upon the parish of Endelstow, and crossed

over to Cork.



One day of absence superimposed itself on another, and

proportionately weighted his heart.  He pushed on to the Lakes of

Killarney, rambled amid their luxuriant woods, surveyed the

infinite variety of island, hill, and dale there to be found,

listened to the marvellous echoes of that romantic spot; but

altogether missed the glory and the dream he formerly found in

such favoured regions.



Whilst in the company of Elfride, her girlish presence had not

perceptibly affected him to any depth.  He had not been conscious

that her entry into his sphere had added anything to himself; but

now that she was taken away he was very conscious of a great deal

being abstracted.  The superfluity had become a necessity, and

Knight was in love.



Stephen fell in love with Elfride by looking at her: Knight by

ceasing to do so.  When or how the spirit entered into him he knew

not: certain he was that when on the point of leaving Endelstow he

had felt none of that exquisite nicety of poignant sadness natural

to such severances, seeing how delightful a subject of

contemplation Elfride had been ever since.  Had he begun to love

her when she met his eye after her mishap on the tower? He had

simply thought her weak.  Had he grown to love her whilst standing

on the lawn brightened all over by the evening sun? He had thought

her complexion good: no more.  Was it her conversation that had

sown the seed? He had thought her words ingenious, and very

creditable to a young woman, but not noteworthy.  Had the chess-

playing anything to do with it? Certainly not: he had thought her

at that time a rather conceited child.



Knight's experience was a complete disproof of the assumption that

love always comes by glances of the eye and sympathetic touches of

the fingers: that, like flame, it makes itself palpable at the

moment of generation.  Not till they were parted, and she had

become sublimated in his memory, could he be said to have even

attentively regarded her.



Thus, having passively gathered up images of her which his mind

did not act upon till the cause of them was no longer before him,

he appeared to himself to have fallen in love with her soul, which

had temporarily assumed its disembodiment to accompany him on his

way.



She began to rule him so imperiously now that, accustomed to

analysis, he almost trembled at the possible result of the

introduction of this new force among the nicely adjusted ones of

his ordinary life.  He became restless: then he forgot all

collateral subjects in the pleasure of thinking about her.



Yet it must be said that Knight loved philosophically rather than

with romance.



He thought of her manner towards him.  Simplicity verges on

coquetry.  Was she flirting? he said to himself.  No forcible

translation of favour into suspicion was able to uphold such a

theory.  The performance had been too well done to be anything but

real.  It had the defects without which nothing is genuine.  No

actress of twenty years' standing, no bald-necked lady whose

earliest season 'out' was lost in the discreet mist of evasive

talk, could have played before him the part of ingenuous girl as

Elfride lived it.  She had the little artful ways which partly

make up ingenuousness.



There are bachelors by nature and bachelors by circumstance:

spinsters there doubtless are also of both kinds, though some

think only those of the latter.  However, Knight had been looked

upon as a bachelor by nature.  What was he coming to? It was very

odd to himself to look at his theories on the subject of love, and

reading them now by the full light of a new experience, to see how

much more his sentences meant than he had felt them to mean when

they were written.  People often discover the real force of a

trite old maxim only when it is thrust upon them by a chance

adventure; but Knight had never before known the case of a man who

learnt the full compass of his own epigrams by such means.



He was intensely satisfied with one aspect of the affair.  Inbred

in him was an invincible objection to be any but the first comer

in a woman's heart.  He had discovered within himself the

condition that if ever he did make up his mind to marry, it must

be on the certainty that no cropping out of inconvenient old

letters, no bow and blush to a mysterious stranger casually met,

should be a possible source of discomposure.  Knight's sentiments

were only the ordinary ones of a man of his age who loves

genuinely, perhaps exaggerated a little by his pursuits.  When men

first love as lads, it is with the very centre of their hearts,

nothing else being concerned in the operation.  With added years,

more of the faculties attempt a partnership in the passion, till

at Knight's age the understanding is fain to have a hand in it.

It may as well be left out.  A man in love setting up his brains

as a gauge of his position is as one determining a ship's

longitude from a light at the mast-head.



Knight argued from Elfride's unwontedness of manner, which was

matter of fact, to an unwontedness in love, which was matter of

inference only.  Incredules les plus credules.  'Elfride,' he

said, 'had hardly looked upon a man till she saw me.'



He had never forgotten his severity to her because she preferred

ornament to edification, and had since excused her a hundred times

by thinking how natural to womankind was a love of adornment, and

how necessary became a mild infusion of personal vanity to

complete the delicate and fascinating dye of the feminine mind.

So at the end of the week's absence, which had brought him as far

as Dublin, he resolved to curtail his tour, return to Endelstow,

and commit himself by making a reality of the hypothetical offer

of that Sunday evening.



Notwithstanding that he had concocted a great deal of paper theory

on social amenities and modern manners generally, the special

ounce of practice was wanting, and now for his life Knight could

not recollect whether it was considered correct to give a young

lady personal ornaments before a regular engagement to marry had

been initiated.  But the day before leaving Dublin he looked

around anxiously for a high-class jewellery establishment, in

which he purchased what he considered would suit her best.



It was with a most awkward and unwonted feeling that after

entering and closing the door of his room he sat down, opened the

morocco case, and held up each of the fragile bits of gold-work

before his eyes.  Many things had become old to the solitary man

of letters, but these were new, and he handled like a child an

outcome of civilization which had never before been touched by his

fingers.  A sudden fastidious decision that the pattern chosen

would not suit her after all caused him to rise in a flurry and

tear down the street to change them for others.  After a great

deal of trouble in reselecting, during which his mind became so

bewildered that the critical faculty on objects of art seemed to

have vacated his person altogether, Knight carried off another

pair of ear-rings.  These remained in his possession till the

afternoon, when, after contemplating them fifty times with a

growing misgiving that the last choice was worse than the first,

he felt that no sleep would visit his pillow till he had improved

upon his previous purchases yet again.  In a perfect heat of

vexation with himself for such tergiversation, he went anew to the

shop-door, was absolutely ashamed to enter and give further

trouble, went to another shop, bought a pair at an enormously

increased price, because they seemed the very thing, asked the

goldsmiths if they would take the other pair in exchange, was told

that they could not exchange articles bought of another maker,

paid down the money, and went off with the two pairs in his

possession, wondering what on earth to do with the superfluous

pair.  He almost wished he could lose them, or that somebody would

steal them, and was burdened with an interposing sense that, as a

capable man, with true ideas of economy, he must necessarily sell

them somewhere, which he did at last for a mere song.  Mingled

with a blank feeling of a whole day being lost to him in running

about the city on this new and extraordinary class of errand, and

of several pounds being lost through his bungling, was a slight

sense of satisfaction that he had emerged for ever from his

antediluvian ignorance on the subject of ladies' jewellery, as

well as secured a truly artistic production at last.  During the

remainder of that day he scanned the ornaments of every lady he

met with the profoundly experienced eye of an appraiser.



Next morning Knight was again crossing St. George's Channel--not

returning to London by the Holyhead route as he had originally

intended, but towards Bristol--availing himself of Mr. and Mrs.

Swancourt's invitation to revisit them on his homeward journey.



We flit forward to Elfride.



Woman's ruling passion--to fascinate and influence those more

powerful than she--though operant in Elfride, was decidedly

purposeless.  She had wanted her friend Knight's good opinion from

the first: how much more than that elementary ingredient of

friendship she now desired, her fears would hardly allow her to

think.  In originally wishing to please the highest class of man

she had ever intimately known, there was no disloyalty to Stephen

Smith.  She could not--and few women can--realize the possible

vastness of an issue which has only an insignificant begetting.



Her letters from Stephen were necessarily few, and her sense of

fidelity clung to the last she had received as a wrecked mariner

clings to flotsam.  The young girl persuaded herself that she was

glad Stephen had such a right to her hand as he had acquired (in

her eyes) by the elopement.  She beguiled herself by saying,

'Perhaps if I had not so committed myself I might fall in love

with Mr. Knight.'



All this made the week of Knight's absence very gloomy and

distasteful to her.  She retained Stephen in her prayers, and his

old letters were re-read--as a medicine in reality, though she

deceived herself into the belief that it was as a pleasure.



These letters had grown more and more hopeful.  He told her that

he finished his work every day with a pleasant consciousness of

having removed one more stone from the barrier which divided them.

Then he drew images of what a fine figure they two would cut some

day.  People would turn their heads and say, 'What a prize he has

won!' She was not to be sad about that wild runaway attempt of

theirs (Elfride had repeatedly said that it grieved her).

Whatever any other person who knew of it might think, he knew well

enough the modesty of her nature.  The only reproach was a gentle

one for not having written quite so devotedly during her visit to

London.  Her letter had seemed to have a liveliness derived from

other thoughts than thoughts of him.





Knight's intention of an early return to Endelstow having

originally been faint, his promise to do so had been fainter.  He

was a man who kept his words well to the rear of his possible

actions.  The vicar was rather surprised to see him again so soon:

Mrs. Swancourt was not.  Knight found, on meeting them all, after

his arrival had been announced, that they had formed an intention

to go to St. Leonards for a few days at the end of the month.



No satisfactory conjuncture offered itself on this first evening

of his return for presenting Elfride with what he had been at such

pains to procure.  He was fastidious in his reading of

opportunities for such an intended act.  The next morning chancing

to break fine after a week of cloudy weather, it was proposed and

decided that they should all drive to Barwith Strand, a local lion

which neither Mrs. Swancourt nor Knight had seen.  Knight scented

romantic occasions from afar, and foresaw that such a one might be

expected before the coming night.



The journey was along a road by neutral green hills, upon which

hedgerows lay trailing like ropes on a quay.  Gaps in these

uplands revealed the blue sea, flecked with a few dashes of white

and a solitary white sail, the whole brimming up to a keen horizon

which lay like a line ruled from hillside to hillside.  Then they

rolled down a pass, the chocolate-toned rocks forming a wall on

both sides, from one of which fell a heavy jagged shade over half

the roadway.  A spout of fresh water burst from an occasional

crevice, and pattering down upon broad green leaves, ran along as

a rivulet at the bottom.  Unkempt locks of heather overhung the

brow of each steep, whence at divers points a bramble swung forth

into mid-air, snatching at their head-dresses like a claw.



They mounted the last crest, and the bay which was to be the end

of their pilgrimage burst upon them.  The ocean blueness deepened

its colour as it stretched to the foot of the crags, where it

terminated in a fringe of white--silent at this distance, though

moving and heaving like a counterpane upon a restless sleeper.

The shadowed hollows of the purple and brown rocks would have been

called blue had not that tint been so entirely appropriated by the

water beside them.



The carriage was put up at a little cottage with a shed attached,

and an ostler and the coachman carried the hamper of provisions

down to the shore.



Knight found his opportunity.  'I did not forget your wish,' he

began, when they were apart from their friends.



Elfride looked as if she did not understand.



'And I have brought you these,' he continued, awkwardly pulling

out the case, and opening it while holding it towards her.



'O Mr. Knight!' said Elfride confusedly, and turning to a lively

red; 'I didn't know you had any intention or meaning in what you

said.  I thought it a mere supposition.  I don't want them.'



A thought which had flashed into her mind gave the reply a greater

decisiveness than it might otherwise have possessed.  To-morrow

was the day for Stephen's letter.



'But will you not accept them?' Knight returned, feeling less her

master than heretofore.



'I would rather not.  They are beautiful--more beautiful than any

I have ever seen,' she answered earnestly, looking half-wishfully

at the temptation, as Eve may have looked at the apple.  'But I

don't want to have them, if you will kindly forgive me, Mr.

Knight.'



'No kindness at all,' said Mr. Knight, brought to a full stop at

this unexpected turn of events.



A silence followed.  Knight held the open case, looking rather

wofully at the glittering forms he had forsaken his orbit to

procure; turning it about and holding it up as if, feeling his

gift to be slighted by her, he were endeavouring to admire it very

much himself.



'Shut them up, and don't let me see them any longer--do!' she said

laughingly, and with a quaint mixture of reluctance and entreaty.



'Why, Elfie?'



'Not Elfie to you, Mr. Knight.  Oh, because I shall want them.

There, I am silly, I know, to say that! But I have a reason for

not taking them--now.' She kept in the last word for a moment,

intending to imply that her refusal was finite, but somehow the

word slipped out, and undid all the rest.



'You will take them some day?'



'I don't want to.'



'Why don't you want to, Elfride Swancourt?'



'Because I don't.  I don't like to take them.'



'I have read a fact of distressing significance in that,' said

Knight.  'Since you like them, your dislike to having them must be

towards me?'



'No, it isn't.'



'What, then? Do you like me?'



Elfride deepened in tint, and looked into the distance with

features shaped to an expression of the nicest criticism as

regarded her answer.



'I like you pretty well,' she at length murmured mildly.



'Not very much?'



'You are so sharp with me, and say hard things, and so how can I?'

she replied evasively.



'You think me a fogey, I suppose?'



'No, I don't--I mean I do--I don't know what I think you, I mean.

Let us go to papa,' responded Elfride, with somewhat of a flurried

delivery.



'Well, I'll tell you my object in getting the present,' said

Knight, with a composure intended to remove from her mind any

possible impression of his being what he was--her lover.  'You see

it was the very least I could do in common civility.'



Elfride felt rather blank at this lucid statement.



Knight continued, putting away the case: 'I felt as anybody

naturally would have, you know, that my words on your choice the

other day were invidious and unfair, and thought an apology should

take a practical shape.'



'Oh yes.'



Elfride was sorry--she could not tell why--that he gave such a

legitimate reason.  It was a disappointment that he had all the

time a cool motive, which might be stated to anybody without

raising a smile.  Had she known they were offered in that spirit,

she would certainly have accepted the seductive gift.  And the

tantalizing feature was that perhaps he suspected her to imagine

them offered as a lover's token, which was mortifying enough if

they were not.



Mrs. Swancourt came now to where they were sitting, to select a

flat boulder for spreading their table-cloth upon, and, amid the

discussion on that subject, the matter pending between Knight and

Elfride was shelved for a while.  He read her refusal so certainly

as the bashfulness of a girl in a novel position, that, upon the

whole, he could tolerate such a beginning.  Could Knight have been

told that it was a sense of fidelity struggling against new love,

whilst no less assuring as to his ultimate victory, it might have

entirely abstracted the wish to secure it.



At the same time a slight constraint of manner was visible between

them for the remainder of the afternoon.  The tide turned, and

they were obliged to ascend to higher ground.  The day glided on

to its end with the usual quiet dreamy passivity of such

occasions--when every deed done and thing thought is in

endeavouring to avoid doing and thinking more.  Looking idly over

the verge of a crag, they beheld their stone dining-table

gradually being splashed upon and their crumbs and fragments all

washed away by the incoming sea.  The vicar drew a moral lesson

from the scene; Knight replied in the same satisfied strain.  And

then the waves rolled in furiously--the neutral green-and-blue

tongues of water slid up the slopes, and were metamorphosed into

foam by a careless blow, falling back white and faint, and leaving

trailing followers behind.



The passing of a heavy shower was the next scene--driving them to

shelter in a shallow cave--after which the horses were put in, and

they started to return homeward.  By the time they reached the

higher levels the sky had again cleared, and the sunset rays

glanced directly upon the wet uphill road they had climbed.  The

ruts formed by their carriage-wheels on the ascent--a pair of

Liliputian canals--were as shining bars of gold, tapering to

nothing in the distance.  Upon this also they turned their backs,

and night spread over the sea.



The evening was chilly, and there was no moon.  Knight sat close

to Elfride, and, when the darkness rendered the position of a

person a matter of uncertainty, particularly close.  Elfride edged

away.



'I hope you allow me my place ungrudgingly?' he whispered.



'Oh yes; 'tis the least I can do in common civility,' she said,

accenting the words so that he might recognize them as his own

returned.



Both of them felt delicately balanced between two possibilities.

Thus they reached home.



To Knight this mild experience was delightful.  It was to him a

gentle innocent time--a time which, though there may not be much

in it, seldom repeats itself in a man's life, and has a peculiar

dearness when glanced at retrospectively.  He is not

inconveniently deep in love, and is lulled by a peaceful sense of

being able to enjoy the most trivial thing with a childlike

enjoyment.  The movement of a wave, the colour of a stone,

anything, was enough for Knight's drowsy thoughts of that day to

precipitate themselves upon.  Even the sermonizing platitudes the

vicar had delivered himself of--chiefly because something seemed

to be professionally required of him in the presence of a man of

Knight's proclivities--were swallowed whole.  The presence of

Elfride led him not merely to tolerate that kind of talk from the

necessities of ordinary courtesy; but he listened to it--took in

the ideas with an enjoyable make-believe that they were proper and

necessary, and indulged in a conservative feeling that the face of

things was complete.



Entering her room that evening Elfride found a packet for herself

on the dressing-table.  How it came there she did not know.  She

tremblingly undid the folds of white paper that covered it.  Yes;

it was the treasure of a morocco case, containing those treasures

of ornament she had refused in the daytime.



Elfride dressed herself in them for a moment, looked at herself in

the glass, blushed red, and put them away.  They filled her dreams

all that night.  Never had she seen anything so lovely, and never

was it more clear that as an honest woman she was in duty bound to

refuse them.  Why it was not equally clear to her that duty

required more vigorous co-ordinate conduct as well, let those who

dissect her say.



The next morning glared in like a spectre upon her.  It was

Stephen's letter-day, and she was bound to meet the postman--to

stealthily do a deed she had never liked, to secure an end she now

had ceased to desire.



But she went.



There were two letters.



One was from the bank at St. Launce's, in which she had a small

private deposit--probably something about interest. She put that

in her pocket for a moment, and going indoors and upstairs to be

safer from observation, tremblingly opened Stephen's.



What was this he said to her?



She was to go to the St. Launce's Bank and take a sum of money

which they had received private advices to pay her.



The sum was two hundred pounds.



There was no check, order, or anything of the nature of guarantee.

In fact the information amounted to this: the money was now in the

St. Launce's Bank, standing in her name.



She instantly opened the other letter.  It contained a deposit-

note from the bank for the sum of two hundred pounds which had

that day been added to her account.  Stephen's information, then,

was correct, and the transfer made.



'I have saved this in one year,' Stephen's letter went on to say,

'and what so proper as well as pleasant for me to do as to hand it

over to you to keep for your use? I have plenty for myself,

independently of this.  Should you not be disposed to let it lie

idle in the bank, get your father to invest it in your name on

good security.  It is a little present to you from your more than

betrothed.  He will, I think, Elfride, feel now that my

pretensions to your hand are anything but the dream of a silly boy

not worth rational consideration.'



With a natural delicacy, Elfride, in mentioning her father's

marriage, had refrained from all allusion to the pecuniary

resources of the lady.



Leaving this matter-of-fact subject, he went on, somewhat after

his boyish manner:



'Do you remember, darling, that first morning of my arrival at

your house, when your father read at prayers the miracle of

healing the sick of the palsy--where he is told to take up his bed

and walk? I do, and I can now so well realize the force of that

passage.  The smallest piece of mat is the bed of the Oriental,

and yesterday I saw a native perform the very action, which

reminded me to mention it.  But you are better read than I, and

perhaps you knew all this long ago....One day I bought some small

native idols to send home to you as curiosities, but afterwards

finding they had been cast in England, made to look old, and

shipped over, I threw them away in disgust.



'Speaking of this reminds me that we are obliged to import all our

house-building ironwork from England.  Never was such foresight

required to be exercised in building houses as here.  Before we

begin, we have to order every column, lock, hinge, and screw that

will be required.  We cannot go into the next street, as in

London, and get them cast at a minute's notice.  Mr. L. says

somebody will have to go to England very soon and superintend the

selection of a large order of this kind.  I only wish I may be the

man.'



There before her lay the deposit-receipt for the two hundred

pounds, and beside it the elegant present of Knight.  Elfride grew

cold--then her cheeks felt heated by beating blood.  If by

destroying the piece of paper the whole transaction could have

been withdrawn from her experience, she would willingly have

sacrificed the money it represented.  She did not know what to do

in either case.  She almost feared to let the two articles lie in

juxtaposition: so antagonistic were the interests they represented

that a miraculous repulsion of one by the other was almost to be

expected.



That day she was seen little of.  By the evening she had come to a

resolution, and acted upon it.  The packet was sealed up--with a

tear of regret as she closed the case upon the pretty forms it

contained--directed, and placed upon the writing-table in Knight's

room.  And a letter was written to Stephen, stating that as yet

she hardly understood her position with regard to the money sent;

but declaring that she was ready to fulfil her promise to marry

him.  After this letter had been written she delayed posting it--

although never ceasing to feel strenuously that the deed must be

done.



Several days passed.  There was another Indian letter for Elfride.

Coming unexpectedly, her father saw it, but made no remark--why,

she could not tell.  The news this time was absolutely

overwhelming.  Stephen, as he had wished, had been actually chosen

as the most fitting to execute the iron-work commission he had

alluded to as impending.  This duty completed he would have three

months' leave.  His letter continued that he should follow it in a

week, and should take the opportunity to plainly ask her father to

permit the engagement.  Then came a page expressive of his delight

and hers at the reunion; and finally, the information that he

would write to the shipping agents, asking them to telegraph and

tell her when the ship bringing him home should be in sight--

knowing how acceptable such information would be.



Elfride lived and moved now as in a dream.  Knight had at first

become almost angry at her persistent refusal of his offering--and

no less with the manner than the fact of it.  But he saw that she

began to look worn and ill--and his vexation lessened to simple

perplexity.



He ceased now to remain in the house for long hours together as

before, but made it a mere centre for antiquarian and geological

excursions in the neighbourhood.  Throw up his cards and go away

he fain would have done, but could not.  And, thus, availing

himself of the privileges of a relative, he went in and out the

premises as fancy led him--but still lingered on.



'I don't wish to stay here another day if my presence is

distasteful,' he said one afternoon.  'At first you used to imply

that I was severe with you; and when I am kind you treat me

unfairly.'



'No, no.  Don't say so.'



The origin of their acquaintanceship had been such as to render

their manner towards each other peculiar and uncommon.  It was of

a kind to cause them to speak out their minds on any feelings of

objection and difference: to be reticent on gentler matters.



'I have a good mind to go away and never trouble you again,'

continued Knight.



She said nothing, but the eloquent expression of her eyes and wan

face was enough to reproach him for harshness.



'Do you like me to be here, then?' inquired Knight gently.



'Yes,' she said.  Fidelity to the old love and truth to the new

were ranged on opposite sides, and truth virtuelessly prevailed.



'Then I'll stay a little longer,' said Knight.



'Don't be vexed if I keep by myself a good deal, will you? Perhaps

something may happen, and I may tell you something.'



'Mere coyness,' said Knight to himself; and went away with a

lighter heart.  The trick of reading truly the enigmatical forces

at work in women at given times, which with some men is an

unerring instinct, is peculiar to minds less direct and honest

than Knight's.



The next evening, about five o'clock, before Knight had returned

from a pilgrimage along the shore, a man walked up to the house.

He was a messenger from Camelton, a town a few miles off, to which

place the railway had been advanced during the summer.



'A telegram for Miss Swancourt, and three and sixpence to pay for

the special messenger.' Miss Swancourt sent out the money, signed

the paper, and opened her letter with a trembling hand.  She read:





'Johnson, Liverpool, to Miss Swancourt, Endelstow, near Castle

Boterel.



'Amaryllis telegraphed off Holyhead, four o'clock.  Expect will

dock and land passengers at Canning's Basin ten o'clock to-morrow

morning.'





Her father called her into the study.



'Elfride, who sent you that message?' he asked suspiciously.



'Johnson.'

'Who is Johnson, for Heaven's sake?'



'I don't know.'



'The deuce you don't! Who is to know, then?'



'I have never heard of him till now.'



'That's a singular story, isn't it.'



'I don't know.'



'Come, come, miss! What was the telegram?'



'Do you really wish to know, papa?'



'Well, I do.'



'Remember, I am a full-grown woman now.'



'Well, what then?'



'Being a woman, and not a child, I may, I think, have a secret or

two.'



'You will, it seems.'



'Women have, as a rule.'



'But don't keep them.  So speak out.'



'If you will not press me now, I give my word to tell you the

meaning of all this before the week is past.'



'On your honour?'



'On my honour.'



'Very well.  I have had a certain suspicion, you know; and I shall

be glad to find it false.  I don't like your manner lately.'



'At the end of the week, I said, papa.'



Her father did not reply, and Elfride left the room.



She began to look out for the postman again.  Three mornings later

he brought an inland letter from Stephen.  It contained very

little matter, having been written in haste; but the meaning was

bulky enough.  Stephen said that, having executed a commission in

Liverpool, he should arrive at his father's house, East Endelstow,

at five or six o'clock that same evening; that he would after dusk

walk on to the next village, and meet her, if she would, in the

church porch, as in the old time.  He proposed this plan because

he thought it unadvisable to call formally at her house so late in

the evening; yet he could not sleep without having seen her.  The

minutes would seem hours till he clasped her in his arms.



Elfride was still steadfast in her opinion that honour compelled

her to meet him.  Probably the very longing to avoid him lent

additional weight to the conviction; for she was markedly one of

those who sigh for the unattainable--to whom, superlatively, a

hope is pleasing because not a possession.  And she knew it so

well that her intellect was inclined to exaggerate this defect in

herself.



So during the day she looked her duty steadfastly in the face;

read Wordsworth's astringent yet depressing ode to that Deity;

committed herself to her guidance; and still felt the weight of

chance desires.



But she began to take a melancholy pleasure in contemplating the

sacrifice of herself to the man whom a maidenly sense of propriety

compelled her to regard as her only possible husband.  She would

meet him, and do all that lay in her power to marry him.  To guard

against a relapse, a note was at once despatched to his father's

cottage for Stephen on his arrival, fixing an hour for the

interview.
