

                              PART V

                       DR. ARCHIE'S VENTURE


                                 I


     DR. HOWARD ARCHIE had come down to Denver

for a meeting of the stockholders in the San Felipe

silver mine.  It was not absolutely necessary for him to

come, but he had no very pressing cases at home.  Winter

was closing down in Moonstone, and he dreaded the dull-

ness of it.  On the 10th day of January, therefore, he was

registered at the Brown Palace Hotel.  On the morning of

the 11th he came down to breakfast to find the streets

white and the air thick with snow.  A wild northwester was

blowing down from the mountains, one of those beautiful

storms that wrap Denver in dry, furry snow, and make the

city a loadstone to thousands of men in the mountains and

on the plains.  The brakemen out on their box-cars, the

miners up in their diggings, the lonely homesteaders in

the sand hills of Yucca and Kit Carson Counties, begin

to think of Denver, muffled in snow, full of food and drink

and good cheer, and to yearn for her with that admiration

which makes her, more than other American cities, an

object of sentiment.



     Howard Archie was glad he had got in before the storm

came.  He felt as cheerful as if he had received a legacy

that morning, and he greeted the clerk with even greater

friendliness than usual when he stopped at the desk for

his mail.  In the dining-room he found several old friends

seated here and there before substantial breakfasts: cattle-

men and mining engineers from odd corners of the State,

all looking fresh and well pleased with themselves.  He had



<p 346>



a word with one and another before he sat down at the little

table by a window, where the Austrian head waiter stood

attentively behind a chair.  After his breakfast was put

before him, the doctor began to run over his letters.  There

was one directed in Thea Kronborg's handwriting, for-

warded from Moonstone.  He saw with astonishment, as

he put another lump of sugar into his cup, that this letter

bore a New York postmark.  He had known that Thea was

in Mexico, traveling with some Chicago people, but New

York, to a Denver man, seems much farther away than

Mexico City.  He put the letter behind his plate, upright

against the stem of his water goblet, and looked at it

thoughtfully while he drank his second cup of coffee.  He

had been a little anxious about Thea; she had not written

to him for a long while.



     As he never got good coffee at home, the doctor always

drank three cups for breakfast when he was in Denver.

Oscar knew just when to bring him a second pot, fresh and

smoking.  "And more cream, Oscar, please.  You know I

like lots of cream," the doctor murmured, as he opened

the square envelope, marked in the upper right-hand cor-

ner, "Everett House, Union Square."  The text of the letter

was as follows:--



DEAR DOCTOR ARCHIE:--



     I have not written to you for a long time, but it has not

been unintentional.  I could not write you frankly, and so

I would not write at all.  I can be frank with you now, but

not by letter.  It is a great deal to ask, but I wonder if you

could come to New York to help me out?  I have got into

difficulties, and I need your advice.  I need your friendship.

I am afraid I must even ask you to lend me money, if you

can without serious inconvenience.  I have to go to Ger-

many to study, and it can't be put off any longer.  My voice

is ready.  Needless to say, I don't want any word of this to

reach my family.  They are the last people I would turn to,



<p 347>



though I love my mother dearly.  If you can come, please

telegraph me at this hotel.  Don't despair of me.  I'll make

it up to you yet.



                    Your old friend,



                                        THEA KRONBORG.





     This in a bold, jagged handwriting with a Gothic turn to

the letters,--something between a highly sophisticated

hand and a very unsophisticated one,--not in the least

smooth or flowing.



     The doctor bit off the end of a cigar nervously and read

the letter through again, fumbling distractedly in his pock-

ets for matches, while the waiter kept trying to call his

attention to the box he had just placed before him.  At last

Oscar came out, as if the idea had just struck him, "Matches,

sir?"



     "Yes, thank you."  The doctor slipped a coin into his

palm and rose, crumpling Thea's letter in his hand and

thrusting the others into his pocket unopened.  He went

back to the desk in the lobby and beckoned to the clerk, upon

whose kindness he threw himself apologetically.



     "Harry, I've got to pull out unexpectedly.  Call up the

Burlington, will you, and ask them to route me to New

York the quickest way, and to let us know.  Ask for the

hour I'll get in.  I have to wire."



     "Certainly, Dr. Archie.  Have it for you in a minute."

The young man's pallid, clean-scraped face was all sympa-

thetic interest as he reached for the telephone.  Dr. Archie

put out his hand and stopped him.



     "Wait a minute.  Tell me, first, is Captain Harris down

yet?"



     "No, sir.  The Captain hasn't come down yet this

morning."



     "I'll wait here for him.  If I don't happen to catch him,

nail him and get me.  Thank you, Harry."



     The doctor spoke gratefully and turned away.  He began



<p 348>



to pace the lobby, his hands behind him, watching the

bronze elevator doors like a hawk.  At last Captain Harris

issued from one of them, tall and imposing, wearing a

Stetson and fierce mustaches, a fur coat on his arm, a soli-

taire glittering upon his little finger and another in his

black satin ascot.  He was one of the grand old bluffers of

those good old days.  As gullible as a schoolboy, he had

managed, with his sharp eye and knowing air and twisted

blond mustaches, to pass himself off for an astute financier,

and the Denver papers respectfully referred to him as the

Rothschild of Cripple Creek.



     Dr. Archie stopped the Captain on his way to breakfast.

"Must see you a minute, Captain.  Can't wait.  Want to

sell you some shares in the San Felipe.  Got to raise

money."



     The Captain grandly bestowed his hat upon an eager

porter who had already lifted his fur coat tenderly from his

arm and stood nursing it.  In removing his hat, the Cap-

tain exposed a bald, flushed dome, thatched about the ears

with yellowish gray hair.  "Bad time to sell, doctor.  You

want to hold on to San Felipe, and buy more.  What have

you got to raise?"



     "Oh, not a great sum.  Five or six thousand.  I've been

buying up close and have run short."



     "I see, I see.  Well, doctor, you'll have to let me get

through that door.  I was out last night, and I'm going to

get my bacon, if you lose your mine."  He clapped Archie

on the shoulder and pushed him along in front of him.

"Come ahead with me, and we'll talk business."



     Dr. Archie attended the Captain and waited while he

gave his order, taking the seat the old promoter indi-

cated.



     "Now, sir," the Captain turned to him, "you don't want

to sell anything.  You must be under the impression that

I'm one of these damned New England sharks that get

their pound of flesh off the widow and orphan.  If you're a



<p 349>



little short, sign a note and I'll write a check.  That's the

way gentlemen do business.  If you want to put up some

San Felipe as collateral, let her go, but I shan't touch a

share of it.  Pens and ink, please, Oscar,"--he lifted a

large forefinger to the Austrian.



     The Captain took out his checkbook and a book of blank

notes, and adjusted his nose-nippers.  He wrote a few words

in one book and Archie wrote a few in the other.  Then

they each tore across perforations and exchanged slips of

paper.



     "That's the way.  Saves office rent," the Captain com-

mented with satisfaction, returning the books to his pocket.

"And now, Archie, where are you off to?"



     "Got to go East to-night.  A deal waiting for me in New

York."  Dr. Archie rose.



     The Captain's face brightened as he saw Oscar approach-

ing with a tray, and he began tucking the corner of his

napkin inside his collar, over his ascot.  "Don't let them

unload anything on you back there, doctor," he said gen-

ially, "and don't let them relieve you of anything, either.

Don't let them get any Cripple stuff off you.  We can man-

age our own silver out here, and we're going to take it out

by the ton, sir!"



     The doctor left the dining-room, and after another con-

sultation with the clerk, he wrote his first telegram to

Thea:--



Miss Thea Kronborg,



          Everett House, New York.



     Will call at your hotel eleven o'clock Friday morning.

Glad to come.  Thank you.



                                             ARCHIE





     He stood and heard the message actually clicked off on

the wire, with the feeling that she was hearing the click at

the other end.  Then he sat down in the lobby and wrote a



<p 350>



note to his wife and one to the other doctor in Moonstone.

When he at last issued out into the storm, it was with a

feeling of elation rather than of anxiety.  Whatever was

wrong, he could make it right.  Her letter had practically

said so.



     He tramped about the snowy streets, from the bank to

the Union Station, where he shoved his money under the

grating of the ticket window as if he could not get rid of it

fast enough.  He had never been in New York, never been

farther east than Buffalo.  "That's rather a shame," he

reflected boyishly as he put the long tickets in his pocket,

"for a man nearly forty years old."  However, he thought

as he walked up toward the club, he was on the whole glad

that his first trip had a human interest, that he was going

for something, and because he was wanted.  He loved holi-

days.  He felt as if he were going to Germany himself.

"Queer,"--he went over it with the snow blowing in his

face,--"but that sort of thing is more interesting than

mines and making your daily bread.  It's worth paying out

to be in on it,--for a fellow like me.  And when it's Thea

--  Oh, I back her!" he laughed aloud as he burst in at the

door of the Athletic Club, powdered with snow.



     Archie sat down before the New York papers and ran

over the advertisements of hotels, but he was too restless

to read.  Probably he had better get a new overcoat, and

he was not sure about the shape of his collars.  "I don't

want to look different to her from everybody else there,"

he mused.  "I guess I'll go down and have Van look me

over.  He'll put me right."



     So he plunged out into the snow again and started for his

tailor's.  When he passed a florist's shop he stopped and

looked in at the window, smiling; how naturally pleasant

things recalled one another.  At the tailor's he kept whis-

tling, "Flow gently, Sweet Afton," while Van Dusen ad-

vised him, until that resourceful tailor and haberdasher

exclaimed, "You must have a date back there, doctor; you



<p 351>



behave like a bridegroom," and made him remember that

he wasn't one.



     Before he let him go, Van put his finger on the Masonic

pin in his client's lapel.  "Mustn't wear that, doctor.  Very

bad form back there."







<p 352>





                                II





     FRED OTTENBURG, smartly dressed for the after-

noon, with a long black coat and gaiters was sitting

in the dusty parlor of the Everett House.  His manner was

not in accord with his personal freshness, the good lines of

his clothes, and the shining smoothness of his hair.  His

attitude was one of deep dejection, and his face, though it

had the cool, unimpeachable fairness possible only to a

very blond young man, was by no means happy.  A page

shuffled into the room and looked about.  When he made

out the dark figure in a shadowy corner, tracing over the

carpet pattern with a cane, he droned, "The lady says you

can come up, sir."



     Fred picked up his hat and gloves and followed the crea-

ture, who seemed an aged boy in uniform, through dark

corridors that smelled of old carpets.  The page knocked

at the door of Thea's sitting-room, and then wandered

away.  Thea came to the door with a telegram in her hand.

She asked Ottenburg to come in and pointed to one of the

clumsy, sullen-looking chairs that were as thick as they

were high.  The room was brown with time, dark in spite

of two windows that opened on Union Square, with dull

curtains and carpet, and heavy, respectable-looking furni-

ture in somber colors.  The place was saved from utter dis-

malness by a coal fire under the black marble mantelpiece,

--brilliantly reflected in a long mirror that hung between

the two windows.  This was the first time Fred had seen

the room, and he took it in quickly, as he put down his hat

and gloves.



     Thea seated herself at the walnut writing-desk, still

holding the slip of yellow paper.  "Dr. Archie is coming,"

she said.  "He will be here Friday morning."



<p 353>





     "Well, that's good, at any rate," her visitor replied with

a determined effort at cheerfulness.  Then, turning to the

fire, he added blankly, "If you want him."



     "Of course I want him.  I would never have asked such

a thing of him if I hadn't wanted him a great deal.  It's a

very expensive trip."  Thea spoke severely.  Then she went

on, in a milder tone.  "He doesn't say anything about

the money, but I think his coming means that he can let

me have it."



     Fred was standing before the mantel, rubbing his hands

together nervously.  "Probably.  You are still determined

to call on him?"  He sat down tentatively in the chair Thea

had indicated.  "I don't see why you won't borrow from

me, and let him sign with you, for instance.  That would

constitute a perfectly regular business transaction.  I could

bring suit against either of you for my money."



     Thea turned toward him from the desk.  "We won't take

that up again, Fred.  I should have a different feeling about

it if I went on your money.  In a way I shall feel freer on

Dr. Archie's, and in another way I shall feel more bound.

I shall try even harder."  She paused.  "He is almost like

my father," she added irrelevantly.



     "Still, he isn't, you know," Fred persisted.  "It would

n't be anything new.  I've loaned money to students

before, and got it back, too."



     "Yes; I know you're generous," Thea hurried over it,

"but this will be the best way.  He will be here on Friday

did I tell you?"



     "I think you mentioned it.  That's rather soon.  May

I smoke?" he took out a small cigarette case.  "I sup-

pose you'll be off next week?" he asked as he struck a

match.



     "Just as soon as I can," she replied with a restless move-

ment of her arms, as if her dark-blue dress were too tight

for her.  "It seems as if I'd been here forever."



     "And yet," the young man mused, "we got in only four



<p 354>



days ago.  Facts really don't count for much, do they?  It's

all in the way people feel: even in little things."



     Thea winced, but she did not answer him.  She put the

telegram back in its envelope and placed it carefully in one

of the pigeonholes of the desk.



     "I suppose," Fred brought out with effort, "that your

friend is in your confidence?"



     "He always has been.  I shall have to tell him about my-

self.  I wish I could without dragging you in."



     Fred shook himself.  "Don't bother about where you

drag me, please," he put in, flushing.  "I don't give--"

he subsided suddenly.



     "I'm afraid," Thea went on gravely, "that he won't

understand.  He'll be hard on you."



     Fred studied the white ash of his cigarette before he

flicked it off.  "You mean he'll see me as even worse than

I am.  Yes, I suppose I shall look very low to him: a fifth-

rate scoundrel.  But that only matters in so far as it hurts

his feelings."



     Thea sighed.  "We'll both look pretty low.  And after

all, we must really be just about as we shall look to

him."



     Ottenburg started up and threw his cigarette into the

grate.  "That I deny.  Have you ever been really frank with

this preceptor of your childhood, even when you WERE a

child?  Think a minute, have you?  Of course not!  From

your cradle, as I once told you, you've been `doing it' on

the side, living your own life, admitting to yourself things

that would horrify him.  You've always deceived him to

the extent of letting him think you different from what

you are.  He couldn't understand then, he can't under-

stand now.  So why not spare yourself and him?"



     She shook her head.  "Of course, I've had my own

thoughts.  Maybe he has had his, too.  But I've never done

anything before that he would much mind.  I must put

myself right with him,--as right as I can,--to begin



<p 355>



over.  He'll make allowances for me.  He always has.  But

I'm afraid he won't for you."



     "Leave that to him and me.  I take it you want me to see

him?"  Fred sat down again and began absently to trace

the carpet pattern with his cane.  "At the worst," he spoke

wanderingly, "I thought you'd perhaps let me go in on the

business end of it and invest along with you.  You'd put

in your talent and ambition and hard work, and I'd put

in the money and--well, nobody's good wishes are to be

scorned, not even mine.  Then, when the thing panned out

big, we could share together.  Your doctor friend hasn't

cared half so much about your future as I have."



     "He's cared a good deal.  He doesn't know as much

about such things as you do.  Of course you've been a great

deal more help to me than any one else ever has," Thea

said quietly.  The black clock on the mantel began to

strike.  She listened to the five strokes and then said, "I'd

have liked your helping me eight months ago.  But now,

you'd simply be keeping me."



     "You weren't ready for it eight months ago."  Fred

leaned back at last in his chair.  "You simply weren't ready

for it.  You were too tired.  You were too timid.  Your

whole tone was too low.  You couldn't rise from a chair

like that,"--she had started up apprehensively and gone

toward the window.--  "You were fumbling and awkward.

Since then you've come into your personality.  You were

always locking horns with it before.  You were a sullen

little drudge eight months ago, afraid of being caught at

either looking or moving like yourself.  Nobody could tell

anything about you.  A voice is not an instrument that's

found ready-made.  A voice is personality.  It can be as

big as a circus and as common as dirt.--  There's good

money in that kind, too, but I don't happen to be interested

in them.--  Nobody could tell much about what you might

be able to do, last winter.  I divined more than anybody

else."



<p 356>





     "Yes, I know you did."  Thea walked over to the old-

fashioned mantel and held her hands down to the glow of

the fire.  "I owe so much to you, and that's what makes

things hard.  That's why I have to get away from you

altogether.  I depend on you for so many things.  Oh, I did

even last winter, in Chicago!"  She knelt down by the

grate and held her hands closer to the coals.  "And one

thing leads to another."



     Ottenburg watched her as she bent toward the fire.  His

glance brightened a little.  "Anyhow, you couldn't look as

you do now, before you knew me.  You WERE clumsy.  And

whatever you do now, you do splendidly.  And you can't

cry enough to spoil your face for more than ten minutes.

It comes right back, in spite of you.  It's only since you've

known me that you've let yourself be beautiful."



     Without rising she turned her face away.  Fred went on

impetuously.  "Oh, you can turn it away from me, Thea;

you can take it away from me!  All the same--" his spurt

died and he fell back.  "How can you turn on me so, after

all!" he sighed.



     "I haven't.  But when you arranged with yourself to

take me in like that, you couldn't have been thinking

very kindly of me.  I can't understand how you carried it

through, when I was so easy, and all the circumstances were

so easy."



     Her crouching position by the fire became threatening.

Fred got up, and Thea also rose.



     "No," he said, "I can't make you see that now.  Some

time later, perhaps, you will understand better.  For one

thing, I honestly could not imagine that words, names,

meant so much to you."  Fred was talking with the des-

peration of a man who has put himself in the wrong and

who yet feels that there was an idea of truth in his conduct.

"Suppose that you had married your brakeman and lived

with him year after year, caring for him even less than you

do for your doctor, or for Harsanyi.  I suppose you would



<p 357>



have felt quite all right about it, because that relation has

a name in good standing.  To me, that seems--sickening!"

He took a rapid turn about the room and then as Thea

remained standing, he rolled one of the elephantine chairs

up to the hearth for her.



     "Sit down and listen to me for a moment, Thea."  He

began pacing from the hearthrug to the window and back

again, while she sat down compliantly.  "Don't you know

most of the people in the world are not individuals at all?

They never have an individual idea or experience.  A lot

of girls go to boarding-school together, come out the same

season, dance at the same parties, are married off in

groups, have their babies at about the same time, send

their children to school together, and so the human crop

renews itself.  Such women know as much about the reality

of the forms they go through as they know about the

wars they learn the dates of.  They get their most per-

sonal experiences out of novels and plays.  Everything is

second-hand with them.  Why, you COULDN'T live like that."



     Thea sat looking toward the mantel, her eyes half closed,

her chin level, her head set as if she were enduring some-

thing.  Her hands, very white, lay passive on her dark

gown.  From the window corner Fred looked at them and

at her.  He shook his head and flashed an angry, tormented

look out into the blue twilight over the Square, through

which muffled cries and calls and the clang of car bells

came up from the street.  He turned again and began to

pace the floor, his hands in his pockets.



     "Say what you will, Thea Kronborg, you are not that

sort of person.  You will never sit alone with a pacifier and

a novel.  You won't subsist on what the old ladies have put

into the bottle for you.  You will always break through

into the realities.  That was the first thing Harsanyi found

out about you; that you couldn't be kept on the outside.

If you'd lived in Moonstone all your life and got on with

the discreet brakeman, you'd have had just the same



<p 358>



nature.  Your children would have been the realities then,

probably.  If they'd been commonplace, you'd have killed

them with driving.  You'd have managed some way to

live twenty times as much as the people around you."



     Fred paused.  He sought along the shadowy ceiling and

heavy mouldings for words.  When he began again, his

voice was lower, and at first he spoke with less conviction,

though again it grew on him.  "Now I knew all this--oh,

knew it better than I can ever make you understand!

You've been running a handicap.  You had no time to lose.

I wanted you to have what you need and to get on fast--

get through with me, if need be; I counted on that.  You've

no time to sit round and analyze your conduct or your

feelings.  Other women give their whole lives to it.  They've

nothing else to do.  Helping a man to get his divorce is a

career for them; just the sort of intellectual exercise they

like."



     Fred dived fiercely into his pockets as if he would rip

them out and scatter their contents to the winds.  Stop-

ping before her, he took a deep breath and went on

again, this time slowly.  "All that sort of thing is foreign

to you.  You'd be nowhere at it.  You haven't that kind of

mind.  The grammatical niceties of conduct are dark to

you.  You're simple--and poetic."  Fred's voice seemed

to be wandering about in the thickening dusk.  "You won't

play much.  You won't, perhaps, love many times."  He

paused.  "And you did love me, you know.  Your railroad

friend would have understood me.  I COULD have thrown you

back.  The reverse was there,--it stared me in the face,--

but I couldn't pull it.  I let you drive ahead."  He threw

out his hands.  What Thea noticed, oddly enough, was the

flash of the firelight on his cuff link.  He turned again.

"And you'll always drive ahead," he muttered.  "It's your

way."



     There was a long silence.  Fred had dropped into a chair.

He seemed, after such an explosion, not to have a word



<p 359>



left in him.  Thea put her hand to the back of her neck and

pressed it, as if the muscles there were aching.



     "Well," she said at last, "I at least overlook more in you

than I do in myself.  I am always excusing you to myself.

I don't do much else."



     "Then why, in Heaven's name, won't you let me be your

friend?  You make a scoundrel of me, borrowing money

from another man to get out of my clutches."



     "If I borrow from him, it's to study.  Anything I took

from you would be different.  As I said before, you'd be

keeping me."



     "Keeping!  I like your language.  It's pure Moonstone,

Thea,--like your point of view.  I wonder how long you'll

be a Methodist."  He turned away bitterly.



     "Well, I've never said I wasn't Moonstone, have I?  I

am, and that's why I want Dr. Archie.  I can't see anything

so funny about Moonstone, you know."  She pushed her

chair back a little from the hearth and clasped her hands

over her knee, still looking thoughtfully into the red coals.

"We always come back to the same thing, Fred.  The name,

as you call it, makes a difference to me how I feel about

myself.  You would have acted very differently with a girl

of your own kind, and that's why I can't take anything

from you now.  You've made everything impossible.  Being

married is one thing and not being married is the other

thing, and that's all there is to it.  I can't see how you

reasoned with yourself, if you took the trouble to reason.

You say I was too much alone, and yet what you did was

to cut me off more than I ever had been.  Now I'm going

to try to make good to my friends out there.  That's all

there is left for me."



     "Make good to your friends!" Fred burst out.  "What

one of them cares as I care, or believes as I believe?  I've

told you I'll never ask a gracious word from you until I

can ask it with all the churches in Christendom at my

back."



<p 360>





     Thea looked up, and when she saw Fred's face, she

thought sadly that he, too, looked as if things were spoiled

for him.  "If you know me as well as you say you do, Fred,"

she said slowly, "then you are not being honest with your-

self.  You know that I can't do things halfway.  If you kept

me at all--you'd keep me."  She dropped her head wearily

on her hand and sat with her forehead resting on her

fingers.



     Fred leaned over her and said just above his breath,

"Then, when I get that divorce, you'll take it up with me

again?  You'll at least let me know, warn me, before there

is a serious question of anybody else?"



     Without lifting her head, Thea answered him.  "Oh, I

don't think there will ever be a question of anybody else.

Not if I can help it.  I suppose I've given you every reason

to think there will be,--at once, on shipboard, any time."



     Ottenburg drew himself up like a shot.  "Stop it, Thea!"

he said sharply.  "That's one thing you've never done.

That's like any common woman."  He saw her shoulders

lift a little and grow calm.  Then he went to the other side

of the room and took up his hat and gloves from the sofa.

He came back cheerfully.  "I didn't drop in to bully you

this afternoon.  I came to coax you to go out for tea with

me somewhere."  He waited, but she did not look up or

lift her head, still sunk on her hand.



     Her handkerchief had fallen.  Fred picked it up and put

it on her knee, pressing her fingers over it.  "Good-night,

dear and wonderful," he whispered,--"wonderful and dear!

How can you ever get away from me when I will always

follow you, through every wall, through every door, wher-

ever you go."  He looked down at her bent head, and the

curve of her neck that was so sad.  He stooped, and with

his lips just touched her hair where the firelight made it

ruddiest.  "I didn't know I had it in me, Thea.  I thought

it was all a fairy tale.  I don't know myself any more."  He

closed his eyes and breathed deeply.  "The salt's all gone



<p 361>



out of your hair.  It's full of sun and wind again.  I believe

it has memories."  Again she heard him take a deep breath.

"I could do without you for a lifetime, if that would give

you to yourself.  A woman like you doesn't find herself,

alone."



     She thrust her free hand up to him.  He kissed it softly,

as if she were asleep and he were afraid of waking her.



     From the door he turned back irrelevantly.  "As to your

old friend, Thea, if he's to be here on Friday, why,"--he

snatched out his watch and held it down to catch the light

from the grate,--"he's on the train now!  That ought to

cheer you.  Good-night."  She heard the door close.







<p 362>





                                III





     ON Friday afternoon Thea Kronborg was walking ex-

citedly up and down her sitting-room, which at that

hour was flooded by thin, clear sunshine.  Both windows

were open, and the fire in the grate was low, for the day was

one of those false springs that sometimes blow into New

York from the sea in the middle of winter, soft, warm,

with a persuasive salty moisture in the air and a relaxing

thaw under foot.  Thea was flushed and animated, and she

seemed as restless as the sooty sparrows that chirped and

cheeped distractingly about the windows.  She kept looking

at the black clock, and then down into the Square.  The

room was full of flowers, and she stopped now and then to

arrange them or to move them into the sunlight.  After the

bellboy came to announce a visitor, she took some Roman

hyacinths from a glass and stuck them in the front of her

dark-blue dress.



     When at last Fred Ottenburg appeared in the doorway,

she met him with an exclamation of pleasure.  "I am glad

you've come, Fred.  I was afraid you might not get my

note, and I wanted to see you before you see Dr. Archie.

He's so nice!"  She brought her hands together to em-

phasize her statement.



     "Is he?  I'm glad.  You see I'm quite out of breath.

I didn't wait for the elevator, but ran upstairs.  I was

so pleased at being sent for."  He dropped his hat and over-

coat.  "Yes, I should say he is nice!  I don't seem to

recognize all of these," waving his handkerchief about at

the flowers.



     "Yes, he brought them himself, in a big box.  He brought

lots with him besides flowers.  Oh, lots of things!  The old

Moonstone feeling,"--Thea moved her hand back and



<p 363>



forth in the air, fluttering her fingers,--"the feeling of

starting out, early in the morning, to take my lesson."



     "And you've had everything out with him?"



     "No, I haven't."



     "Haven't?"  He looked up in consternation.



     "No, I haven't!"  Thea spoke excitedly, moving about

over the sunny patches on the grimy carpet.  "I've lied

to him, just as you said I had always lied to him, and

that's why I'm so happy.  I've let him think what he

likes to think.  Oh, I couldn't do anything else, Fred,"--

she shook her head emphatically.  "If you'd seen him

when he came in, so pleased and excited!  You see this is

a great adventure for him.  From the moment I began to

talk to him, he entreated me not to say too much, not to

spoil his notion of me.  Not in so many words, of course.

But if you'd seen his eyes, his face, his kind hands!  Oh,

no!  I couldn't."  She took a deep breath, as if with a

renewed sense of her narrow escape.



     "Then, what did you tell him?" Fred demanded.



     Thea sat down on the edge of the sofa and began shutting

and opening her hands nervously.  "Well, I told him

enough, and not too much.  I told him all about how good

you were to me last winter, getting me engagements and

things, and how you had helped me with my work more

than anybody.  Then I told him about how you sent me

down to the ranch when I had no money or anything."

She paused and wrinkled her forehead.  "And I told him

that I wanted to marry you and ran away to Mexico with

you, and that I was awfully happy until you told me that

you couldn't marry me because--well, I told him why."

Thea dropped her eyes and moved the toe of her shoe

about restlessly on the carpet.



     "And he took it from you, like that?" Fred asked,

almost with awe.



     "Yes, just like that, and asked no questions.  He was

hurt; he had some wretched moments.  I could see him



<p 364>



squirming and squirming and trying to get past it.  He

kept shutting his eyes and rubbing his forehead.  But when

I told him that I absolutely knew you wanted to marry me,

that you would whenever you could, that seemed to help

him a good deal."



     "And that satisfied him?" Fred asked wonderingly.

He could not quite imagine what kind of person Dr. Archie

might be.



     "He took me by the shoulders once and asked, oh, in

such a frightened way, `Thea, was he GOOD to you, this

young man?'  When I told him you were, he looked at me

again: `And you care for him a great deal, you believe in

him?'  Then he seemed satisfied."  Thea paused.  "You

see, he's just tremendously good, and tremendously afraid

of things--of some things.  Otherwise he would have got

rid of Mrs. Archie."  She looked up suddenly: "You were

right, though; one can't tell people about things they don't

know already."



     Fred stood in the window, his back to the sunlight,

fingering the jonquils.  "Yes, you can, my dear.  But

you must tell it in such a way that they don't know

you're telling it, and that they don't know they're hear-

ing it."



     Thea smiled past him, out into the air.  "I see.  It's a

secret.  Like the sound in the shell."



     "What's that?"  Fred was watching her and thinking

how moving that faraway expression, in her, happened to

be.  "What did you say?"



     She came back.  "Oh, something old and Moonstony!

I have almost forgotten it myself.  But I feel better than I

thought I ever could again.  I can't wait to be off.  Oh,

Fred," she sprang up, "I want to get at it!"



     As she broke out with this, she threw up her head and

lifted herself a little on her toes.  Fred colored and looked

at her fearfully, hesitatingly.  Her eyes, which looked out

through the window, were bright--they had no memories.



<p 365>



No, she did not remember.  That momentary elevation had

no associations for her.  It was unconscious.



     He looked her up and down and laughed and shook his

head.  "You are just all I want you to be--and that is,--

not for me!  Don't worry, you'll get at it.  You are at it.

My God! have you ever, for one moment, been at anything

else?"



     Thea did not answer him, and clearly she had not heard

him.  She was watching something out in the thin light of

the false spring and its treacherously soft air.



     Fred waited a moment.  "Are you going to dine with

your friend to-night?"



     "Yes.  He has never been in New York before.  He

wants to go about.  Where shall I tell him to go?"



     "Wouldn't it be a better plan, since you wish me to

meet him, for you both to dine with me?  It would seem

only natural and friendly.  You'll have to live up a little to

his notion of us."  Thea seemed to consider the suggestion

favorably.  "If you wish him to be easy in his mind,"

Fred went on, "that would help.  I think, myself, that we

are rather nice together.  Put on one of the new dresses

you got down there, and let him see how lovely you can

be.  You owe him some pleasure, after all the trouble he

has taken."



     Thea laughed, and seemed to find the idea exciting and

pleasant.  "Oh, very well!  I'll do my best.  Only don't

wear a dress coat, please.  He hasn't one, and he's nervous

about it."



     Fred looked at his watch.  "Your monument up there

is fast.  I'll be here with a cab at eight.  I'm anxious to

meet him.  You've given me the strangest idea of his callow

innocence and aged indifference."



     She shook her head.  "No, he's none of that.  He's very

good, and he won't admit things.  I love him for it.  Now,

as I look back on it, I see that I've always, even when I was

little, shielded him."



<p 366>





     As she laughed, Fred caught the bright spark in her

eye that he knew so well, and held it for a happy in-

stant.  Then he blew her a kiss with his finger-tips and

fled.







<p 367>





                                IV





     AT nine o'clock that evening our three friends were

seated in the balcony of a French restaurant, much

gayer and more intimate than any that exists in New York

to-day.  This old restaurant was built by a lover of plea-

sure, who knew that to dine gayly human beings must

have the reassurance of certain limitations of space and

of a certain definite style; that the walls must be near

enough to suggest shelter, the ceiling high enough to give

the chandeliers a setting.  The place was crowded with the

kind of people who dine late and well, and Dr. Archie, as

he watched the animated groups in the long room below

the balcony, found this much the most festive scene he had

ever looked out upon.  He said to himself, in a jovial mood

somewhat sustained by the cheer of the board, that this

evening alone was worth his long journey.  He followed

attentively the orchestra, ensconced at the farther end of

the balcony, and told Thea it made him feel "quite musi-

cal" to recognize "The Invitation to the Dance" or "The

Blue Danube," and that he could remember just what kind

of day it was when he heard her practicing them at home,

and lingered at the gate to listen.



     For the first few moments, when he was introduced to

young Ottenburg in the parlor of the Everett House, the

doctor had been awkward and unbending.  But Fred, as

his father had often observed, "was not a good mixer for

nothing."  He had brought Dr. Archie around during the

short cab ride, and in an hour they had become old friends.



     From the moment when the doctor lifted his glass and,

looking consciously at Thea, said, "To your success," Fred

liked him.  He felt his quality; understood his courage in

some directions and what Thea called his timidity in others,



<p 368>



his unspent and miraculously preserved youthfulness.

Men could never impose upon the doctor, he guessed,

but women always could.  Fred liked, too, the doctor's

manner with Thea, his bashful admiration and the little

hesitancy by which he betrayed his consciousness of the

change in her.  It was just this change that, at present,

interested Fred more than anything else.  That, he felt,

was his "created value," and it was his best chance for any

peace of mind.  If that were not real, obvious to an old

friend like Archie, then he cut a very poor figure, indeed.



     Fred got a good deal, too, out of their talk about Moon-

stone.  From her questions and the doctor's answers he was

able to form some conception of the little world that

was almost the measure of Thea's experience, the one bit

of the human drama that she had followed with sympathy

and understanding.  As the two ran over the list of

their friends, the mere sound of a name seemed to recall

volumes to each of them, to indicate mines of knowledge

and observation they had in common.  At some names they

laughed delightedly, at some indulgently and even ten-

derly.



     "You two young people must come out to Moonstone

when Thea gets back," the doctor said hospitably.



     "Oh, we shall!"  Fred caught it up.  "I'm keen to know

all these people.  It is very tantalizing to hear only their

names."



     "Would they interest an outsider very much, do you

think, Dr. Archie?"  Thea leaned toward him.  "Isn't it

only because we've known them since I was little?"



     The doctor glanced at her deferentially.  Fred had noticed

that he seemed a little afraid to look at her squarely--per-

haps a trifle embarrassed by a mode of dress to which he

was unaccustomed.  "Well, you are practically an outsider

yourself, Thea, now," he observed smiling.  "Oh, I know,"

he went on quickly in response to her gesture of protest,--

"I know you don't change toward your old friends, but



<p 369>



you can see us all from a distance now.  It's all to your

advantage that you can still take your old interest, isn't

it, Mr. Ottenburg?"



     "That's exactly one of her advantages, Dr. Archie.

Nobody can ever take that away from her, and none of us

who came later can ever hope to rival Moonstone in the

impression we make.  Her scale of values will always be

the Moonstone scale.  And, with an artist, that IS an

advantage."  Fred nodded.



     Dr. Archie looked at him seriously.  "You mean it keeps

them from getting affected?"



     "Yes; keeps them from getting off the track generally."



     While the waiter filled the glasses, Fred pointed out to

Thea a big black French barytone who was eating ancho-

vies by their tails at one of the tables below, and the doctor

looked about and studied his fellow diners.



     "Do you know, Mr. Ottenburg," he said deeply, "these

people all look happier to me than our Western people do.

Is it simply good manners on their part, or do they get

more out of life?"



     Fred laughed to Thea above the glass he had just lifted.

"Some of them are getting a good deal out of it now,

doctor.  This is the hour when bench-joy brightens."



     Thea chuckled and darted him a quick glance.  "Bench-

joy!  Where did you get that slang?"



     "That happens to be very old slang, my dear.  Older

than Moonstone or the sovereign State of Colorado.  Our

old friend Mr. Nathanmeyer could tell us why it happens

to hit you."  He leaned forward and touched Thea's wrist,

"See that fur coat just coming in, Thea.  It's D'Albert.

He's just back from his Western tour.  Fine head, hasn't

he?"



     "To go back," said Dr. Archie; "I insist that people do

look happier here.  I've noticed it even on the street, and

especially in the hotels."



     Fred turned to him cheerfully.  "New York people live



<p 370>



a good deal in the fourth dimension, Dr. Archie.  It's that

you notice in their faces."



     The doctor was interested.  "The fourth dimension," he

repeated slowly; "and is that slang, too?"



     "No,"--Fred shook his head,--"that's merely a

figure.  I mean that life is not quite so personal here as it

is in your part of the world.  People are more taken up by

hobbies, interests that are less subject to reverses than

their personal affairs.  If you're interested in Thea's voice,

for instance, or in voices in general, that interest is just the

same, even if your mining stocks go down."



     The doctor looked at him narrowly.  "You think that's

about the principal difference between country people and

city people, don't you?"



     Fred was a little disconcerted at being followed up so

resolutely, and he attempted to dismiss it with a pleasantry.

"I've never thought much about it, doctor.  But I should

say, on the spur of the moment, that that is one of the

principal differences between people anywhere.  It's the

consolation of fellows like me who don't accomplish much.

The fourth dimension is not good for business, but we think

we have a better time."



     Dr. Archie leaned back in his chair.  His heavy shoulders

were contemplative.  "And she," he said slowly; "should

you say that she is one of the kind you refer to?"  He in-

clined his head toward the shimmer of the pale-green dress

beside him.  Thea was leaning, just then, over the balcony

rail, her head in the light from the chandeliers below.



     "Never, never!" Fred protested.  "She's as hard-headed

as the worst of you--with a difference."



     The doctor sighed.  "Yes, with a difference; something

that makes a good many revolutions to the second.  When

she was little I used to feel her head to try to locate it."



     Fred laughed.  "Did you, though?  So you were on the

track of it?  Oh, it's there!  We can't get round it, miss,"

as Thea looked back inquiringly.  "Dr. Archie, there's a



<p 371>



fellow townsman of yours I feel a real kinship for."  He

pressed a cigar upon Dr. Archie and struck a match for him.

"Tell me about Spanish Johnny."



     The doctor smiled benignantly through the first waves

of smoke.  "Well, Johnny's an old patient of mine, and he's

an old admirer of Thea's.  She was born a cosmopolitan,

and I expect she learned a good deal from Johnny when she

used to run away and go to Mexican Town.  We thought

it a queer freak then."



     The doctor launched into a long story, in which he was

often eagerly interrupted or joyously confirmed by Thea,

who was drinking her coffee and forcing open the petals of

the roses with an ardent and rather rude hand.  Fred set-

tled down into enjoying his comprehension of his guests.

Thea, watching Dr. Archie and interested in his presenta-

tion, was unconsciously impersonating her suave, gold-

tinted friend.  It was delightful to see her so radiant and

responsive again.  She had kept her promise about looking

her best; when one could so easily get together the colors

of an apple branch in early spring, that was not hard to do.

Even Dr. Archie felt, each time he looked at her, a fresh

consciousness.  He recognized the fine texture of her

mother's skin, with the difference that, when she reached

across the table to give him a bunch of grapes, her arm was

not only white, but somehow a little dazzling.  She seemed

to him taller, and freer in all her movements.  She had now

a way of taking a deep breath when she was interested, that

made her seem very strong, somehow, and brought her

at one quite overpoweringly.  If he seemed shy, it was not

that he was intimidated by her worldly clothes, but that

her greater positiveness, her whole augmented self, made

him feel that his accustomed manner toward her was

inadequate.



     Fred, on his part, was reflecting that the awkward posi-

tion in which he had placed her would not confine or chafe

her long.  She looked about at other people, at other women,



<p 372>



curiously.  She was not quite sure of herself, but she was not

in the least afraid or apologetic.  She seemed to sit there on

the edge, emerging from one world into another, taking her

bearings, getting an idea of the concerted movement about

her, but with absolute self-confidence.  So far from shrink-

ing, she expanded.  The mere kindly effort to please Dr.

Archie was enough to bring her out.



     There was much talk of aurae at that time, and Fred

mused that every beautiful, every compellingly beautiful

woman, had an aura, whether other people did or no.  There

was, certainly, about the woman he had brought up from

Mexico, such an emanation.  She existed in more space

than she occupied by measurement.  The enveloping air

about her head and shoulders was subsidized--was more

moving than she herself, for in it lived the awakenings, all

the first sweetness that life kills in people.  One felt in her

such a wealth of JUGENDZEIT, all those flowers of the mind

and the blood that bloom and perish by the myriad in the

few exhaustless years when the imagination first kindles.  It

was in watching her as she emerged like this, in being near

and not too near, that one got, for a moment, so much that

one had lost; among other legendary things the legendary

theme of the absolutely magical power of a beautiful woman.



     After they had left Thea at her hotel, Dr. Archie admit-

ted to Fred, as they walked up Broadway through the rap-

idly chilling air, that once before he had seen their young

friend flash up into a more potent self, but in a darker mood.

It was in his office one night, when she was at home the

summer before last.  "And then I got the idea," he added

simply, "that she would not live like other people: that,

for better or worse, she had uncommon gifts."



     "Oh, we'll see that it's for better, you and I," Fred

reassured him.  "Won't you come up to my hotel with me?

I think we ought to have a long talk."



     "Yes, indeed," said Dr. Archie gratefully; "I think we

ought."







<p 373>





                                 V





     THEA was to sail on Tuesday, at noon, and on Saturday

Fred Ottenburg arranged for her passage, while she

and Dr. Archie went shopping.  With rugs and sea-clothes

she was already provided; Fred had got everything of that

sort she needed for the voyage up from Vera Cruz.  On

Sunday afternoon Thea went to see the Harsanyis.  When

she returned to her hotel, she found a note from Ottenburg,

saying that he had called and would come again to-morrow.



     On Monday morning, while she was at breakfast, Fred

came in.  She knew by his hurried, distracted air as he

entered the dining-room that something had gone wrong.

He had just got a telegram from home.  His mother had

been thrown from her carriage and hurt; a concussion of

some sort, and she was unconscious.  He was leaving for

St. Louis that night on the eleven o'clock train.  He had a

great deal to attend to during the day.  He would come that

evening, if he might, and stay with her until train time,

while she was doing her packing.  Scarcely waiting for her

consent, he hurried away.



     All day Thea was somewhat cast down.  She was sorry

for Fred, and she missed the feeling that she was the one

person in his mind.  He had scarcely looked at her when

they exchanged words at the breakfast-table.  She felt as

if she were set aside, and she did not seem so important

even to herself as she had yesterday.  Certainly, she

reflected, it was high time that she began to take care of

herself again.  Dr. Archie came for dinner, but she sent him

away early, telling him that she would be ready to go to

the boat with him at half-past ten the next morning.  When

she went upstairs, she looked gloomily at the open trunk

in her sitting-room, and at the trays piled on the sofa.  She



<p 374>



stood at the window and watched a quiet snowstorm

spending itself over the city.  More than anything else,

falling snow always made her think of Moonstone; of the

Kohlers' garden, of Thor's sled, of dressing by lamplight

and starting off to school before the paths were broken.



     When Fred came, he looked tired, and he took her hand

almost without seeing her.



     "I'm so sorry, Fred.  Have you had any more word?"



     "She was still unconscious at four this afternoon.  It

doesn't look very encouraging."  He approached the fire

and warmed his hands.  He seemed to have contracted, and

he had not at all his habitual ease of manner.  "Poor

mother!" he exclaimed; "nothing like this should have

happened to her.  She has so much pride of person.  She's

not at all an old woman, you know.  She's never got beyond

vigorous and rather dashing middle age."  He turned

abruptly to Thea and for the first time really looked at her.

"How badly things come out!  She'd have liked you for a

daughter-in-law.  Oh, you'd have fought like the devil,

but you'd have respected each other."  He sank into a

chair and thrust his feet out to the fire.  "Still," he went

on thoughtfully, seeming to address the ceiling, "it might

have been bad for you.  Our big German houses, our good

German cooking--you might have got lost in the uphol-

stery.  That substantial comfort might take the temper out

of you, dull your edge.  Yes," he sighed, "I guess you were

meant for the jolt of the breakers."



     "I guess I'll get plenty of jolt," Thea murmured, turn-

ing to her trunk.



     "I'm rather glad I'm not staying over until to-morrow,"

Fred reflected.  "I think it's easier for me to glide out like

this.  I feel now as if everything were rather casual, any-

how.  A thing like that dulls one's feelings."



     Thea, standing by her trunk, made no reply.  Presently

he shook himself and rose.  "Want me to put those trays

in for you?"



<p 375>





     "No, thank you.  I'm not ready for them yet."



     Fred strolled over to the sofa, lifted a scarf from one of

the trays and stood abstractedly drawing it through his

fingers.  "You've been so kind these last few days, Thea,

that I began to hope you might soften a little; that you

might ask me to come over and see you this summer."



     "If you thought that, you were mistaken," she said

slowly.  "I've hardened, if anything.  But I shan't carry

any grudge away with me, if you mean that."



     He dropped the scarf.  "And there's nothing--nothing

at all you'll let me do?"



     "Yes, there is one thing, and it's a good deal to ask.  If I

get knocked out, or never get on, I'd like you to see that

Dr. Archie gets his money back.  I'm taking three thousand

dollars of his."



     "Why, of course I shall.  You may dismiss that from

your mind.  How fussy you are about money, Thea.  You

make such a point of it."  He turned sharply and walked

to the windows.



     Thea sat down in the chair he had quitted.  "It's only

poor people who feel that way about money, and who are

really honest," she said gravely.  "Sometimes I think that

to be really honest, you must have been so poor that you've

been tempted to steal."



     "To what?"



     "To steal.  I used to be, when I first went to Chicago

and saw all the things in the big stores there.  Never any-

thing big, but little things, the kind I'd never seen before

and could never afford.  I did take something once, before

I knew it."



     Fred came toward her.  For the first time she had his

whole attention, in the degree to which she was accustomed

to having it.  "Did you?  What was it?" he asked with

interest.



     "A sachet.  A little blue silk bag of orris-root powder.

There was a whole counterful of them, marked down to



<p 376>



fifty cents.  I'd never seen any before, and they seemed

irresistible.  I took one up and wandered about the store

with it.  Nobody seemed to notice, so I carried it off."



     Fred laughed.  "Crazy child!  Why, your things always

smell of orris; is it a penance?"



     "No, I love it.  But I saw that the firm didn't lose any-

thing by me.  I went back and bought it there whenever I

had a quarter to spend.  I got a lot to take to Arizona.  I

made it up to them."



     "I'll bet you did!"  Fred took her hand.  "Why didn't

I find you that first winter?  I'd have loved you just as you

came!"



     Thea shook her head.  "No, you wouldn't, but you

might have found me amusing.  The Harsanyis said yester-

day afternoon that I wore such a funny cape and that my

shoes always squeaked.  They think I've improved.  I told

them it was your doing if I had, and then they looked

scared."



     "Did you sing for Harsanyi?"



     "Yes.  He thinks I've improved there, too.  He said nice

things to me.  Oh, he was very nice!  He agrees with you

about my going to Lehmann, if she'll take me.  He came

out to the elevator with me, after we had said good-bye.

He said something nice out there, too, but he seemed sad."



     "What was it that he said?"



     "He said, `When people, serious people, believe in you,

they give you some of their best, so--take care of it, Miss

Kronborg.'  Then he waved his hands and went back."



     "If you sang, I wish you had taken me along.  Did you

sing well?"  Fred turned from her and went back to the

window.  "I wonder when I shall hear you sing again."

He picked up a bunch of violets and smelled them.  "You

know, your leaving me like this--well, it's almost inhu-

man to be able to do it so kindly and unconditionally."



     "I suppose it is.  It was almost inhuman to be able to

leave home, too,--the last time, when I knew it was for



<p 377>



good.  But all the same, I cared a great deal more than

anybody else did.  I lived through it.  I have no choice now.

No matter how much it breaks me up, I have to go.  Do I

seem to enjoy it?"



     Fred bent over her trunk and picked up something which

proved to be a score, clumsily bound.  "What's this?  Did

you ever try to sing this?"  He opened it and on the

engraved title-page read Wunsch's inscription, "EINST, O

WUNDER!"  He looked up sharply at Thea.



     "Wunsch gave me that when he went away.  I've told

you about him, my old teacher in Moonstone.  He loved

that opera."



     Fred went toward the fireplace, the book under his arm,

singing softly:--





          "EINST, O WUNDER, ENTBLUHT AUF MEINEM GRABE,

              EINE BLUME DER ASCHE MEINES HERZENS;"



"You have no idea at all where he is, Thea?"  He leaned

against the mantel and looked down at her.



     "No, I wish I had.  He may be dead by this time.  That

was five years ago, and he used himself hard.  Mrs. Kohler

was always afraid he would die off alone somewhere and be

stuck under the prairie.  When we last heard of him, he was

in Kansas."



     "If he were to be found, I'd like to do something for him.

I seem to get a good deal of him from this."  He opened the

book again, where he kept the place with his finger, and

scrutinized the purple ink.  "How like a German!  Had he

ever sung the song for you?"



     "No.  I didn't know where the words were from until

once, when Harsanyi sang it for me, I recognized them."



     Fred closed the book.  "Let me see, what was your noble

brakeman's name?"



     Thea looked up with surprise.  "Ray, Ray Kennedy."



     "Ray Kennedy!" he laughed.  "It couldn't well have

been better!  Wunsch and Dr. Archie, and Ray, and I,"--



<p 378>



he told them off on his fingers,--"your whistling-posts!

You haven't done so badly.  We've backed you as we

could, some in our weakness and some in our might.  In

your dark hours--and you'll have them--you may like

to remember us."  He smiled whimsically and dropped the

score into the trunk.  "You are taking that with you?"



     "Surely I am.  I haven't so many keepsakes that I can

afford to leave that.  I haven't got many that I value so

highly."



     "That you value so highly?"  Fred echoed her gravity

playfully.  "You are delicious when you fall into your

vernacular."  He laughed half to himself.



     "What's the matter with that?  Isn't it perfectly good

English?"



     "Perfectly good Moonstone, my dear.  Like the ready-

made clothes that hang in the windows, made to fit every-

body and fit nobody, a phrase that can be used on all occa-

sions.  Oh,"--he started across the room again,--"that's

one of the fine things about your going!  You'll be with

the right sort of people and you'll learn a good, live, warm

German, that will be like yourself.  You'll get a new speech

full of shades and color like your voice; alive, like your mind.

It will be almost like being born again, Thea."



     She was not offended.  Fred had said such things to her

before, and she wanted to learn.  In the natural course of

things she would never have loved a man from whom she

could not learn a great deal.



     "Harsanyi said once," she remarked thoughtfully, "that

if one became an artist one had to be born again, and that

one owed nothing to anybody."



     "Exactly.  And when I see you again I shall not see you,

but your daughter.  May I?"  He held up his cigarette case

questioningly and then began to smoke, taking up again

the song which ran in his head:--





          "DEUTLICH SCHIMMERT AUF JEDEM, PURPURBLATTCHEN,

ADELAIDE!"





<p 379>



"I have half an hour with you yet, and then, exit Fred."

He walked about the room, smoking and singing the words

under his breath.  "You'll like the voyage," he said ab-

ruptly.  "That first approach to a foreign shore, stealing

up on it and finding it--there's nothing like it.  It wakes

up everything that's asleep in you.  You won't mind my

writing to some people in Berlin?  They'll be nice to you."



     "I wish you would."  Thea gave a deep sigh.  "I wish

one could look ahead and see what is coming to one."



     "Oh, no!"  Fred was smoking nervously; "that would

never do.  It's the uncertainty that makes one try.  You've

never had any sort of chance, and now I fancy you'll make

it up to yourself.  You'll find the way to let yourself out in

one long flight."



     Thea put her hand on her heart.  "And then drop like

the rocks we used to throw--anywhere."  She left the

chair and went over to the sofa, hunting for something in

the trunk trays.  When she came back she found Fred sit-

ting in her place.  "Here are some handkerchiefs of yours.

I've kept one or two.  They're larger than mine and useful

if one has a headache."



     "Thank you.  How nicely they smell of your things!"

He looked at the white squares for a moment and then put

them in his pocket.  He kept the low chair, and as she stood

beside him he took her hands and sat looking intently at

them, as if he were examining them for some special pur-

pose, tracing the long round fingers with the tips of his

own.  "Ordinarily, you know, there are reefs that a man

catches to and keeps his nose above water.  But this is a

case by itself.  There seems to be no limit as to how much

I can be in love with you.  I keep going."  He did not lift

his eyes from her fingers, which he continued to study with

the same fervor.  "Every kind of stringed instrument there

is plays in your hands, Thea," he whispered, pressing them

to his face.



     She dropped beside him and slipped into his arms, shut-



<p 380>



ting her eyes and lifting her cheek to his.  "Tell me one

thing," Fred whispered.  "You said that night on the boat,

when I first told you, that if you could you would crush it

all up in your hands and throw it into the sea.  Would you,

all those weeks?"



     She shook her head.



     "Answer me, would you?"



     "No, I was angry then.  I'm not now.  I'd never give

them up.  Don't make me pay too much."  In that embrace

they lived over again all the others.  When Thea drew away

from him, she dropped her face in her hands.  "You are

good to me," she breathed, "you are!"



     Rising to his feet, he put his hands under her elbows and

lifted her gently.  He drew her toward the door with him.

"Get all you can.  Be generous with yourself.  Don't stop

short of splendid things.  I want them for you more than I

want anything else, more than I want one splendid thing

for myself.  I can't help feeling that you'll gain, somehow,

by my losing so much.  That you'll gain the very thing I

lose.  Take care of her, as Harsanyi said.  She's wonder-

ful!"  He kissed her and went out of the door without look-

ing back, just as if he were coming again to-morrow.



     Thea went quickly into her bedroom.  She brought out

an armful of muslin things, knelt down, and began to lay

them in the trays.  Suddenly she stopped, dropped for-

ward and leaned against the open trunk, her head on her

arms.  The tears fell down on the dark old carpet.  It

came over her how many people must have said good-bye

and been unhappy in that room.  Other people, before her

time, had hired this room to cry in.  Strange rooms and

strange streets and faces, how sick at heart they made one!

Why was she going so far, when what she wanted was

some familiar place to hide in?--the rock house, her

little room in Moonstone, her own bed.  Oh, how good it

would be to lie down in that little bed, to cut the nerve

that kept one struggling, that pulled one on and on, to sink



<p 381>



into peace there, with all the family safe and happy down-

stairs.  After all, she was a Moonstone girl, one of the

preacher's children.  Everything else was in Fred's imagi-

nation.  Why was she called upon to take such chances?

Any safe, humdrum work that did not compromise her

would be better.  But if she failed now, she would lose her

soul.  There was nowhere to fall, after one took that step,

except into abysses of wretchedness.  She knew what

abysses, for she could still hear the old man playing in the

snowstorm, "<Ach, ich habe sie verloren!>"  That melody

was released in her like a passion of longing.  Every nerve

in her body thrilled to it.  It brought her to her feet, car-

ried her somehow to bed and into troubled sleep.



     That night she taught in Moonstone again: she beat her

pupils in hideous rages, she kept on beating them.  She

sang at funerals, and struggled at the piano with Harsanyi.

In one dream she was looking into a hand-glass and think-

ing that she was getting better-looking, when the glass

began to grow smaller and smaller and her own reflection

to shrink, until she realized that she was looking into Ray

Kennedy's eyes, seeing her face in that look of his which

she could never forget.  All at once the eyes were Fred

Ottenburg's, and not Ray's.  All night she heard the shriek-

ing of trains, whistling in and out of Moonstone, as she

used to hear them in her sleep when they blew shrill in the

winter air.  But to-night they were terrifying,--the spec-

tral, fated trains that "raced with death," about which the

old woman from the depot used to pray.



     In the morning she wakened breathless after a struggle

with Mrs. Livery Johnson's daughter.  She started up with

a bound, threw the blankets back and sat on the edge of

the bed, her night-dress open, her long braids hanging over

her bosom, blinking at the daylight.  After all, it was not

too late.  She was only twenty years old, and the boat sailed

at noon.  There was still time!



End of Part V
