

                              PART IV

                        THE ANCIENT PEOPLE


                                 I



     THE San Francisco Mountain lies in Northern Arizona,

above Flagstaff, and its blue slopes and snowy summit

entice the eye for a hundred miles across the desert.  About

its base lie the pine forests of the Navajos, where the great

red-trunked trees live out their peaceful centuries in that

sparkling air.  The PINONS and scrub begin only where the

forest ends, where the country breaks into open, stony

clearings and the surface of the earth cracks into deep can-

yons.  The great pines stand at a considerable distance from

each other.  Each tree grows alone, murmurs alone, thinks

alone.  They do not intrude upon each other.  The Navajos

are not much in the habit of giving or of asking help.  Their

language is not a communicative one, and they never

attempt an interchange of personality in speech.  Over

their forests there is the same inexorable reserve.  Each

tree has its exalted power to bear.



     That was the first thing Thea Kronborg felt about the

forest, as she drove through it one May morning in Henry

Biltmer's democrat wagon--and it was the first great

forest she had ever seen.  She had got off the train at Flag-

staff that morning, rolled off into the high, chill air when

all the pines on the mountain were fired by sunrise, so that

she seemed to fall from sleep directly into the forest.



     Old Biltmer followed a faint wagon trail which ran south-

east, and which, as they traveled, continually dipped lower,

falling away from the high plateau on the slope of which

Flagstaff sits.  The white peak of the mountain, the snow



<p 296>



gorges above the timber, now disappeared from time to

time as the road dropped and dropped, and the forest closed

behind the wagon.  More than the mountain disappeared

as the forest closed thus.  Thea seemed to be taking very

little through the wood with her.  The personality of which

she was so tired seemed to let go of her.  The high, spark-

ling air drank it up like blotting-paper.  It was lost in the

thrilling blue of the new sky and the song of the thin wind

in the PINONS.  The old, fretted lines which marked one off,

which defined her,--made her Thea Kronborg, Bowers's

accompanist, a soprano with a faulty middle voice,--were

all erased.



     So far she had failed.  Her two years in Chicago had not

resulted in anything.  She had failed with Harsanyi, and

she had made no great progress with her voice.  She had

come to believe that whatever Bowers had taught her was

of secondary importance, and that in the essential things

she had made no advance.  Her student life closed behind

her, like the forest, and she doubted whether she could

go back to it if she tried.  Probably she would teach music

in little country towns all her life.  Failure was not so tragic

as she would have supposed; she was tired enough not to

care.



     She was getting back to the earliest sources of gladness

that she could remember.  She had loved the sun, and the

brilliant solitudes of sand and sun, long before these other

things had come along to fasten themselves upon her and

torment her.  That night, when she clambered into her big

German feather bed, she felt completely released from the

enslaving desire to get on in the world.  Darkness had once

again the sweet wonder that it had in childhood.







<p 297>





                                II





     THEA'S life at the Ottenburg ranch was simple and full

of light, like the days themselves.  She awoke every

morning when the first fierce shafts of sunlight darted

through the curtainless windows of her room at the ranch

house.  After breakfast she took her lunch-basket and went

down to the canyon.  Usually she did not return until

sunset.



     Panther Canyon was like a thousand others--one of

those abrupt fissures with which the earth in the Southwest

is riddled; so abrupt that you might walk over the edge of

any one of them on a dark night and never know what had

happened to you.  This canyon headed on the Ottenburg

ranch, about a mile from the ranch house, and it was acces-

sible only at its head.  The canyon walls, for the first two

hundred feet below the surface, were perpendicular cliffs,

striped with even-running strata of rock.  From there on

to the bottom the sides were less abrupt, were shelving,

and lightly fringed with PINONS and dwarf cedars.  The

effect was that of a gentler canyon within a wilder one.

The dead city lay at the point where the perpendicular

outer wall ceased and the V-shaped inner gorge began.

There a stratum of rock, softer than those above, had

been hollowed out by the action of time until it was like

a deep groove running along the sides of the canyon.  In

this hollow (like a great fold in the rock) the Ancient

People had built their houses of yellowish stone and mor-

tar.  The over-hanging cliff above made a roof two hun-

dred feet thick.  The hard stratum below was an ever-

lasting floor.  The houses stood along in a row, like the

buildings in a city block, or like a barracks.



     In both walls of the canyon the same streak of soft rock



<p 298>



had been washed out, and the long horizontal groove had

been built up with houses.  The dead city had thus two

streets, one set in either cliff, facing each other across the

ravine, with a river of blue air between them.



     The canyon twisted and wound like a snake, and these

two streets went on for four miles or more, interrupted by

the abrupt turnings of the gorge, but beginning again

within each turn.  The canyon had a dozen of these false

endings near its head.  Beyond, the windings were larger

and less perceptible, and it went on for a hundred miles,

too narrow, precipitous, and terrible for man to follow it.

The Cliff Dwellers liked wide canyons, where the great

cliffs caught the sun.  Panther Canyon had been deserted

for hundreds of years when the first Spanish missionaries

came into Arizona, but the masonry of the houses was

still wonderfully firm; had crumbled only where a landslide

or a rolling boulder had torn it.



     All the houses in the canyon were clean with the clean-

ness of sun-baked, wind-swept places, and they all smelled

of the tough little cedars that twisted themselves into the

very doorways.  One of these rock-rooms Thea took for her

own.  Fred had told her how to make it comfortable.  The

day after she came old Henry brought over on one of the

pack-ponies a roll of Navajo blankets that belonged to

Fred, and Thea lined her cave with them.  The room was

not more than eight by ten feet, and she could touch the

stone roof with her finger-tips.  This was her old idea: a

nest in a high cliff, full of sun.  All morning long the sun

beat upon her cliff, while the ruins on the opposite side of

the canyon were in shadow.  In the afternoon, when she

had the shade of two hundred feet of rock wall, the ruins

on the other side of the gulf stood out in the blazing sun-

light.  Before her door ran the narrow, winding path that

had been the street of the Ancient People.  The yucca and

niggerhead cactus grew everywhere.  From her doorstep

she looked out on the ocher-colored slope that ran down



<p 299>



several hundred feet to the stream, and this hot rock was

sparsely grown with dwarf trees.  Their colors were so pale

that the shadows of the little trees on the rock stood out

sharper than the trees themselves.  When Thea first came,

the chokecherry bushes were in blossom, and the scent of

them was almost sickeningly sweet after a shower.  At the

very bottom of the canyon, along the stream, there was a

thread of bright, flickering, golden-green,--cottonwood

seedlings.  They made a living, chattering screen behind

which she took her bath every morning.



     Thea went down to the stream by the Indian water

trail.  She had found a bathing-pool with a sand bottom,

where the creek was damned by fallen trees.  The climb

back was long and steep, and when she reached her little

house in the cliff she always felt fresh delight in its com-

fort and inaccessibility.  By the time she got there, the

woolly red-and-gray blankets were saturated with sun-

light, and she sometimes fell asleep as soon as she stretched

her body on their warm surfaces.  She used to wonder at

her own inactivity.  She could lie there hour after hour in

the sun and listen to the strident whir of the big locusts,

and to the light, ironical laughter of the quaking asps.  All

her life she had been hurrying and sputtering, as if she

had been born behind time and had been trying to catch

up.  Now, she reflected, as she drew herself out long upon

the rugs, it was as if she were waiting for something to

catch up with her.  She had got to a place where she was

out of the stream of meaningless activity and undirected

effort.



     Here she could lie for half a day undistracted, holding

pleasant and incomplete conceptions in her mind--almost

in her hands.  They were scarcely clear enough to be called

ideas.  They had something to do with fragrance and color

and sound, but almost nothing to do with words.  She was

singing very little now, but a song would go through her

head all morning, as a spring keeps welling up, and it was



<p 300>



like a pleasant sensation indefinitely prolonged.  It was

much more like a sensation than like an idea, or an act of

remembering.  Music had never come to her in that sensu-

ous form before.  It had always been a thing to be struggled

with, had always brought anxiety and exaltation and cha-

grin--never content and indolence.  Thea began to won-

der whether people could not utterly lose the power to

work, as they can lose their voice or their memory.  She

had always been a little drudge, hurrying from one task to

another--as if it mattered!  And now her power to think

seemed converted into a power of sustained sensation.  She

could become a mere receptacle for heat, or become a color,

like the bright lizards that darted about on the hot stones

outside her door; or she could become a continuous repeti-

tion of sound, like the cicadas.







<p 301>





                                III





     THE faculty of observation was never highly developed

in Thea Kronborg.  A great deal escaped her eye as

she passed through the world.  But the things which were

for her, she saw; she experienced them physically and re-

membered them as if they had once been a part of herself.

The roses she used to see in the florists' shops in Chicago

were merely roses.  But when she thought of the moon-

flowers that grew over Mrs. Tellamantez's door, it was as

if she had been that vine and had opened up in white flow-

ers every night.  There were memories of light on the sand

hills, of masses of prickly-pear blossoms she had found in

the desert in early childhood, of the late afternoon sun pour-

ing through the grape leaves and the mint bed in Mrs.

Kohler's garden, which she would never lose.  These recol-

lections were a part of her mind and personality.  In Chicago

she had got almost nothing that went into her subconscious

self and took root there.  But here, in Panther Canyon,

there were again things which seemed destined for her.



     Panther Canyon was the home of innumerable swallows.

They built nests in the wall far above the hollow groove in

which Thea's own rock chamber lay.  They seldom ven-

tured above the rim of the canyon, to the flat, wind-swept

tableland.  Their world was the blue air-river between the

canyon walls.  In that blue gulf the arrow-shaped birds

swam all day long, with only an occasional movement of

the wings.  The only sad thing about them was their tim-

idity; the way in which they lived their lives between the

echoing cliffs and never dared to rise out of the shadow of

the canyon walls.  As they swam past her door, Thea often

felt how easy it would be to dream one's life out in some

cleft in the world.



<p 302>





     From the ancient dwelling there came always a dignified,

unobtrusive sadness; now stronger, now fainter,--like

the aromatic smell which the dwarf cedars gave out in the

sun,--but always present, a part of the air one breathed.

At night, when Thea dreamed about the canyon,--or in

the early morning when she hurried toward it, anticipating

it,--her conception of it was of yellow rocks baking in

sunlight, the swallows, the cedar smell, and that peculiar

sadness--a voice out of the past, not very loud, that went

on saying a few simple things to the solitude eternally.



     Standing up in her lodge, Thea could with her thumb

nail dislodge flakes of carbon from the rock roof--the

cooking-smoke of the Ancient People.  They were that

near!  A timid, nest-building folk, like the swallows.  How

often Thea remembered Ray Kennedy's moralizing about

the cliff cities.  He used to say that he never felt the hard-

ness of the human struggle or the sadness of history as he

felt it among those ruins.  He used to say, too, that it made

one feel an obligation to do one's best.  On the first day

that Thea climbed the water trail she began to have intui-

tions about the women who had worn the path, and who

had spent so great a part of their lives going up and down

it.  She found herself trying to walk as they must have

walked, with a feeling in her feet and knees and loins which

she had never known before,--which must have come up

to her out of the accustomed dust of that rocky trail.  She

could feel the weight of an Indian baby hanging to her

back as she climbed.



     The empty houses, among which she wandered in the

afternoon, the blanketed one in which she lay all morning,

were haunted by certain fears and desires; feelings about

warmth and cold and water and physical strength.  It

seemed to Thea that a certain understanding of those

old people came up to her out of the rock shelf on

which she lay; that certain feelings were transmitted to her,

suggestions that were simple, insistent, and monotonous,



<p 303>



like the beating of Indian drums.  They were not expressi-

ble in words, but seemed rather to translate themselves

into attitudes of body, into degrees of muscular tension or

relaxation; the naked strength of youth, sharp as the sun-

shafts; the crouching timorousness of age, the sullenness of

women who waited for their captors.  At the first turning

of the canyon there was a half-ruined tower of yellow

masonry, a watch-tower upon which the young men used

to entice eagles and snare them with nets.  Sometimes

for a whole morning Thea could see the coppery breast

and shoulders of an Indian youth there against the sky;

see him throw the net, and watch the struggle with the

eagle.



     Old Henry Biltmer, at the ranch, had been a great deal

among the Pueblo Indians who are the descendants of the

Cliff-Dwellers.  After supper he used to sit and smoke his

pipe by the kitchen stove and talk to Thea about them.

He had never found any one before who was interested in

his ruins.  Every Sunday the old man prowled about in the

canyon, and he had come to know a good deal more about

it than he could account for.  He had gathered up a whole

chestful of Cliff-Dweller relics which he meant to take

back to Germany with him some day.  He taught Thea

how to find things among the ruins: grinding-stones, and

drills and needles made of turkey-bones.  There were frag-

ments of pottery everywhere.  Old Henry explained to her

that the Ancient People had developed masonry and pot-

tery far beyond any other crafts.  After they had made

houses for themselves, the next thing was to house the

precious water.  He explained to her how all their customs

and ceremonies and their religion went back to water.  The

men provided the food, but water was the care of the wo-

men.  The stupid women carried water for most of their

lives; the cleverer ones made the vessels to hold it.  Their

pottery was their most direct appeal to water, the envelope

and sheath of the precious element itself.  The strongest



<p 304>



Indian need was expressed in those graceful jars, fashioned

slowly by hand, without the aid of a wheel.



     When Thea took her bath at the bottom of the canyon,

in the sunny pool behind the screen of cottonwoods, she

sometimes felt as if the water must have sovereign quali-

ties, from having been the object of so much service and

desire.  That stream was the only living thing left of the

drama that had been played out in the canyon centuries

ago.  In the rapid, restless heart of it, flowing swifter than

the rest, there was a continuity of life that reached back

into the old time.  The glittering thread of current had a

kind of lightly worn, loosely knit personality, graceful and

laughing.  Thea's bath came to have a ceremonial gravity.

The atmosphere of the canyon was ritualistic.



     One morning, as she was standing upright in the pool,

splashing water between her shoulder-blades with a big

sponge, something flashed through her mind that made her

draw herself up and stand still until the water had quite

dried upon her flushed skin.  The stream and the broken

pottery: what was any art but an effort to make a

sheath, a mould in which to imprison for a moment the

shining, elusive element which is life itself,--life hurrying

past us and running away, too strong to stop, too sweet to

lose?  The Indian women had held it in their jars.  In the

sculpture she had seen in the Art Institute, it had been

caught in a flash of arrested motion.  In singing, one made

a vessel of one's throat and nostrils and held it on one's

breath, caught the stream in a scale of natural intervals.







<p 305>





                                IV





     THEA had a superstitious feeling about the potsherds,

and liked better to leave them in the dwellings

where she found them.  If she took a few bits back to her

own lodge and hid them under the blankets, she did it

guiltily, as if she were being watched.  She was a guest in

these houses, and ought to behave as such.  Nearly every

afternoon she went to the chambers which contained the

most interesting fragments of pottery, sat and looked at

them for a while.  Some of them were beautifully deco-

rated.  This care, expended upon vessels that could not

hold food or water any better for the additional labor

put upon them, made her heart go out to those ancient

potters.  They had not only expressed their desire, but

they had expressed it as beautifully as they could.  Food,

fire, water, and something else--even here, in this crack

in the world, so far back in the night of the past!  Down

here at the beginning that painful thing was already

stirring; the seed of sorrow, and of so much delight.



     There were jars done in a delicate overlay, like pine

cones; and there were many patterns in a low relief, like

basket-work.  Some of the pottery was decorated in

color, red and brown, black and white, in graceful geo-

metrical patterns.  One day, on a fragment of a shallow

bowl, she found a crested serpent's head, painted in red

on terra-cotta.  Again she found half a bowl with a broad

band of white cliff-houses painted on a black ground.

They were scarcely conventionalized at all; there they

were in the black border, just as they stood in the rock

before her.  It brought her centuries nearer to these peo-

ple to find that they saw their houses exactly as she saw

them.



<p 306>





     Yes, Ray Kennedy was right.  All these things made one

feel that one ought to do one's best, and help to fulfill some

desire of the dust that slept there.  A dream had been

dreamed there long ago, in the night of ages, and the wind

had whispered some promise to the sadness of the savage.

In their own way, those people had felt the beginnings of

what was to come.  These potsherds were like fetters that

bound one to a long chain of human endeavor.



     Not only did the world seem older and richer to Thea

now, but she herself seemed older.  She had never been

alone for so long before, or thought so much.  Nothing had

ever engrossed her so deeply as the daily contemplation of

that line of pale-yellow houses tucked into the wrinkle of the

cliff.  Moonstone and Chicago had become vague.  Here

everything was simple and definite, as things had been in

childhood.  Her mind was like a ragbag into which she had

been frantically thrusting whatever she could grab.  And

here she must throw this lumber away.  The things that

were really hers separated themselves from the rest.  Her

ideas were simplified, became sharper and clearer.  She felt

united and strong.





     When Thea had been at the Ottenburg ranch for two

months, she got a letter from Fred announcing that he

"might be along at almost any time now."  The letter

came at night, and the next morning she took it down

into the canyon with her.  She was delighted that he was

coming soon.  She had never felt so grateful to any one,

and she wanted to tell him everything that had happened

to her since she had been there--more than had happened

in all her life before.  Certainly she liked Fred better

than any one else in the world.  There was Harsanyi, of

course--but Harsanyi was always tired.  Just now, and

here, she wanted some one who had never been tired, who

could catch an idea and run with it.



     She was ashamed to think what an apprehensive drudge



<p 307>



she must always have seemed to Fred, and she wondered

why he had concerned himself about her at all.  Perhaps

she would never be so happy or so good-looking again,

and she would like Fred to see her, for once, at her best.

She had not been singing much, but she knew that her

voice was more interesting than it had ever been before.

She had begun to understand that--with her, at least--

voice was, first of all, vitality; a lightness in the body and

a driving power in the blood.  If she had that, she could

sing.  When she felt so keenly alive, lying on that insensi-

ble shelf of stone, when her body bounded like a rubber ball

away from its hardness, then she could sing.  This, too, she

could explain to Fred.  He would know what she meant.



     Another week passed.  Thea did the same things as

before, felt the same influences, went over the same ideas;

but there was a livelier movement in her thoughts, and a

freshening of sensation, like the brightness which came over

the underbrush after a shower.  A persistent affirmation--

or denial--was going on in her, like the tapping of the

woodpecker in the one tall pine tree across the chasm.

Musical phrases drove each other rapidly through her

mind, and the song of the cicada was now too long and too

sharp.  Everything seemed suddenly to take the form of a

desire for action.



     It was while she was in this abstracted state, waiting

for the clock to strike, that Thea at last made up her mind

what she was going to try to do in the world, and that she

was going to Germany to study without further loss of time.

Only by the merest chance had she ever got to Panther

Canyon.  There was certainly no kindly Providence that

directed one's life; and one's parents did not in the least

care what became of one, so long as one did not misbehave

and endanger their comfort.  One's life was at the mercy of

blind chance.  She had better take it in her own hands and

lose everything than meekly draw the plough under the

rod of parental guidance.  She had seen it when she was at



<p 308>



home last summer,--the hostility of comfortable, self-

satisfied people toward any serious effort.  Even to her

father it seemed indecorous.  Whenever she spoke seriously,

he looked apologetic.  Yet she had clung fast to whatever

was left of Moonstone in her mind.  No more of that!  The

Cliff-Dwellers had lengthened her past.  She had older and

higher obligations.







<p 309>





                                 V





     ONE Sunday afternoon late in July old Henry Biltmer

was rheumatically descending into the head of the

canyon.  The Sunday before had been one of those cloudy

days--fortunately rare--when the life goes out of that

country and it becomes a gray ghost, an empty, shivering

uncertainty.  Henry had spent the day in the barn; his

canyon was a reality only when it was flooded with the light

of its great lamp, when the yellow rocks cast purple shad-

ows, and the resin was fairly cooking in the corkscrew

cedars.  The yuccas were in blossom now.  Out of each

clump of sharp bayonet leaves rose a tall stalk hung with

greenish-white bells with thick, fleshy petals.  The nigger-

head cactus was thrusting its crimson blooms up out of

every crevice in the rocks.



     Henry had come out on the pretext of hunting a spade

and pick-axe that young Ottenburg had borrowed, but he

was keeping his eyes open.  He was really very curious

about the new occupants of the canyon, and what they

found to do there all day long.  He let his eye travel along

the gulf for a mile or so to the first turning, where the fis-

sure zigzagged out and then receded behind a stone prom-

ontory on which stood the yellowish, crumbling ruin of

the old watch-tower.



     From the base of this tower, which now threw its

shadow forward, bits of rock kept flying out into the open

gulf--skating upon the air until they lost their momen-

tum, then falling like chips until they rang upon the ledges

at the bottom of the gorge or splashed into the stream.

Biltmer shaded his eyes with his hand.  There on the prom-

ontory, against the cream-colored cliff, were two figures

nimbly moving in the light, both slender and agile, entirely



<p 310>



absorbed in their game.  They looked like two boys.  Both

were hatless and both wore white shirts.



     Henry forgot his pick-axe and followed the trail before

the cliff-houses toward the tower.  Behind the tower, as

he well knew, were heaps of stones, large and small, piled

against the face of the cliff.  He had always believed that

the Indian watchmen piled them there for ammunition.

Thea and Fred had come upon these missiles and were

throwing them for distance.  As Biltmer approached he

could hear them laughing, and he caught Thea's voice,

high and excited, with a ring of vexation in it.  Fred was

teaching her to throw a heavy stone like a discus.  When

it was Fred's turn, he sent a triangular-shaped stone out

into the air with considerable skill.  Thea watched it en-

viously, standing in a half-defiant posture, her sleeves

rolled above her elbows and her face flushed with heat

and excitement.  After Fred's third missile had rung upon

the rocks below, she snatched up a stone and stepped im-

patiently out on the ledge in front of him.  He caught her

by the elbows and pulled her back.



     "Not so close, you silly!  You'll spin yourself off in a

minute."



     "You went that close.  There's your heel-mark," she

retorted.



     "Well, I know how.  That makes a difference."  He drew

a mark in the dust with his toe.  "There, that's right.

Don't step over that.  Pivot yourself on your spine, and

make a half turn.  When you've swung your length, let it

go."



     Thea settled the flat piece of rock between her wrist and

fingers, faced the cliff wall, stretched her arm in position,

whirled round on her left foot to the full stretch of her

body, and let the missile spin out over the gulf.  She hung

expectantly in the air, forgetting to draw back her arm,

her eyes following the stone as if it carried her fortunes

with it.  Her comrade watched her; there weren't many



<p 311>



girls who could show a line like that from the toe to the

thigh, from the shoulder to the tip of the outstretched

hand.  The stone spent itself and began to fall.  Thea drew

back and struck her knee furiously with her palm.



     "There it goes again!  Not nearly so far as yours.  What

IS the matter with me?  Give me another."  She faced the

cliff and whirled again.  The stone spun out, not quite so

far as before.



     Ottenburg laughed.  "Why do you keep on working

AFTER you've thrown it?  You can't help it along then."



     Without replying, Thea stooped and selected another

stone, took a deep breath and made another turn.  Fred

watched the disk, exclaiming, "Good girl!  You got past

the pine that time.  That's a good throw."



     She took out her handkerchief and wiped her glowing

face and throat, pausing to feel her right shoulder with her

left hand.



     "Ah--ha, you've made yourself sore, haven't you?

What did I tell you?  You go at things too hard.  I'll tell

you what I'm going to do, Thea," Fred dusted his hands

and began tucking in the blouse of his shirt, "I'm going to

make some single-sticks and teach you to fence.  You'd be

all right there.  You're light and quick and you've got lots

of drive in you.  I'd like to have you come at me with foils;

you'd look so fierce," he chuckled.



     She turned away from him and stubbornly sent out

another stone, hanging in the air after its flight.  Her fury

amused Fred, who took all games lightly and played them

well.  She was breathing hard, and little beads of moisture

had gathered on her upper lip.  He slipped his arm about

her.  "If you will look as pretty as that--" he bent his

head and kissed her.  Thea was startled, gave him an

angry push, drove at him with her free hand in a manner

quite hostile.  Fred was on his mettle in an instant.  He

pinned both her arms down and kissed her resolutely.



     When he released her, she turned away and spoke over



<p 312>



her shoulder.  "That was mean of you, but I suppose I

deserved what I got."



     "I should say you did deserve it," Fred panted, "turning

savage on me like that!  I should say you did deserve it!"



     He saw her shoulders harden.  "Well, I just said I de-

served it, didn't I?  What more do you want?"



     "I want you to tell me why you flew at me like that!

You weren't playing; you looked as if you'd like to murder

me."



     She brushed back her hair impatiently.  "I didn't mean

anything, really.  You interrupted me when I was watching

the stone.  I can't jump from one thing to another.  I pushed

you without thinking."



     Fred thought her back expressed contrition.  He went

up to her, stood behind her with his chin above her shoul-

der, and said something in her ear.  Thea laughed and

turned toward him.  They left the stone-pile carelessly, as

if they had never been interested in it, rounded the yellow

tower, and disappeared into the second turn of the canyon,

where the dead city, interrupted by the jutting promon-

tory, began again.



     Old Biltmer had been somewhat embarrassed by the

turn the game had taken.  He had not heard their conver-

sation, but the pantomime against the rocks was clear

enough.  When the two young people disappeared, their

host retreated rapidly toward the head of the canyon.



     "I guess that young lady can take care of herself," he

chuckled.  "Young Fred, though, he has quite a way with

them."







<p 313>





                                VI





     DAY was breaking over Panther Canyon.  The gulf was

cold and full of heavy, purplish twilight.  The wood

smoke which drifted from one of the cliff-houses hung in a

blue scarf across the chasm, until the draft caught it and

whirled it away.  Thea was crouching in the doorway of

her rock house, while Ottenburg looked after the crackling

fire in the next cave.  He was waiting for it to burn down to

coals before he put the coffee on to boil.



     They had left the ranch house that morning a little after

three o'clock, having packed their camp equipment the

day before, and had crossed the open pasture land with

their lantern while the stars were still bright.  During the

descent into the canyon by lantern-light, they were chilled

through their coats and sweaters.  The lantern crept slowly

along the rock trail, where the heavy air seemed to offer

resistance.  The voice of the stream at the bottom of the

gorge was hollow and threatening, much louder and deeper

than it ever was by day--another voice altogether.  The

sullenness of the place seemed to say that the world could

get on very well without people, red or white; that under

the human world there was a geological world, conducting

its silent, immense operations which were indifferent to

man.  Thea had often seen the desert sunrise,--a light-

hearted affair, where the sun springs out of bed and the

world is golden in an instant.  But this canyon seemed to

waken like an old man, with rheum and stiffness of the

joints, with heaviness, and a dull, malignant mind.  She

crouched against the wall while the stars faded, and thought

what courage the early races must have had to endure so

much for the little they got out of life.



     At last a kind of hopefulness broke in the air.  In a mo-



<p 314>



ment the pine trees up on the edge of the rim were flashing

with coppery fire.  The thin red clouds which hung above

their pointed tops began to boil and move rapidly, weaving

in and out like smoke.  The swallows darted out of their

rock houses as at a signal, and flew upward, toward the

rim.  Little brown birds began to chirp in the bushes along

the watercourse down at the bottom of the ravine, where

everything was still dusky and pale.  At first the golden

light seemed to hang like a wave upon the rim of the can-

yon; the trees and bushes up there, which one scarcely

noticed at noon, stood out magnified by the slanting rays.

Long, thin streaks of light began to reach quiveringly

down into the canyon.  The red sun rose rapidly above the

tops of the blazing pines, and its glow burst into the gulf,

about the very doorstep on which Thea sat.  It bored into

the wet, dark underbrush.  The dripping cherry bushes,

the pale aspens, and the frosty PINONS were glittering and

trembling, swimming in the liquid gold.  All the pale, dusty

little herbs of the bean family, never seen by any one but

a botanist, became for a moment individual and import-

ant, their silky leaves quite beautiful with dew and light.

The arch of sky overhead, heavy as lead a little while be-

fore, lifted, became more and more transparent, and one

could look up into depths of pearly blue.



     The savor of coffee and bacon mingled with the smell of

wet cedars drying, and Fred called to Thea that he was

ready for her.  They sat down in the doorway of his

kitchen, with the warmth of the live coals behind them and

the sunlight on their faces, and began their breakfast,

Mrs. Biltmer's thick coffee cups and the cream bottle

between them, the coffee-pot and frying-pan conveniently

keeping hot among the embers.



     "I thought you were going back on the whole proposi-

tion, Thea, when you were crawling along with that lan-

tern.  I couldn't get a word out of you."



     "I know.  I was cold and hungry, and I didn't believe



<p 315>



there was going to be any morning, anyway.  Didn't you

feel queer, at all?"



     Fred squinted above his smoking cup.  "Well, I am

never strong for getting up before the sun.  The world

looks unfurnished.  When I first lit the fire and had a square

look at you, I thought I'd got the wrong girl.  Pale, grim--

you were a sight!"



     Thea leaned back into the shadow of the rock room and

warmed her hands over the coals.  "It was dismal enough.

How warm these walls are, all the way round; and your

breakfast is so good.  I'm all right now, Fred."



     "Yes, you're all right now."  Fred lit a cigarette and

looked at her critically as her head emerged into the sun

again.  "You get up every morning just a little bit hand-

somer than you were the day before.  I'd love you just as

much if you were not turning into one of the loveliest wo-

men I've ever seen; but you are, and that's a fact to be

reckoned with."  He watched her across the thin line of

smoke he blew from his lips.  "What are you going to do

with all that beauty and all that talent, Miss Kronborg?"



     She turned away to the fire again.  "I don't know what

you're talking about," she muttered with an awkwardness

which did not conceal her pleasure.



     Ottenburg laughed softly.  "Oh, yes, you do!  Nobody

better!  You're a close one, but you give yourself away

sometimes, like everybody else.  Do you know, I've de-

cided that you never do a single thing without an ulterior

motive."  He threw away his cigarette, took out his

tobacco-pouch and began to fill his pipe.  "You ride and

fence and walk and climb, but I know that all the while

you're getting somewhere in your mind.  All these things

are instruments; and I, too, am an instrument."  He looked

up in time to intercept a quick, startled glance from Thea.

"Oh, I don't mind," he chuckled; "not a bit.  Every

woman, every interesting woman, has ulterior motives,

many of 'em less creditable than yours.  It's your constancy



<p 316>



that amuses me.  You must have been doing it ever since

you were two feet high."



     Thea looked slowly up at her companion's good-humored

face.  His eyes, sometimes too restless and sympathetic in

town, had grown steadier and clearer in the open air.  His

short curly beard and yellow hair had reddened in the sun

and wind.  The pleasant vigor of his person was always

delightful to her, something to signal to and laugh with in

a world of negative people.  With Fred she was never be-

calmed.  There was always life in the air, always something

coming and going, a rhythm of feeling and action,--

stronger than the natural accord of youth.  As she looked

at him, leaning against the sunny wall, she felt a desire to

be frank with him.  She was not willfully holding anything

back.  But, on the other hand, she could not force things

that held themselves back.  "Yes, it was like that when I

was little," she said at last.  "I had to be close, as you

call it, or go under.  But I didn't know I had been like that

since you came.  I've had nothing to be close about.  I

haven't thought about anything but having a good time

with you.  I've just drifted."



     Fred blew a trail of smoke out into the breeze and looked

knowing.  "Yes, you drift like a rifle ball, my dear.  It's

your--your direction that I like best of all.  Most fellows

wouldn't, you know.  I'm unusual."



     They both laughed, but Thea frowned questioningly.

"Why wouldn't most fellows?  Other fellows have liked

me."



     "Yes, serious fellows.  You told me yourself they were all

old, or solemn.  But jolly fellows want to be the whole

target.  They would say you were all brain and muscle;

that you have no feeling."



     She glanced at him sidewise.  "Oh, they would, would

they?"



     "Of course they would," Fred continued blandly.  "Jolly

fellows have no imagination.  They want to be the animat-



<p 317>



ing force.  When they are not around, they want a girl to

be--extinct," he waved his hand.  "Old fellows like Mr.

Nathanmeyer understand your kind; but among the young

ones, you are rather lucky to have found me.  Even I

wasn't always so wise.  I've had my time of thinking it

would not bore me to be the Apollo of a homey flat, and

I've paid out a trifle to learn better.  All those things get

very tedious unless they are hooked up with an idea of

some sort.  It's because we DON'T come out here only to

look at each other and drink coffee that it's so pleasant to

--look at each other."  Fred drew on his pipe for a while,

studying Thea's abstraction.  She was staring up at the

far wall of the canyon with a troubled expression that drew

her eyes narrow and her mouth hard.  Her hands lay in her

lap, one over the other, the fingers interlacing.  "Suppose,"

Fred came out at length,--"suppose I were to offer you

what most of the young men I know would offer a girl

they'd been sitting up nights about: a comfortable flat in

Chicago, a summer camp up in the woods, musical even-

ings, and a family to bring up.  Would it look attractive

to you?"



     Thea sat up straight and stared at him in alarm, glared

into his eyes.  "Perfectly hideous!" she exclaimed.



     Fred dropped back against the old stonework and

laughed deep in his chest.  "Well, don't be frightened.  I

won't offer them.  You're not a nest-building bird.  You

know I always liked your song, `Me for the jolt of the

breakers!'  I understand."



     She rose impatiently and walked to the edge of the cliff.

"It's not that so much.  It's waking up every morning

with the feeling that your life is your own, and your

strength is your own, and your talent is your own; that

you're all there, and there's no sag in you."  She stood for

a moment as if she were tortured by uncertainty, then

turned suddenly back to him.  "Don't talk about these

things any more now," she entreated.  "It isn't that I



<p 318>



want to keep anything from you.  The trouble is that I've

got nothing to keep--except (you know as well as I) that

feeling.  I told you about it in Chicago once.  But it always

makes me unhappy to talk about it.  It will spoil the day.

Will you go for a climb with me?"  She held out her hands

with a smile so eager that it made Ottenburg feel how much

she needed to get away from herself.



     He sprang up and caught the hands she put out so cor-

dially, and stood swinging them back and forth.  "I won't

tease you.  A word's enough to me.  But I love it, all the

same.  Understand?"  He pressed her hands and dropped

them.  "Now, where are you going to drag me?"



     "I want you to drag me.  Over there, to the other houses.

They are more interesting than these."  She pointed across

the gorge to the row of white houses in the other cliff.

"The trail is broken away, but I got up there once.  It's

possible.  You have to go to the bottom of the canyon,

cross the creek, and then go up hand-over-hand."



     Ottenburg, lounging against the sunny wall, his hands in

the pockets of his jacket, looked across at the distant dwell-

ings.  "It's an awful climb," he sighed, "when I could be

perfectly happy here with my pipe.  However--"  He

took up his stick and hat and followed Thea down the

water trail.  "Do you climb this path every day?  You

surely earn your bath.  I went down and had a look at your

pool the other afternoon.  Neat place, with all those little

cottonwoods.  Must be very becoming."



     "Think so?" Thea said over her shoulder, as she swung

round a turn.



     "Yes, and so do you, evidently.  I'm becoming expert

at reading your meaning in your back.  I'm behind you so

much on these single-foot trails.  You don't wear stays, do

you?"



     "Not here."



     "I wouldn't, anywhere, if I were you.  They will make

you less elastic.  The side muscles get flabby.  If you go in



<p 319>



for opera, there's a fortune in a flexible body.  Most of the

German singers are clumsy, even when they're well set up."



     Thea switched a PINON branch back at him.  "Oh, I'll

never get fat!  That I can promise you."



     Fred smiled, looking after her.  "Keep that promise, no

matter how many others you break," he drawled.



     The upward climb, after they had crossed the stream,

was at first a breathless scramble through underbrush.

When they reached the big boulders, Ottenburg went first

because he had the longer leg-reach, and gave Thea a hand

when the step was quite beyond her, swinging her up until

she could get a foothold.  At last they reached a little plat-

form among the rocks, with only a hundred feet of jagged,

sloping wall between them and the cliff-houses.



     Ottenburg lay down under a pine tree and declared that

he was going to have a pipe before he went any farther.

"It's a good thing to know when to stop, Thea," he said

meaningly.



     "I'm not going to stop now until I get there," Thea in-

sisted.  "I'll go on alone."



     Fred settled his shoulder against the tree-trunk.  "Go

on if you like, but I'm here to enjoy myself.  If you meet a

rattler on the way, have it out with him."



     She hesitated, fanning herself with her felt hat.  "I never

have met one."



     "There's reasoning for you," Fred murmured languidly.



     Thea turned away resolutely and began to go up the

wall, using an irregular cleft in the rock for a path.  The

cliff, which looked almost perpendicular from the bottom,

was really made up of ledges and boulders, and behind

these she soon disappeared.  For a long while Fred smoked

with half-closed eyes, smiling to himself now and again.

Occasionally he lifted an eyebrow as he heard the rattle of

small stones among the rocks above.  "In a temper," he

concluded; "do her good."  Then he subsided into warm

drowsiness and listened to the locusts in the yuccas, and



<p 320>



the tap-tap of the old woodpecker that was never weary of

assaulting the big pine.



     Fred had finished his pipe and was wondering whether

he wanted another, when he heard a call from the cliff far

above him.  Looking up, he saw Thea standing on the edge

of a projecting crag.  She waved to him and threw her arm

over her head, as if she were snapping her fingers in the air.



     As he saw her there between the sky and the gulf, with

that great wash of air and the morning light about her,

Fred recalled the brilliant figure at Mrs. Nathanmeyer's.

Thea was one of those people who emerge, unexpectedly,

larger than we are accustomed to see them.  Even at this

distance one got the impression of muscular energy and

audacity,--a kind of brilliancy of motion,--of a person-

ality that carried across big spaces and expanded among

big things.  Lying still, with his hands under his head,

Ottenburg rhetorically addressed the figure in the air.

"You are the sort that used to run wild in Germany,

dressed in their hair and a piece of skin.  Soldiers caught

'em in nets.  Old Nathanmeyer," he mused, "would like

a peep at her now.  Knowing old fellow.  Always buying

those Zorn etchings of peasant girls bathing.  No sag in

them either.  Must be the cold climate."  He sat up.

"She'll begin to pitch rocks on me if I don't move."  In

response to another impatient gesture from the crag, he

rose and began swinging slowly up the trail.





     It was the afternoon of that long day.  Thea was lying

on a blanket in the door of her rock house.  She and Otten-

burg had come back from their climb and had lunch, and

he had gone off for a nap in one of the cliff-houses farther

down the path.  He was sleeping peacefully, his coat under

his head and his face turned toward the wall.



     Thea, too, was drowsy, and lay looking through half-

closed eyes up at the blazing blue arch over the rim of the

canyon.  She was thinking of nothing at all.  Her mind, like



<p 321>



her body, was full of warmth, lassitude, physical content.

Suddenly an eagle, tawny and of great size, sailed over the

cleft in which she lay, across the arch of sky.  He dropped

for a moment into the gulf between the walls, then wheeled,

and mounted until his plumage was so steeped in light that

he looked like a golden bird.  He swept on, following the

course of the canyon a little way and then disappearing

beyond the rim.  Thea sprang to her feet as if she had been

thrown up from the rock by volcanic action.  She stood

rigid on the edge of the stone shelf, straining her eyes after

that strong, tawny flight.  O eagle of eagles!  Endeavor,

achievement, desire, glorious striving of human art!  From

a cleft in the heart of the world she saluted it. . . .  It had

come all the way; when men lived in caves, it was there.

A vanished race; but along the trails, in the stream, under

the spreading cactus, there still glittered in the sun the

bits of their frail clay vessels, fragments of their desire.







<p 322>





                                VII





     FROM the day of Fred's arrival, he and Thea were

unceasingly active.  They took long rides into the

Navajo pine forests, bought turquoises and silver brace-

lets from the wandering Indian herdsmen, and rode twenty

miles to Flagstaff upon the slightest pretext.  Thea had

never felt this pleasant excitement about any man before,

and she found herself trying very hard to please young

Ottenburg.  She was never tired, never dull.  There was

a zest about waking up in the morning and dressing, about

walking, riding, even about sleep.



     One morning when Thea came out from her room at

seven o'clock, she found Henry and Fred on the porch,

looking up at the sky.  The day was already hot and there

was no breeze.  The sun was shining, but heavy brown

clouds were hanging in the west, like the smoke of a for-

est fire.  She and Fred had meant to ride to Flagstaff that

morning, but Biltmer advised against it, foretelling a

storm.  After breakfast they lingered about the house,

waiting for the weather to make up its mind.  Fred had

brought his guitar, and as they had the dining-room to

themselves, he made Thea go over some songs with him.

They got interested and kept it up until Mrs. Biltmer

came to set the table for dinner.  Ottenburg knew some of

the Mexican things Spanish Johnny used to sing.  Thea

had never before happened to tell him about Spanish

Johnny, and he seemed more interested in Johnny than

in Dr. Archie or Wunsch.



     After dinner they were too restless to endure the ranch

house any longer, and ran away to the canyon to practice

with single-sticks.  Fred carried a slicker and a sweater, and

he made Thea wear one of the rubber hats that hung in



<p 323>



Biltmer's gun-room.  As they crossed the pasture land the

clumsy slicker kept catching in the lacings of his leggings.



     "Why don't you drop that thing?" Thea asked.  "I

won't mind a shower.  I've been wet before."



     "No use taking chances."



     From the canyon they were unable to watch the sky,

since only a strip of the zenith was visible.  The flat ledge

about the watch-tower was the only level spot large enough

for single-stick exercise, and they were still practicing there

when, at about four o'clock, a tremendous roll of thunder

echoed between the cliffs and the atmosphere suddenly

became thick.



     Fred thrust the sticks in a cleft in the rock.  "We're in

for it, Thea.  Better make for your cave where there are

blankets."  He caught her elbow and hurried her along the

path before the cliff-houses.  They made the half-mile at a

quick trot, and as they ran the rocks and the sky and the

air between the cliffs turned a turbid green, like the color

in a moss agate.  When they reached the blanketed rock

room, they looked at each other and laughed.  Their faces

had taken on a greenish pallor.  Thea's hair, even, was

green.



     "Dark as pitch in here," Fred exclaimed as they hurried

over the old rock doorstep.  "But it's warm.  The rocks

hold the heat.  It's going to be terribly cold outside, all

right."  He was interrupted by a deafening peal of thunder.

"Lord, what an echo!  Lucky you don't mind.  It's worth

watching out there.  We needn't come in yet."



     The green light grew murkier and murkier.  The smaller

vegetation was blotted out.  The yuccas, the cedars, and

PINONS stood dark and rigid, like bronze.  The swallows

flew up with sharp, terrified twitterings.  Even the quak-

ing asps were still.  While Fred and Thea watched from

the doorway, the light changed to purple.  Clouds of dark

vapor, like chlorine gas, began to float down from the head

of the canyon and hung between them and the cliff-houses



<p 324>



in the opposite wall.  Before they knew it, the wall itself

had disappeared.  The air was positively venomous-looking,

and grew colder every minute.  The thunder seemed to

crash against one cliff, then against the other, and to go

shrieking off into the inner canyon.



     The moment the rain broke, it beat the vapors down.

In the gulf before them the water fell in spouts, and

dashed from the high cliffs overhead.  It tore aspens and

chokecherry bushes out of the ground and left the yuccas

hanging by their tough roots.  Only the little cedars stood

black and unmoved in the torrents that fell from so far

above.  The rock chamber was full of fine spray from the

streams of water that shot over the doorway.  Thea crept

to the back wall and rolled herself in a blanket, and Fred

threw the heavier blankets over her.  The wool of the

Navajo sheep was soon kindled by the warmth of her

body, and was impenetrable to dampness.  Her hair,

where it hung below the rubber hat, gathered the mois-

ture like a sponge.  Fred put on the slicker, tied the

sweater about his neck, and settled himself cross-legged

beside her.  The chamber was so dark that, although he

could see the outline of her head and shoulders, he could

not see her face.  He struck a wax match to light his

pipe.  As he sheltered it between his hands, it sizzled and

sputtered, throwing a yellow flicker over Thea and her

blankets.



     "You look like a gypsy," he said as he dropped the

match.  "Any one you'd rather be shut up with than me?

No?  Sure about that?"



     "I think I am.  Aren't you cold?"



     "Not especially."  Fred smoked in silence, listening to

the roar of the water outside.  "We may not get away from

here right away," he remarked.



     "I shan't mind.  Shall you?"



     He laughed grimly and pulled on his pipe.  "Do you

know where you're at, Miss Thea Kronborg?" he said at



<p 325>



last.  "You've got me going pretty hard, I suppose you

know.  I've had a lot of sweethearts, but I've never been

so much--engrossed before.  What are you going to do

about it?"  He heard nothing from the blankets.  "Are you

going to play fair, or is it about my cue to cut away?"



     "I'll play fair.  I don't see why you want to go."



     "What do you want me around for?--to play with?"



     Thea struggled up among the blankets.  "I want you for

everything.  I don't know whether I'm what people call in

love with you or not.  In Moonstone that meant sitting in

a hammock with somebody.  I don't want to sit in a ham-

mock with you, but I want to do almost everything else.

Oh, hundreds of things!"



     "If I run away, will you go with me?"



     "I don't know.  I'll have to think about that.  Maybe I

would."  She freed herself from her wrappings and stood

up.  "It's not raining so hard now.  Hadn't we better

start this minute?  It will be night before we get to

Biltmer's."



     Fred struck another match.  "It's seven.  I don't know

how much of the path may be washed away.  I don't even

know whether I ought to let you try it without a lantern."



     Thea went to the doorway and looked out.  "There's

nothing else to do.  The sweater and the slicker will keep

me dry, and this will be my chance to find out whether

these shoes are really water-tight.  They cost a week's sal-

ary."  She retreated to the back of the cave.  "It's getting

blacker every minute."



     Ottenburg took a brandy flask from his coat pocket.

"Better have some of this before we start.  Can you take

it without water?"



     Thea lifted it obediently to her lips.  She put on the

sweater and Fred helped her to get the clumsy slicker on

over it.  He buttoned it and fastened the high collar.  She

could feel that his hands were hurried and clumsy.  The

coat was too big, and he took off his necktie and belted it



<p 326>



in at the waist.  While she tucked her hair more securely

under the rubber hat he stood in front of her, between her

and the gray doorway, without moving.



     "Are you ready to go?" she asked carelessly.



     "If you are," he spoke quietly, without moving, except

to bend his head forward a little.



     Thea laughed and put her hands on his shoulders.  "You

know how to handle me, don't you?" she whispered.  For

the first time, she kissed him without constraint or embar-

rassment.



     "Thea, Thea, Thea!"  Fred whispered her name three

times, shaking her a little as if to waken her.  It was too

dark to see, but he could feel that she was smiling.



     When she kissed him she had not hidden her face on his

shoulder,--she had risen a little on her toes, and stood

straight and free.  In that moment when he came close to

her actual personality, he felt in her the same expansion

that he had noticed at Mrs. Nathanmeyer's.  She became

freer and stronger under impulses.  When she rose to meet

him like that, he felt her flash into everything that she had

ever suggested to him, as if she filled out her own shadow.



     She pushed him away and shot past him out into the rain.

"Now for it, Fred," she called back exultantly.  The rain

was pouring steadily down through the dying gray twilight,

and muddy streams were spouting and foaming over the

cliff.



     Fred caught her and held her back.  "Keep behind me,

Thea.  I don't know about the path.  It may be gone alto-

gether.  Can't tell what there is under this water."



     But the path was older than the white man's Arizona.

The rush of water had washed away the dust and stones

that lay on the surface, but the rock skeleton of the Indian

trail was there, ready for the foot.  Where the streams

poured down through gullies, there was always a cedar or

a PINON to cling to.  By wading and slipping and climbing,

they got along.  As they neared the head of the canyon,



<p 327>



where the path lifted and rose in steep loops to the surface

of the plateau, the climb was more difficult.  The earth

above had broken away and washed down over the trail,

bringing rocks and bushes and even young trees with it.

The last ghost of daylight was dying and there was no time

to lose.  The canyon behind them was already black.



     "We've got to go right through the top of this pine tree,

Thea.  No time to hunt a way around.  Give me your hand."

After they had crashed through the mass of branches, Fred

stopped abruptly.  "Gosh, what a hole!  Can you jump it?

Wait a minute."



     He cleared the washout, slipped on the wet rock at the

farther side, and caught himself just in time to escape a

tumble.  "If I could only find something to hold to, I could

give you a hand.  It's so cursed dark, and there are no

trees here where they're needed.  Here's something; it's a

root.  It will hold all right."  He braced himself on the rock,

gripped the crooked root with one hand and swung himself

across toward Thea, holding out his arm.  "Good jump!  I

must say you don't lose your nerve in a tight place.  Can

you keep at it a little longer?  We're almost out.  Have to

make that next ledge.  Put your foot on my knee and catch

something to pull by."



     Thea went up over his shoulder.  "It's hard ground up

here," she panted.  "Did I wrench your arm when I slipped

then?  It was a cactus I grabbed, and it startled me."



     "Now, one more pull and we're on the level."



     They emerged gasping upon the black plateau.  In the

last five minutes the darkness had solidified and it seemed

as if the skies were pouring black water.  They could not

see where the sky ended or the plain began.  The light at

the ranch house burned a steady spark through the rain.

Fred drew Thea's arm through his and they struck off

toward the light.  They could not see each other, and the

rain at their backs seemed to drive them along.  They kept

laughing as they stumbled over tufts of grass or stepped



<p 328>



into slippery pools.  They were delighted with each other

and with the adventure which lay behind them.



     "I can't even see the whites of your eyes, Thea.  But I'd

know who was here stepping out with me, anywhere.  Part

coyote you are, by the feel of you.  When you make up your

mind to jump, you jump!  My gracious, what's the matter

with your hand?"



     "Cactus spines.  Didn't I tell you when I grabbed the

cactus?  I thought it was a root.  Are we going straight?"



     "I don't know.  Somewhere near it, I think.  I'm very

comfortable, aren't you?  You're warm, except your

cheeks.  How funny they are when they're wet.  Still, you

always feel like you.  I like this.  I could walk to Flagstaff.

It's fun, not being able to see anything.  I feel surer of you

when I can't see you.  Will you run away with me?"



     Thea laughed.  "I won't run far to-night.  I'll think

about it.  Look, Fred, there's somebody coming."



     "Henry, with his lantern.  Good enough!  Halloo!  Hallo

--o--o!" Fred shouted.



     The moving light bobbed toward them.  In half an hour

Thea was in her big feather bed, drinking hot lentil soup,

and almost before the soup was swallowed she was asleep.







<p 329>





                               VIII





     ON the first day of September Fred Ottenburg and Thea

Kronborg left Flagstaff by the east-bound express.

As the bright morning advanced, they sat alone on the

rear platform of the observation car, watching the yellow

miles unfold and disappear.  With complete content they

saw the brilliant, empty country flash by.  They were

tired of the desert and the dead races, of a world without

change or ideas.  Fred said he was glad to sit back and let

the Santa Fe do the work for a while.



     "And where are we going, anyhow?" he added.



     "To Chicago, I suppose.  Where else would we be

going?"  Thea hunted for a handkerchief in her hand-

bag.



     "I wasn't sure, so I had the trunks checked to Albu-

querque.  We can recheck there to Chicago, if you like.

Why Chicago?  You'll never go back to Bowers.  Why

wouldn't this be a good time to make a run for it?  We

could take the southern branch at Albuquerque, down to

El Paso, and then over into Mexico.  We are exceptionally

free.  Nobody waiting for us anywhere."



     Thea sighted along the steel rails that quivered in the

light behind them.  "I don't see why I couldn't marry you

in Chicago, as well as any place," she brought out with

some embarrassment.



     Fred took the handbag out of her nervous clasp and

swung it about on his finger.  "You've no particular love

for that spot, have you?  Besides, as I've told you, my

family would make a row.  They are an excitable lot.  They

discuss and argue everlastingly.  The only way I can ever

put anything through is to go ahead, and convince them

afterward."



<p 330>





     "Yes; I understand.  I don't mind that.  I don't want to

marry your family.  I'm sure you wouldn't want to marry

mine.  But I don't see why we have to go so far."



     "When we get to Winslow, you look about the freight

yards and you'll probably see several yellow cars with

my name on them.  That's why, my dear.  When your

visiting-card is on every beer bottle, you can't do things

quietly.  Things get into the papers."  As he watched her

troubled expression, he grew anxious.  He leaned forward

on his camp-chair, and kept twirling the handbag between

his knees.  "Here's a suggestion, Thea," he said presently.

"Dismiss it if you don't like it: suppose we go down to

Mexico on the chance.  You've never seen anything like

Mexico City; it will be a lark for you, anyhow.  If you

change your mind, and don't want to marry me, you can

go back to Chicago, and I'll take a steamer from Vera

Cruz and go up to New York.  When I get to Chicago,

you'll be at work, and nobody will ever be the wiser.  No

reason why we shouldn't both travel in Mexico, is there?

You'll be traveling alone.  I'll merely tell you the right

places to stop, and come to take you driving.  I won't put

any pressure on you.  Have I ever?"  He swung the bag

toward her and looked up under her hat.



     "No, you haven't," she murmured.  She was thinking

that her own position might be less difficult if he had used

what he called pressure.  He clearly wished her to take the

responsibility.



     "You have your own future in the back of your mind all

the time," Fred began, "and I have it in mine.  I'm not

going to try to carry you off, as I might another girl.  If you

wanted to quit me, I couldn't hold you, no matter how

many times you had married me.  I don't want to over-

persuade you.  But I'd like mighty well to get you down to

that jolly old city, where everything would please you, and

give myself a chance.  Then, if you thought you could have

a better time with me than without me, I'd try to grab you



<p 331>



before you changed your mind.  You are not a sentimental

person."



     Thea drew her veil down over her face.  "I think I am, a

little; about you," she said quietly.  Fred's irony somehow

hurt her.



     "What's at the bottom of your mind, Thea?" he asked

hurriedly.  "I can't tell.  Why do you consider it at all, if

you're not sure?  Why are you here with me now?"



     Her face was half-averted.  He was thinking that it

looked older and more firm--almost hard--under a veil.



     "Isn't it possible to do things without having any very

clear reason?" she asked slowly.  "I have no plan in the

back of my mind.  Now that I'm with you, I want to be

with you; that's all.  I can't settle down to being alone

again.  I am here to-day because I want to be with you

to-day."  She paused.  "One thing, though; if I gave you

my word, I'd keep it.  And you could hold me, though you

don't seem to think so.  Maybe I'm not sentimental, but

I'm not very light, either.  If I went off with you like

this, it wouldn't be to amuse myself."



     Ottenburg's eyes fell.  His lips worked nervously for a

moment.  "Do you mean that you really care for me, Thea

Kronborg?" he asked unsteadily.



     "I guess so.  It's like anything else.  It takes hold of you

and you've got to go through with it, even if you're afraid.

I was afraid to leave Moonstone, and afraid to leave

Harsanyi.  But I had to go through with it."



     "And are you afraid now?" Fred asked slowly.



     "Yes; more than I've ever been.  But I don't think I

could go back.  The past closes up behind one, somehow.

One would rather have a new kind of misery.  The old

kind seems like death or unconsciousness.  You can't force

your life back into that mould again.  No, one can't go

back."  She rose and stood by the back grating of the

platform, her hand on the brass rail.



     Fred went to her side.  She pushed up her veil and turned



<p 332>



her most glowing face to him.  Her eyes were wet and

there were tears on her lashes, but she was smiling the

rare, whole-hearted smile he had seen once or twice be-

fore.  He looked at her shining eyes, her parted lips, her

chin a little lifted.  It was as if they were colored by a sun-

rise he could not see.  He put his hand over hers and clasped

it with a strength she felt.  Her eyelashes trembled, her

mouth softened, but her eyes were still brilliant.



     "Will you always be like you were down there, if I go

with you?" she asked under her breath.



     His fingers tightened on hers.  "By God, I will!" he

muttered.



     "That's the only promise I'll ask you for.  Now go away

for a while and let me think about it.  Come back at lunch-

time and I'll tell you.  Will that do?"



     "Anything will do, Thea, if you'll only let me keep

an eye on you.  The rest of the world doesn't interest me

much.  You've got me in deep."



     Fred dropped her hand and turned away.  As he glanced

back from the front end of the observation car, he saw that

she was still standing there, and any one would have known

that she was brooding over something.  The earnestness of

her head and shoulders had a certain nobility.  He stood

looking at her for a moment.



     When he reached the forward smoking-car, Fred took a

seat at the end, where he could shut the other passengers

from his sight.  He put on his traveling-cap and sat down

wearily, keeping his head near the window.  "In any case,

I shall help her more than I shall hurt her," he kept saying

to himself.  He admitted that this was not the only motive

which impelled him, but it was one of them.  "I'll make it

my business in life to get her on.  There's nothing else I

care about so much as seeing her have her chance.  She

hasn't touched her real force yet.  She isn't even aware of

it.  Lord, don't I know something about them?  There isn't

one of them that has such a depth to draw from.  She'll be



<p 333>



one of the great artists of our time.  Playing accompani-

ments for that cheese-faced sneak!  I'll get her off to Ger-

many this winter, or take her.  She hasn't got any time to

waste now.  I'll make it up to her, all right."



     Ottenburg certainly meant to make it up to her, in so

far as he could.  His feeling was as generous as strong human

feelings are likely to be.  The only trouble was, that he was

married already, and had been since he was twenty.



     His older friends in Chicago, people who had been friends

of his family, knew of the unfortunate state of his personal

affairs; but they were people whom in the natural course

of things Thea Kronborg would scarcely meet.  Mrs.

Frederick Ottenburg lived in California, at Santa Bar-

bara, where her health was supposed to be better than

elsewhere, and her husband lived in Chicago.  He visited

his wife every winter to reinforce her position, and his

devoted mother, although her hatred for her daughter-in-

law was scarcely approachable in words, went to Santa

Barbara every year to make things look better and to

relieve her son.





     When Frederick Ottenburg was beginning his junior year

at Harvard, he got a letter from Dick Brisbane, a Kansas

City boy he knew, telling him that his FIANCEE, Miss Edith

Beers, was going to New York to buy her trousseau.  She

would be at the Holland House, with her aunt and a girl

from Kansas City who was to be a bridesmaid, for two

weeks or more.  If Ottenburg happened to be going down

to New York, would he call upon Miss Beers and "show

her a good time"?



     Fred did happen to be going to New York.  He was going

down from New Haven, after the Thanksgiving game.  He

called on Miss Beers and found her, as he that night tele-

graphed Brisbane, a "ripping beauty, no mistake."  He

took her and her aunt and her uninteresting friend to the

theater and to the opera, and he asked them to lunch with



<p 334>



him at the Waldorf.  He took no little pains in arranging

the luncheon with the head waiter.  Miss Beers was the

sort of girl with whom a young man liked to seem experi-

enced.  She was dark and slender and fiery.  She was witty

and slangy; said daring things and carried them off with

NONCHALANCE.  Her childish extravagance and contempt for

all the serious facts of life could be charged to her father's

generosity and his long packing-house purse.  Freaks that

would have been vulgar and ostentatious in a more simple-

minded girl, in Miss Beers seemed whimsical and pictur-

esque.  She darted about in magnificent furs and pumps

and close-clinging gowns, though that was the day of full

skirts.  Her hats were large and floppy.  When she wrig-

gled out of her moleskin coat at luncheon, she looked like

a slim black weasel.  Her satin dress was a mere sheath, so

conspicuous by its severity and scantness that every one in

the dining-room stared.  She ate nothing but alligator-pear

salad and hothouse grapes, drank a little champagne, and

took cognac in her coffee.  She ridiculed, in the raciest

slang, the singers they had heard at the opera the night

before, and when her aunt pretended to reprove her, she

murmured indifferently, "What's the matter with you,

old sport?"  She rattled on with a subdued loquacious-

ness, always keeping her voice low and monotonous,

always looking out of the corner of her eye and speaking,

as it were, in asides, out of the corner of her mouth.  She

was scornful of everything,--which became her eyebrows.

Her face was mobile and discontented, her eyes quick

and black.  There was a sort of smouldering fire about

her, young Ottenburg thought.  She entertained him pro-

digiously.



     After luncheon Miss Beers said she was going uptown to

be fitted, and that she would go alone because her aunt

made her nervous.  When Fred held her coat for her, she

murmured, "Thank you, Alphonse," as if she were address-

ing the waiter.  As she stepped into a hansom, with a long



<p 335>



stretch of thin silk stocking, she said negligently, over her

fur collar, "Better let me take you along and drop you

somewhere."  He sprang in after her, and she told the driver

to go to the Park.



     It was a bright winter day, and bitterly cold.  Miss Beers

asked Fred to tell her about the game at New Haven, and

when he did so paid no attention to what he said.  She

sank back into the hansom and held her muff before her

face, lowering it occasionally to utter laconic remarks

about the people in the carriages they passed, interrupt-

ing Fred's narrative in a disconcerting manner.  As they

entered the Park he happened to glance under her wide

black hat at her black eyes and hair--the muff hid every-

thing else--and discovered that she was crying.  To his

solicitous inquiry she replied that it "was enough to make

you damp, to go and try on dresses to marry a man you

weren't keen about."



     Further explanations followed.  She had thought she

was "perfectly cracked" about Brisbane, until she met

Fred at the Holland House three days ago.  Then she

knew she would scratch Brisbane's eyes out if she married

him.  What was she going to do?



     Fred told the driver to keep going.  What did she want

to do?  Well, she didn't know.  One had to marry some-

body, after all the machinery had been put in motion.

Perhaps she might as well scratch Brisbane as anybody

else; for scratch she would, if she didn't get what she

wanted.



     Of course, Fred agreed, one had to marry somebody.

And certainly this girl beat anything he had ever been up

against before.  Again he told the driver to go ahead.  Did

she mean that she would think of marrying him, by any

chance?  Of course she did, Alphonse.  Hadn't he seen that

all over her face three days ago?  If he hadn't, he was a

snowball.



     By this time Fred was beginning to feel sorry for the



<p 336>



driver.  Miss Beers, however, was compassionless.  After

a few more turns, Fred suggested tea at the Casino.  He

was very cold himself, and remembering the shining silk

hose and pumps, he wondered that the girl was not frozen.

As they got out of the hansom, he slipped the driver a bill

and told him to have something hot while he waited.



     At the tea-table, in a snug glass enclosure, with the steam

sputtering in the pipes beside them and a brilliant winter

sunset without, they developed their plan.  Miss Beers had

with her plenty of money, destined for tradesmen, which

she was quite willing to divert into other channels--the

first excitement of buying a trousseau had worn off, any-

way.  It was very much like any other shopping.  Fred

had his allowance and a few hundred he had won on the

game.  She would meet him to-morrow morning at the

Jersey ferry.  They could take one of the west-bound

Pennsylvania trains and go--anywhere, some place

where the laws weren't too fussy.--  Fred had not even

thought about the laws!--  It would be all right with

her father; he knew Fred's family.



     Now that they were engaged, she thought she would

like to drive a little more.  They were jerked about in the

cab for another hour through the deserted Park.  Miss

Beers, having removed her hat, reclined upon Fred's

shoulder.



     The next morning they left Jersey City by the latest fast

train out.  They had some misadventures, crossed several

States before they found a justice obliging enough to marry

two persons whose names automatically instigated inquiry.

The bride's family were rather pleased with her originality;

besides, any one of the Ottenburg boys was clearly a better

match than young Brisbane.  With Otto Ottenburg, how-

ever, the affair went down hard, and to his wife, the once

proud Katarina Furst, such a disappointment was almost

unbearable.  Her sons had always been clay in her hands,

and now the GELIEBTER SOHN had escaped her.



<p 337>





     Beers, the packer, gave his daughter a house in St. Louis,

and Fred went into his father's business.  At the end of a

year, he was mutely appealing to his mother for sympathy.

At the end of two, he was drinking and in open rebellion.

He had learned to detest his wife.  Her wastefulness and

cruelty revolted him.  The ignorance and the fatuous con-

ceit which lay behind her grimacing mask of slang and

ridicule humiliated him so deeply that he became absolutely

reckless.  Her grace was only an uneasy wriggle, her auda-

city was the result of insolence and envy, and her wit was

restless spite.  As her personal mannerisms grew more and

more odious to him, he began to dull his perceptions with

champagne.  He had it for tea, he drank it with dinner, and

during the evening he took enough to insure that he would

be well insulated when he got home.  This behavior spread

alarm among his friends.  It was scandalous, and it did not

occur among brewers.  He was violating the NOBLESSE OBLIGE

of his guild.  His father and his father's partners looked

alarmed.



     When Fred's mother went to him and with clasped hands

entreated an explanation, he told her that the only trouble

was that he couldn't hold enough wine to make life endur-

able, so he was going to get out from under and enlist in

the navy.  He didn't want anything but the shirt on his

back and clean salt air.  His mother could look out; he was

going to make a scandal.



     Mrs. Otto Ottenburg went to Kansas City to see Mr.

Beers, and had the satisfaction of telling him that he had

brought up his daughter like a savage, EINE UNGEBILDETE.  All

the Ottenburgs and all the Beers, and many of their friends,

were drawn into the quarrel.  It was to public opinion, how-

ever and not to his mother's activities, that Fred owed his

partial escape from bondage.  The cosmopolitan brewing

world of St. Louis had conservative standards.  The Otten-

burgs' friends were not predisposed in favor of the plunging

Kansas City set, and they disliked young Fred's wife from



<p 338>



the day that she was brought among them.  They found her

ignorant and ill-bred and insufferably impertinent.  When

they became aware of how matters were going between her

and Fred, they omitted no opportunity to snub her.  Young

Fred had always been popular, and St. Louis people took

up his cause with warmth.  Even the younger men, among

whom Mrs. Fred tried to draft a following, at first avoided

and then ignored her.  Her defeat was so conspicuous, her

life became such a desert, that she at last consented to

accept the house in Santa Barbara which Mrs. Otto Otten-

burg had long owned and cherished.  This villa, with its

luxuriant gardens, was the price of Fred's furlough.  His

mother was only too glad to offer it in his behalf.  As soon

as his wife was established in California, Fred was trans-

ferred from St. Louis to Chicago.



     A divorce was the one thing Edith would never, never,

give him.  She told him so, and she told his family so, and

her father stood behind her.  She would enter into no

arrangement that might eventually lead to divorce.  She

had insulted her husband before guests and servants, had

scratched his face, thrown hand-mirrors and hairbrushes

and nail-scissors at him often enough, but she knew that

Fred was hardly the fellow who would go into court and

offer that sort of evidence.  In her behavior with other men

she was discreet.



     After Fred went to Chicago, his mother visited him often,

and dropped a word to her old friends there, who were

already kindly disposed toward the young man.  They

gossiped as little as was compatible with the interest they

felt, undertook to make life agreeable for Fred, and told his

story only where they felt it would do good: to girls who

seemed to find the young brewer attractive.  So far, he had

behaved well, and had kept out of entanglements.



     Since he was transferred to Chicago, Fred had been

abroad several times, and had fallen more and more into

the way of going about among young artists,--people with



<p 339>



whom personal relations were incidental.  With women, and

even girls, who had careers to follow, a young man might

have pleasant friendships without being regarded as a pro-

spective suitor or lover.  Among artists his position was not

irregular, because with them his marriageableness was not

an issue.  His tastes, his enthusiasm, and his agreeable

personality made him welcome.



     With Thea Kronborg he had allowed himself more lib-

erty than he usually did in his friendships or gallantries

with young artists, because she seemed to him distinctly

not the marrying kind.  She impressed him as equipped to

be an artist, and to be nothing else; already directed, con-

centrated, formed as to mental habit.  He was generous

and sympathetic, and she was lonely and needed friendship;

needed cheerfulness.  She had not much power of reaching

out toward useful people or useful experiences, did not see

opportunities.  She had no tact about going after good

positions or enlisting the interest of influential persons.

She antagonized people rather than conciliated them.  He

discovered at once that she had a merry side, a robust

humor that was deep and hearty, like her laugh, but it

slept most of the time under her own doubts and the dull-

ness of her life.  She had not what is called a "sense of

humor."  That is, she had no intellectual humor; no power

to enjoy the absurdities of people, no relish of their preten-

tiousness and inconsistencies--which only depressed her.

But her joviality, Fred felt, was an asset, and ought to be

developed.  He discovered that she was more receptive and

more effective under a pleasant stimulus than she was

under the gray grind which she considered her salvation.

She was still Methodist enough to believe that if a thing

were hard and irksome, it must be good for her.  And yet,

whatever she did well was spontaneous.  Under the least

glow of excitement, as at Mrs. Nathanmeyer's, he had seen

the apprehensive, frowning drudge of Bowers's studio flash

into a resourceful and consciously beautiful woman.



<p 340>





     His interest in Thea was serious, almost from the first,

and so sincere that he felt no distrust of himself.  He be-

lieved that he knew a great deal more about her possibili-

ties than Bowers knew, and he liked to think that he had

given her a stronger hold on life.  She had never seen her-

self or known herself as she did at Mrs. Nathanmeyer's

musical evenings.  She had been a different girl ever since.

He had not anticipated that she would grow more fond of

him than his immediate usefulness warranted.  He thought

he knew the ways of artists, and, as he said, she must have

been "at it from her cradle."  He had imagined, perhaps,

but never really believed, that he would find her waiting

for him sometime as he found her waiting on the day

he reached the Biltmer ranch.  Once he found her so--

well, he did not pretend to be anything more or less

than a reasonably well-intentioned young man.  A lovesick

girl or a flirtatious woman he could have handled easily


enough.  But a personality like that, unconsciously reveal-

ing itself for the first time under the exaltation of a per-

sonal feeling,--what could one do but watch it?  As he

used to say to himself, in reckless moments back there in

the canyon, "You can't put out a sunrise."  He had to

watch it, and then he had to share it.



     Besides, was he really going to do her any harm?  The

Lord knew he would marry her if he could!  Marriage would

be an incident, not an end with her; he was sure of that.

If it were not he, it would be some one else; some one who

would be a weight about her neck, probably; who would

hold her back and beat her down and divert her from the

first plunge for which he felt she was gathering all her ener-

gies.  He meant to help her, and he could not think of

another man who would.  He went over his unmarried

friends, East and West, and he could not think of one who

would know what she was driving at--or care.  The clever

ones were selfish, the kindly ones were stupid.



     "Damn it, if she's going to fall in love with somebody, it



<p 341>



had better be me than any of the others--of the sort

she'd find.  Get her tied up with some conceited ass who'd

try to make her over, train her like a puppy!  Give one of

'em a big nature like that, and he'd be horrified.  He

wouldn't show his face in the clubs until he'd gone after

her and combed her down to conform to some fool idea in

his own head--put there by some other woman, too, his

first sweetheart or his grandmother or a maiden aunt.  At

least, I understand her.  I know what she needs and where

she's bound, and I mean to see that she has a fighting

chance."



     His own conduct looked crooked, he admitted; but he

asked himself whether, between men and women, all ways

were not more or less crooked.  He believed those which are

called straight were the most dangerous of all.  They

seemed to him, for the most part, to lie between windowless

stone walls, and their rectitude had been achieved at the

expense of light and air.  In their unquestioned regularity

lurked every sort of human cruelty and meanness, and

every kind of humiliation and suffering.  He would rather

have any woman he cared for wounded than crushed.  He

would deceive her not once, he told himself fiercely, but a

hundred times, to keep her free.





     When Fred went back to the observation car at one

o'clock, after the luncheon call, it was empty, and he found

Thea alone on the platform.  She put out her hand, and

met his eyes.



     "It's as I said.  Things have closed behind me.  I can't

go back, so I am going on--to Mexico?"  She lifted her

face with an eager, questioning smile.



     Fred met it with a sinking heart.  Had he really hoped

she would give him another answer?  He would have given

pretty much anything--  But there, that did no good.  He

could give only what he had.  Things were never complete

in this world; you had to snatch at them as they came or go



<p 342>



without.  Nobody could look into her face and draw back,

nobody who had any courage.  She had courage enough for

anything--look at her mouth and chin and eyes!  Where

did it come from, that light?  How could a face, a familiar

face, become so the picture of hope, be painted with the

very colors of youth's exaltation?  She was right; she was

not one of those who draw back.  Some people get on by

avoiding dangers, others by riding through them.



     They stood by the railing looking back at the sand levels,

both feeling that the train was steaming ahead very fast.

Fred's mind was a confusion of images and ideas.  Only

two things were clear to him: the force of her determination,

and the belief that, handicapped as he was, he could do

better by her than another man would do.  He knew he

would always remember her, standing there with that ex-

pectant, forward-looking smile, enough to turn the future

into summer.


End of Part IV
