

                              PART VI

                             KRONBORG


                                 I


     It is a glorious winter day.  Denver, standing on her

high plateau under a thrilling green-blue sky, is masked

in snow and glittering with sunlight.  The Capitol building

is actually in armor, and throws off the shafts of the sun

until the beholder is dazzled and the outlines of the building

are lost in a blaze of reflected light.  The stone terrace is a

white field over which fiery reflections dance, and the trees

and bushes are faithfully repeated in snow--on every

black twig a soft, blurred line of white.  From the terrace

one looks directly over to where the mountains break in

their sharp, familiar lines against the sky.  Snow fills the

gorges, hangs in scarfs on the great slopes, and on the peaks

the fiery sunshine is gathered up as by a burning-glass.



     Howard Archie is standing at the window of his private

room in the offices of the San Felipe Mining Company, on

the sixth floor of the Raton Building, looking off at the

mountain glories of his State while he gives dictation to his

secretary.  He is ten years older than when we saw him last,

and emphatically ten years more prosperous.  A decade of

coming into things has not so much aged him as it has forti-

fied, smoothed, and assured him.  His sandy hair and

imperial conceal whatever gray they harbor.  He has not

grown heavier, but more flexible, and his massive shoulders

carry fifty years and the control of his great mining inter-

ests more lightly than they carried forty years and a coun-

try practice.  In short, he is one of the friends to whom we

feel grateful for having got on in the world, for helping to



<p 386>



keep up the general temperature and our own confidence in

life.  He is an acquaintance that one would hurry to over-

take and greet among a hundred.  In his warm handshake

and generous smile there is the stimulating cordiality of

good fellows come into good fortune and eager to pass it on;

something that makes one think better of the lottery of

life and resolve to try again.



     When Archie had finished his morning mail, he turned

away from the window and faced his secretary.  "Did any-

thing come up yesterday afternoon while I was away,

T. B.?"



     Thomas Burk turned over the leaf of his calendar.

"Governor Alden sent down to say that he wanted to see

you before he sends his letter to the Board of Pardons.

Asked if you could go over to the State House this morn-

ing."



     Archie shrugged his shoulders.  "I'll think about it."



     The young man grinned.



     "Anything else?" his chief continued.



     T. B. swung round in his chair with a look of interest on

his shrewd, clean-shaven face.  "Old Jasper Flight was in,

Dr. Archie.  I never expected to see him alive again.  Seems

he's tucked away for the winter with a sister who's a

housekeeper at the Oxford.  He's all crippled up with

rheumatism, but as fierce after it as ever.  Wants to know

if you or the company won't grub-stake him again.  Says

he's sure of it this time; had located something when the

snow shut down on him in December.  He wants to crawl

out at the first break in the weather, with that same old

burro with the split ear.  He got somebody to winter the

beast for him.  He's superstitious about that burro, too;

thinks it's divinely guided.  You ought to hear the line of

talk he put up here yesterday; said when he rode in his

carriage, that burro was a-going to ride along with him."



     Archie laughed.  "Did he leave you his address?"



     "He didn't neglect anything," replied the clerk cynically.



<p 387>





     "Well, send him a line and tell him to come in again.  I

like to hear him.  Of all the crazy prospectors I've ever

known, he's the most interesting, because he's really crazy.

It's a religious conviction with him, and with most of 'em

it's a gambling fever or pure vagrancy.  But Jasper Flight

believes that the Almighty keeps the secret of the silver

deposits in these hills, and gives it away to the deserving.

He's a downright noble figure.  Of course I'll stake him!

As long as he can crawl out in the spring.  He and that

burro are a sight together.  The beast is nearly as white as

Jasper; must be twenty years old."



     "If you stake him this time, you won't have to again,"

said T. B. knowingly.  "He'll croak up there, mark my

word.  Says he never ties the burro at night now, for fear he

might be called sudden, and the beast would starve.  I guess

that animal could eat a lariat rope, all right, and enjoy it."



     "I guess if we knew the things those two have eaten, and

haven't eaten, in their time, T. B., it would make us vege-

tarians."  The doctor sat down and looked thoughtful.

"That's the way for the old man to go.  It would be pretty

hard luck if he had to die in a hospital.  I wish he could

turn up something before he cashes in.  But his kind seldom

do; they're bewitched.  Still, there was Stratton.  I've been

meeting Jasper Flight, and his side meat and tin pans, up

in the mountains for years, and I'd miss him.  I always

halfway believe the fairy tales he spins me.  Old Jasper

Flight," Archie murmured, as if he liked the name or the

picture it called up.



     A clerk came in from the outer office and handed Archie

a card.  He sprang up and exclaimed, "Mr. Ottenburg?

Bring him in."



     Fred Ottenburg entered, clad in a long, fur-lined coat,

holding a checked-cloth hat in his hand, his cheeks and

eyes bright with the outdoor cold.  The two men met before

Archie's desk and their handclasp was longer than friend-

ship prompts except in regions where the blood warms and



<p 388>



quickens to meet the dry cold.  Under the general keying-

up of the altitude, manners take on a heartiness, a vivacity,

that is one expression of the half-unconscious excitement

which Colorado people miss when they drop into lower

strata of air.  The heart, we are told, wears out early in

that high atmosphere, but while it pumps it sends out no

sluggish stream.  Our two friends stood gripping each other

by the hand and smiling.



     "When did you get in, Fred?  And what have you come

for?"  Archie gave him a quizzical glance.



     "I've come to find out what you think you're doing out

here," the younger man declared emphatically.  "I want

to get next, I do.  When can you see me?"



     "Anything on to-night?  Then suppose you dine with

me.  Where can I pick you up at five-thirty?"



     "Bixby's office, general freight agent of the Burlington."

Ottenburg began to button his overcoat and drew on his

gloves.  "I've got to have one shot at you before I go,

Archie.  Didn't I tell you Pinky Alden was a cheap squirt?"



     Alden's backer laughed and shook his head.  "Oh, he's

worse than that, Fred.  It isn't polite to mention what he

is, outside of the Arabian Nights.  I guessed you'd come

to rub it into me."



     Ottenburg paused, his hand on the doorknob, his high

color challenging the doctor's calm.  "I'm disgusted with

you, Archie, for training with such a pup.  A man of your

experience!"



     "Well, he's been an experience," Archie muttered.  "I'm

not coy about admitting it, am I?"



     Ottenburg flung open the door.  "Small credit to you.

Even the women are out for capital and corruption, I hear.

Your Governor's done more for the United Breweries in

six months than I've been able to do in six years.  He's the

lily-livered sort we're looking for.  Good-morning."



     That afternoon at five o'clock Dr. Archie emerged from

the State House after his talk with Governor Alden, and



<p 388>



crossed the terrace under a saffron sky.  The snow, beaten

hard, was blue in the dusk; a day of blinding sunlight had

not even started a thaw.  The lights of the city twinkled

pale below him in the quivering violet air, and the dome of

the State House behind him was still red with the light

from the west.  Before he got into his car, the doctor paused

to look about him at the scene of which he never tired.

Archie lived in his own house on Colfax Avenue, where

he had roomy grounds and a rose garden and a conserva-

tory.  His housekeeping was done by three Japanese boys,

devoted and resourceful, who were able to manage Archie's

dinner parties, to see that he kept his engagements, and to

make visitors who stayed at the house so comfortable that

they were always loath to go away.



     Archie had never known what comfort was until he

became a widower, though with characteristic delicacy, or

dishonesty, he insisted upon accrediting his peace of mind

to the San Felipe, to Time, to anything but his release from

Mrs. Archie.



     Mrs. Archie died just before her husband left Moonstone

and came to Denver to live, six years ago.  The poor wo-

man's fight against dust was her undoing at last.  One

summer day when she was rubbing the parlor upholstery

with gasoline,--the doctor had often forbidden her to use

it on any account, so that was one of the pleasures she

seized upon in his absence,--an explosion occurred.  No-

body ever knew exactly how it happened, for Mrs. Archie

was dead when the neighbors rushed in to save her from the

burning house.  She must have inhaled the burning gas and

died instantly.



     Moonstone severity relented toward her somewhat after

her death.  But even while her old cronies at Mrs. Smiley's

millinery store said that it was a terrible thing, they added

that nothing but a powerful explosive COULD have killed

Mrs. Archie, and that it was only right the doctor should

have a chance.



<p 390>





     Archie's past was literally destroyed when his wife died.

The house burned to the ground, and all those material

reminders which have such power over people disappeared

in an hour.  His mining interests now took him to Denver

so often that it seemed better to make his headquarters

there.  He gave up his practice and left Moonstone for

good.  Six months afterward, while Dr. Archie was living

at the Brown Palace Hotel, the San Felipe mine began to

give up that silver hoard which old Captain Harris had

always accused it of concealing, and San Felipe headed the

list of mining quotations in every daily paper, East and

West.  In a few years Dr. Archie was a very rich man.

His mine was such an important item in the mineral out-

put of the State, and Archie had a hand in so many of the

new industries of Colorado and New Mexico, that his poli-

tical influence was considerable.  He had thrown it all, two

years ago, to the new reform party, and had brought about

the election of a governor of whose conduct he was now

heartily ashamed.  His friends believed that Archie himself

had ambitious political plans.







<p 391>





                                II





     WHEN Ottenburg and his host reached the house on

Colfax Avenue, they went directly to the library,

a long double room on the second floor which Archie had

arranged exactly to his own taste.  It was full of books and

mounted specimens of wild game, with a big writing-table

at either end, stiff, old-fashioned engravings, heavy hang-

ings and deep upholstery.



     When one of the Japanese boys brought the cocktails,

Fred turned from the fine specimen of peccoray he had

been examining and said, "A man is an owl to live in such

a place alone, Archie.  Why don't you marry?  As for me,

just because I can't marry, I find the world full of charm-

ing, unattached women, any one of whom I could fit up a

house for with alacrity."



     "You're more knowing than I."  Archie spoke politely.

"I'm not very wide awake about women.  I'd be likely to

pick out one of the uncomfortable ones--and there are a

few of them, you know."  He drank his cocktail and rubbed

his hands together in a friendly way.  "My friends here

have charming wives, and they don't give me a chance

to get lonely.  They are very kind to me, and I have a

great many pleasant friendships."



     Fred put down his glass.  "Yes, I've always noticed that

women have confidence in you.  You have the doctor's way

of getting next.  And you enjoy that kind of thing?"



     "The friendship of attractive women?  Oh, dear, yes!

I depend upon it a great deal."



     The butler announced dinner, and the two men went

downstairs to the dining-room.  Dr. Archie's dinners were

always good and well served, and his wines were excellent.



     "I saw the Fuel and Iron people to-day," Ottenburg said,



<p 392>



looking up from his soup.  "Their heart is in the right place.

I can't see why in the mischief you ever got mixed up with

that reform gang, Archie.  You've got nothing to reform

out here.  The situation has always been as simple as two

and two in Colorado; mostly a matter of a friendly under-

standing."



     "Well,"--Archie spoke tolerantly,--"some of the

young fellows seemed to have red-hot convictions, and I

thought it was better to let them try their ideas out."



     Ottenburg shrugged his shoulders.  "A few dull young

men who haven't ability enough to play the old game the

old way, so they want to put on a new game which doesn't

take so much brains and gives away more advertising

that's what your anti-saloon league and vice commission

amounts to.  They provide notoriety for the fellows who

can't distinguish themselves at running a business or prac-

ticing law or developing an industry.  Here you have a

mediocre lawyer with no brains and no practice, trying to

get a look-in on something.  He comes up with the novel

proposition that the prostitute has a hard time of it, puts

his picture in the paper, and the first thing you know, he's

a celebrity.  He gets the rake-off and she's just where she

was before.  How could you fall for a mouse-trap like

Pink Alden, Archie?"



     Dr. Archie laughed as he began to carve.  "Pink seems

to get under your skin.  He's not worth talking about.

He's gone his limit.  People won't read about his blame-

less life any more.  I knew those interviews he gave out

would cook him.  They were a last resort.  I could have

stopped him, but by that time I'd come to the conclusion

that I'd let the reformers down.  I'm not against a general

shaking-up, but the trouble with Pinky's crowd is they

never get beyond a general writing-up.  We gave them a

chance to do something, and they just kept on writing

about each other and what temptations they had over-

come."



<p 393>





     While Archie and his friend were busy with Colorado

politics, the impeccable Japanese attended swiftly and

intelligently to his duties, and the dinner, as Ottenburg at

last remarked, was worthy of more profitable conversation.



     "So it is," the doctor admitted.  "Well, we'll go up-

stairs for our coffee and cut this out.  Bring up some cognac

and arak, Tai," he added as he rose from the table.



     They stopped to examine a moose's head on the stair-

way, and when they reached the library the pine logs in

the fireplace had been lighted, and the coffee was bubbling

before the hearth.  Tai placed two chairs before the fire

and brought a tray of cigarettes.



     "Bring the cigars in my lower desk drawer, boy," the

doctor directed.  "Too much light in here, isn't there,

Fred?  Light the lamp there on my desk, Tai."  He turned

off the electric glare and settled himself deep into the chair

opposite Ottenburg's.



     "To go back to our conversation, doctor," Fred began

while he waited for the first steam to blow off his coffee;

"why don't you make up your mind to go to Washington?

There'd be no fight made against you.  I needn't say the

United Breweries would back you.  There'd be some KUDOS

coming to us, too; backing a reform candidate."



     Dr. Archie measured his length in his chair and thrust

his large boots toward the crackling pitch-pine.  He drank

his coffee and lit a big black cigar while his guest looked

over the assortment of cigarettes on the tray.  "You say

why don't I," the doctor spoke with the deliberation of a

man in the position of having several courses to choose

from, "but, on the other hand, why should I?"  He puffed

away and seemed, through his half-closed eyes, to look

down several long roads with the intention of luxuriously

rejecting all of them and remaining where he was.  "I'm

sick of politics.  I'm disillusioned about serving my crowd,

and I don't particularly want to serve yours.  Nothing in it

that I particularly want; and a man's not effective in poli-



<p 394>



tics unless he wants something for himself, and wants it

hard.  I can reach my ends by straighter roads.  There are

plenty of things to keep me busy.  We haven't begun to

develop our resources in this State; we haven't had a look

in on them yet.  That's the only thing that isn't fake--

making men and machines go, and actually turning out a

product."



     The doctor poured himself some white cordial and looked

over the little glass into the fire with an expression which

led Ottenburg to believe that he was getting at something

in his own mind.  Fred lit a cigarette and let his friend

grope for his idea.



     "My boys, here," Archie went on, "have got me rather

interested in Japan.  Think I'll go out there in the spring,

and come back the other way, through Siberia.  I've always

wanted to go to Russia."  His eyes still hunted for some-

thing in his big fireplace.  With a slow turn of his head he

brought them back to his guest and fixed them upon him.

"Just now, I'm thinking of running on to New York for

a few weeks," he ended abruptly.



     Ottenburg lifted his chin.  "Ah!" he exclaimed, as if he

began to see Archie's drift.  "Shall you see Thea?"



     "Yes."  The doctor replenished his cordial glass.  "In

fact, I suspect I am going exactly TO see her.  I'm getting

stale on things here, Fred.  Best people in the world and

always doing things for me.  I'm fond of them, too, but

I've been with them too much.  I'm getting ill-tempered,

and the first thing I know I'll be hurting people's feelings.

I snapped Mrs. Dandridge up over the telephone this

afternoon when she asked me to go out to Colorado Springs

on Sunday to meet some English people who are staying

at the Antlers.  Very nice of her to want me, and I was as

sour as if she'd been trying to work me for something.

I've got to get out for a while, to save my reputation."



     To this explanation Ottenburg had not paid much atten-

tion.  He seemed to be looking at a fixed point: the yellow



<p 395>



glass eyes of a fine wildcat over one of the bookcases.

"You've never heard her at all, have you?" he asked

reflectively.  "Curious, when this is her second season in

New York."



     "I was going on last March.  Had everything arranged.

And then old Cap Harris thought he could drive his car

and me through a lamp-post and I was laid up with a com-

pound fracture for two months.  So I didn't get to see

Thea."



     Ottenburg studied the red end of his cigarette attentively.

"She might have come out to see you.  I remember you

covered the distance like a streak when she wanted you."



     Archie moved uneasily.  "Oh, she couldn't do that.  She

had to get back to Vienna to work on some new parts for

this year.  She sailed two days after the New York season

closed."



     "Well, then she couldn't, of course."  Fred smoked his

cigarette close and tossed the end into the fire.  "I'm tre-

mendously glad you're going now.  If you're stale, she'll

jack you up.  That's one of her specialties.  She got a rise

out of me last December that lasted me all winter."



     "Of course," the doctor apologized, "you know so much

more about such things.  I'm afraid it will be rather wasted

on me.  I'm no judge of music."



     "Never mind that."  The younger man pulled himself

up in his chair.  "She gets it across to people who aren't

judges.  That's just what she does."  He relapsed into his

former lassitude.  "If you were stone deaf, it wouldn't all

be wasted.  It's a great deal to watch her.  Incidentally,

you know, she is very beautiful.  Photographs give you no

idea."



     Dr. Archie clasped his large hands under his chin.  "Oh,

I'm counting on that.  I don't suppose her voice will sound

natural to me.  Probably I wouldn't know it."



     Ottenburg smiled.  "You'll know it, if you ever knew it.

It's the same voice, only more so.  You'll know it."



<p 396>





     "Did you, in Germany that time, when you wrote me?

Seven years ago, now.  That must have been at the very

beginning."



     "Yes, somewhere near the beginning.  She sang one of

the Rhine daughters."  Fred paused and drew himself up

again.  "Sure, I knew it from the first note.  I'd heard a

good many young voices come up out of the Rhine, but,

by gracious, I hadn't heard one like that!"  He fumbled

for another cigarette.  "Mahler was conducting that night.

I met him as he was leaving the house and had a word with

him.  `Interesting voice you tried out this evening,' I

said.  He stopped and smiled.  `Miss Kronborg, you mean?

Yes, very.  She seems to sing for the idea.  Unusual in a

young singer.'  I'd never heard him admit before that a

singer could have an idea.  She not only had it, but she got

it across.  The Rhine music, that I'd known since I was a

boy, was fresh to me, vocalized for the first time.  You

realized that she was beginning that long story, adequately,

with the end in view.  Every phrase she sang was basic.

She simply WAS the idea of the Rhine music."  Ottenburg

rose and stood with his back to the fire.  "And at the end,

where you don't see the maidens at all, the same thing

again: two pretty voices AND the Rhine voice."  Fred

snapped his fingers and dropped his hand.



     The doctor looked up at him enviously.  "You see, all

that would be lost on me," he said modestly.  "I don't

know the dream nor the interpretation thereof.  I'm out of

it.  It's too bad that so few of her old friends can appreciate

her."



     "Take a try at it," Fred encouraged him.  "You'll get

in deeper than you can explain to yourself.  People with no

personal interest do that."



     "I suppose," said Archie diffidently, "that college Ger-

man, gone to seed, wouldn't help me out much.  I used to

be able to make my German patients understand me."



     "Sure it would!" cried Ottenburg heartily.  "Don't be



<p 397>



above knowing your libretto.  That's all very well for

musicians, but common mortals like you and me have got

to know what she's singing about.  Get out your dictionary

and go at it as you would at any other proposition.  Her

diction is beautiful, and if you know the text you'll get a

great deal.  So long as you're going to hear her, get all

that's coming to you.  You bet in Germany people know

their librettos by heart!  You Americans are so afraid of

stooping to learn anything."



     "I AM a little ashamed," Archie admitted.  "I guess

that's the way we mask our general ignorance.  However,

I'll stoop this time; I'm more ashamed not to be able to

follow her.  The papers always say she's such a fine ac-

tress."  He took up the tongs and began to rearrange the

logs that had burned through and fallen apart.  "I suppose

she has changed a great deal?" he asked absently.



     "We've all changed, my dear Archie,--she more than

most of us.  Yes, and no.  She's all there, only there's a

great deal more of her.  I've had only a few words with her

in several years.  It's better not, when I'm tied up this

way.  The laws are barbarous, Archie."



     "Your wife is--still the same?" the doctor asked

sympathetically.



     "Absolutely.  Hasn't been out of a sanitarium for seven

years now.  No prospect of her ever being out, and as long

as she's there I'm tied hand and foot.  What does society

get out of such a state of things, I'd like to know, except

a tangle of irregularities?  If you want to reform, there's

an opening for you!"



     "It's bad, oh, very bad; I agree with you!"  Dr. Archie

shook his head.  "But there would be complications under

another system, too.  The whole question of a young man's

marrying has looked pretty grave to me for a long while.

How have they the courage to keep on doing it?  It de-

presses me now to buy wedding presents."  For some time

the doctor watched his guest, who was sunk in bitter reflec-



<p 398>



tions.  "Such things used to go better than they do now,

I believe.  Seems to me all the married people I knew when

I was a boy were happy enough."  He paused again and bit

the end off a fresh cigar.  "You never saw Thea's mother,

did you, Ottenburg?  That's a pity.  Mrs. Kronborg was a

fine woman.  I've always been afraid Thea made a mistake,

not coming home when Mrs. Kronborg was ill, no matter

what it cost her."



     Ottenburg moved about restlessly.  "She couldn't,

Archie, she positively couldn't.  I felt you never under-

stood that, but I was in Dresden at the time, and though

I wasn't seeing much of her, I could size up the situation

for myself.  It was by just a lucky chance that she got to

sing ELIZABETH that time at the Dresden Opera, a complica-

tion of circumstances.  If she'd run away, for any reason,

she might have waited years for such a chance to come

again.  She gave a wonderful performance and made a

great impression.  They offered her certain terms; she had

to take them and follow it up then and there.  In that game

you can't lose a single trick.  She was ill herself, but she

sang.  Her mother was ill, and she sang.  No, you mustn't

hold that against her, Archie.  She did the right thing

there."  Ottenburg drew out his watch.  "Hello!  I must be

traveling.  You hear from her regularly?"



     "More or less regularly.  She was never much of a letter-

writer.  She tells me about her engagements and contracts,

but I know so little about that business that it doesn't

mean much to me beyond the figures, which seem very

impressive.  We've had a good deal of business correspond-

ence, about putting up a stone to her father and mother,

and, lately, about her youngest brother, Thor.  He is with

me now; he drives my car.  To-day he's up at the mine."



     Ottenburg, who had picked up his overcoat, dropped it.

"Drives your car?" he asked incredulously.



     "Yes.  Thea and I have had a good deal of bother about

Thor.  We tried a business college, and an engineering



<p 399>



school, but it was no good.  Thor was born a chauffeur

before there were cars to drive.  He was never good for any-

thing else; lay around home and collected postage stamps

and took bicycles to pieces, waiting for the automobile to

be invented.  He's just as much a part of a car as the steer-

ing-gear.  I can't find out whether he likes his job with me or

not, or whether he feels any curiosity about his sister.  You

can't find anything out from a Kronborg nowadays.  The

mother was different."



     Fred plunged into his coat.  "Well, it's a queer world,

Archie.  But you'll think better of it, if you go to New

York.  Wish I were going with you.  I'll drop in on you

in the morning at about eleven.  I want a word with you

about this Interstate Commerce Bill.  Good-night."



     Dr. Archie saw his guest to the motor which was waiting

below, and then went back to his library, where he replen-

ished the fire and sat down for a long smoke.  A man of

Archie's modest and rather credulous nature develops late,

and makes his largest gain between forty and fifty.  At

thirty, indeed, as we have seen, Archie was a soft-hearted

boy under a manly exterior, still whistling to keep up his

courage.  Prosperity and large responsibilities--above all,

getting free of poor Mrs. Archie--had brought out a good

deal more than he knew was in him.  He was thinking to-

night as he sat before the fire, in the comfort he liked so

well, that but for lucky chances, and lucky holes in the

ground, he would still be a country practitioner, reading

his old books by his office lamp.  And yet, he was not so

fresh and energetic as he ought to be.  He was tired of

business and of politics.  Worse than that, he was tired of

the men with whom he had to do and of the women who,

as he said, had been kind to him.  He felt as if he were still

hunting for something, like old Jasper Flight.  He knew

that this was an unbecoming and ungrateful state of mind,

and he reproached himself for it.  But he could not help

wondering why it was that life, even when it gave so much,



<p 400>



after all gave so little.  What was it that he had expected

and missed?  Why was he, more than he was anything else,

disappointed?



     He fell to looking back over his life and asking himself

which years of it he would like to live over again,--just

as they had been,--and they were not many.  His college

years he would live again, gladly.  After them there was

nothing he would care to repeat until he came to Thea

Kronborg.  There had been something stirring about those

years in Moonstone, when he was a restless young man on

the verge of breaking into larger enterprises, and when she

was a restless child on the verge of growing up into some-

thing unknown.  He realized now that she had counted for

a great deal more to him than he knew at the time.  It was

a continuous sort of relationship.  He was always on the

lookout for her as he went about the town, always vaguely

expecting her as he sat in his office at night.  He had never

asked himself then if it was strange that he should find a

child of twelve the most interesting and companionable

person in Moonstone.  It had seemed a pleasant, natural

kind of solicitude.  He explained it then by the fact that

he had no children of his own.  But now, as he looked back

at those years, the other interests were faded and inani-

mate.  The thought of them was heavy.  But wherever his

life had touched Thea Kronborg's, there was still a little

warmth left, a little sparkle.  Their friendship seemed to

run over those discontented years like a leafy pattern, still

bright and fresh when the other patterns had faded into

the dull background.  Their walks and drives and confi-

dences, the night they watched the rabbit in the moon-

light,--why were these things stirring to remember?

Whenever he thought of them, they were distinctly dif-

ferent from the other memories of his life; always seemed

humorous, gay, with a little thrill of anticipation and mys-

tery about them.  They came nearer to being tender secrets

than any others he possessed.  Nearer than anything else



<p 401>



they corresponded to what he had hoped to find in the

world, and had not found.  It came over him now that the

unexpected favors of fortune, no matter how dazzling, do

not mean very much to us.  They may excite or divert us

for a time, but when we look back, the only things we cher-

ish are those which in some way met our original want; the

desire which formed in us in early youth, undirected, and

of its own accord.







<p 402>





                                III





     FOR the first four years after Thea went to Germany

things went on as usual with the Kronborg family.

Mrs. Kronborg's land in Nebraska increased in value and

brought her in a good rental.  The family drifted into an

easier way of living, half without realizing it, as families

will.  Then Mr. Kronborg, who had never been ill, died sud-

denly of cancer of the liver, and after his death Mrs.

Kronborg went, as her neighbors said, into a decline.

Hearing discouraging reports of her from the physician

who had taken over his practice, Dr. Archie went up from

Denver to see her.  He found her in bed, in the room where

he had more than once attended her, a handsome woman

of sixty with a body still firm and white, her hair, faded

now to a very pale primrose, in two thick braids down her

back, her eyes clear and calm.  When the doctor arrived,

she was sitting up in her bed, knitting.  He felt at once how

glad she was to see him, but he soon gathered that she had

made no determination to get well.  She told him, indeed,

that she could not very well get along without Mr. Kron-

borg.  The doctor looked at her with astonishment.  Was

it possible that she could miss the foolish old man so much?

He reminded her of her children.



     "Yes," she replied; "the children are all very well, but

they are not father.  We were married young."



     The doctor watched her wonderingly as she went on

knitting, thinking how much she looked like Thea.  The

difference was one of degree rather than of kind.  The

daughter had a compelling enthusiasm, the mother had

none.  But their framework, their foundation, was very

much the same.



     In a moment Mrs. Kronborg spoke again.  "Have you

heard anything from Thea lately?"



<p 403>





     During his talk with her, the doctor gathered that what

Mrs. Kronborg really wanted was to see her daughter Thea.

Lying there day after day, she wanted it calmly and con-

tinuously.  He told her that, since she felt so, he thought

they might ask Thea to come home.



     "I've thought a good deal about it," said Mrs. Kronborg

slowly.  "I hate to interrupt her, now that she's begun to

get advancement.  I expect she's seen some pretty hard

times, though she was never one to complain.  Perhaps

she'd feel that she would like to come.  It would be hard,

losing both of us while she's off there."



     When Dr. Archie got back to Denver he wrote a long

letter to Thea, explaining her mother's condition and how

much she wished to see her, and asking Thea to come, if

only for a few weeks.  Thea had repaid the money she had

borrowed from him, and he assured her that if she hap-

pened to be short of funds for the journey, she had only to

cable him.



     A month later he got a frantic sort of reply from Thea.

Complications in the opera at Dresden had given her an

unhoped-for opportunity to go on in a big part.  Before this

letter reached the doctor, she would have made her debut

as ELIZABETH, in "Tannhauser."  She wanted to go to her

mother more than she wanted anything else in the world,

but, unless she failed,--which she would not,--she abso-

lutely could not leave Dresden for six months.  It was not

that she chose to stay; she had to stay--or lose every-

thing.  The next few months would put her five years

ahead, or would put her back so far that it would be of no

use to struggle further.  As soon as she was free, she would

go to Moonstone and take her mother back to Germany

with her.  Her mother, she was sure, could live for years

yet, and she would like German people and German ways,

and could be hearing music all the time.  Thea said she was

writing her mother and begging her to help her one last

time; to get strength and to wait for her six months, and



<p 404>



then she (Thea) would do everything.  Her mother would

never have to make an effort again.



     Dr. Archie went up to Moonstone at once.  He had great

confidence in Mrs. Kronborg's power of will, and if Thea's

appeal took hold of her enough, he believed she might

get better.  But when he was shown into the familiar room

off the parlor, his heart sank.  Mrs. Kronborg was lying

serene and fateful on her pillows.  On the dresser at the

foot of her bed there was a large photograph of Thea in the

character in which she was to make her debut.  Mrs.

Kronborg pointed to it.



     "Isn't she lovely, doctor?  It's nice that she hasn't

changed much.  I've seen her look like that many a time."



     They talked for a while about Thea's good fortune.  Mrs.

Kronborg had had a cablegram saying, "First performance

well received.  Great relief."  In her letter Thea said; "If

you'll only get better, dear mother, there's nothing I can't

do.  I will make a really great success, if you'll try with me.

You shall have everything you want, and we will always be

together.  I have a little house all picked out where we are

to live."



     "Bringing up a family is not all it's cracked up to be,"

said Mrs. Kronborg with a flicker of irony, as she tucked

the letter back under her pillow.  "The children you don't

especially need, you have always with you, like the poor.

But the bright ones get away from you.  They have their

own way to make in the world.  Seems like the brighter

they are, the farther they go.  I used to feel sorry that you

had no family, doctor, but maybe you're as well off."



     "Thea's plan seems sound to me, Mrs. Kronborg.

There's no reason I can see why you shouldn't pull up

and live for years yet, under proper care.  You'd have the

best doctors in the world over there, and it would be won-

derful to live with anybody who looks like that."  He

nodded at the photograph of the young woman who must

have been singing "DICH, THEURE HALLE, GRUSS' ICH WIEDER,"



<p 405>



her eyes looking up, her beautiful hands outspread with

pleasure.



     Mrs. Kronborg laughed quite cheerfully.  "Yes, would

n't it?  If father were here, I might rouse myself.  But

sometimes it's hard to come back.  Or if she were in

trouble, maybe I could rouse myself."



     "But, dear Mrs. Kronborg, she is in trouble," her old

friend expostulated.  "As she says, she's never needed you

as she needs you now.  I make my guess that she's never

begged anybody to help her before."



     Mrs. Kronborg smiled.  "Yes, it's pretty of her.  But

that will pass.  When these things happen far away they

don't make such a mark; especially if your hands are full

and you've duties of your own to think about.  My own

father died in Nebraska when Gunner was born,--we

were living in Iowa then,--and I was sorry, but the baby

made it up to me.  I was father's favorite, too.  That's the

way it goes, you see."



     The doctor took out Thea's letter to him, and read it over

to Mrs. Kronborg.  She seemed to listen, and not to listen.



     When he finished, she said thoughtfully: "I'd counted

on hearing her sing again.  But I always took my pleasures

as they come.  I always enjoyed her singing when she was

here about the house.  While she was practicing I often

used to leave my work and sit down in a rocker and give

myself up to it, the same as if I'd been at an entertainment.

I was never one of these housekeepers that let their work

drive them to death.  And when she had the Mexicans over

here, I always took it in.  First and last,"--she glanced

judicially at the photograph,--"I guess I got about as

much out of Thea's voice as anybody will ever get."



     "I guess you did!" the doctor assented heartily; "and I

got a good deal myself.  You remember how she used to sing

those Scotch songs for me, and lead us with her head, her

hair bobbing?"



     "`Flow Gently, Sweet Afton,'--I can hear it now,"



<p 406>



said Mrs. Kronborg; "and poor father never knew when

he sang sharp!  He used to say, `Mother, how do you always

know when they make mistakes practicing?'"  Mrs. Kron-

borg chuckled.



     Dr. Archie took her hand, still firm like the hand of a

young woman.  "It was lucky for her that you did know.

I always thought she got more from you than from any

of her teachers."



     "Except Wunsch; he was a real musician," said Mrs.

Kronborg respectfully.  "I gave her what chance I could,

in a crowded house.  I kept the other children out of the

parlor for her.  That was about all I could do.  If she wasn't

disturbed, she needed no watching.  She went after it like a

terrier after rats from the first, poor child.  She was down-

right afraid of it.  That's why I always encouraged her

taking Thor off to outlandish places.  When she was out of

the house, then she was rid of it."



     After they had recalled many pleasant memories to-

gether, Mrs. Kronborg said suddenly: "I always under-

stood about her going off without coming to see us that

time.  Oh, I know!  You had to keep your own counsel.

You were a good friend to her.  I've never forgot that."

She patted the doctor's sleeve and went on absently.

"There was something she didn't want to tell me, and

that's why she didn't come.  Something happened when

she was with those people in Mexico.  I worried for a good

while, but I guess she's come out of it all right.  She'd

had a pretty hard time, scratching along alone like that

when she was so young, and my farms in Nebraska were

down so low that I couldn't help her none.  That's no way

to send a girl out.  But I guess, whatever there was, she

wouldn't be afraid to tell me now."  Mrs. Kronborg

looked up at the photograph with a smile.  "She doesn't

look like she was beholding to anybody, does she?"



     "She isn't, Mrs. Kronborg.  She never has been.  That

was why she borrowed the money from me."



<p 407>





     "Oh, I knew she'd never have sent for you if she'd done

anything to shame us.  She was always proud."  Mrs.

Kronborg paused and turned a little on her side.  "It's

been quite a satisfaction to you and me, doctor, having

her voice turn out so fine.  The things you hope for don't

always turn out like that, by a long sight.  As long as old

Mrs. Kohler lived, she used always to translate what it

said about Thea in the German papers she sent.  I could

make some of it out myself,--it's not very different from

Swedish,--but it pleased the old lady.  She left Thea her

piece-picture of the burning of Moscow.  I've got it put

away in moth-balls for her, along with the oboe her grand-

father brought from Sweden.  I want her to take father's

oboe back there some day."  Mrs. Kronborg paused a

moment and compressed her lips.  "But I guess she'll take

a finer instrument than that with her, back to Sweden!"

she added.



     Her tone fairly startled the doctor, it was so vibrating

with a fierce, defiant kind of pride he had heard often in

Thea's voice.  He looked down wonderingly at his old friend

and patient.  After all, one never knew people to the core.

Did she, within her, hide some of that still passion of

which her daughter was all-compact?



     "That last summer at home wasn't very nice for her,"

Mrs. Kronborg began as placidly as if the fire had never

leaped up in her.  "The other children were acting-up

because they thought I might make a fuss over her and

give her the big-head.  We gave her the dare, somehow,

the lot of us, because we couldn't understand her changing

teachers and all that.  That's the trouble about giving the

dare to them quiet, unboastful children; you never know

how far it'll take 'em.  Well, we ought not to complain,

doctor; she's given us a good deal to think about."





     The next time Dr. Archie came to Moonstone, he came

to be a pall-bearer at Mrs. Kronborg's funeral.  When he



<p 408>



last looked at her, she was so serene and queenly that he

went back to Denver feeling almost as if he had helped

to bury Thea Kronborg herself.  The handsome head in

the coffin seemed to him much more really Thea than did

the radiant young woman in the picture, looking about

at the Gothic vaultings and greeting the Hall of Song.







<p 409>





                                IV





     ONE bright morning late in February Dr. Archie was

breakfasting comfortably at the Waldorf.  He had got

into Jersey City on an early train, and a red, windy sunrise

over the North River had given him a good appetite.  He

consulted the morning paper while he drank his coffee and

saw that "Lohengrin" was to be sung at the opera that

evening.  In the list of the artists who would appear was

the name "Kronborg."  Such abruptness rather startled

him.  "Kronborg": it was impressive and yet, somehow,

disrespectful; somewhat rude and brazen, on the back page

of the morning paper.  After breakfast he went to the hotel

ticket office and asked the girl if she could give him some-

thing for "Lohengrin," "near the front."  His manner was

a trifle awkward and he wondered whether the girl noticed

it.  Even if she did, of course, she could scarcely suspect.

Before the ticket stand he saw a bunch of blue posters

announcing the opera casts for the week.  There was

"Lohengrin," and under it he saw:--





        ELSA VON BRABANT . . . . Thea Kronborg.





     That looked better.  The girl gave him a ticket for a seat

which she said was excellent.  He paid for it and went out

to the cabstand.  He mentioned to the driver a number on

Riverside Drive and got into a taxi.  It would not, of

course, be the right thing to call upon Thea when she was

going to sing in the evening.  He knew that much, thank

goodness!  Fred Ottenburg had hinted to him that, more

than almost anything else, that would put one in wrong.



     When he reached the number to which he directed his

letters, he dismissed the cab and got out for a walk.  The



<p 410>



house in which Thea lived was as impersonal as the

Waldorf, and quite as large.  It was above 116th Street,

where the Drive narrows, and in front of it the shelving

bank dropped to the North River.  As Archie strolled about

the paths which traversed this slope, below the street level,

the fourteen stories of the apartment hotel rose above him

like a perpendicular cliff.  He had no idea on which floor

Thea lived, but he reflected, as his eye ran over the many

windows, that the outlook would be fine from any floor.

The forbidding hugeness of the house made him feel as if

he had expected to meet Thea in a crowd and had missed

her.  He did not really believe that she was hidden away

behind any of those glittering windows, or that he was to

hear her this evening.  His walk was curiously uninspiring

and unsuggestive.  Presently remembering that Ottenburg

had encouraged him to study his lesson, he went down to

the opera house and bought a libretto.  He had even brought

his old "Adler's German and English" in his trunk, and

after luncheon he settled down in his gilded suite at the

Waldorf with a big cigar and the text of "Lohengrin."



     The opera was announced for seven-forty-five, but at

half-past seven Archie took his seat in the right front of the

orchestra circle.  He had never been inside the Metropoli-

tan Opera House before, and the height of the audience

room, the rich color, and the sweep of the balconies were

not without their effect upon him.  He watched the house

fill with a growing feeling of expectation.  When the steel

curtain rose and the men of the orchestra took their places,

he felt distinctly nervous.  The burst of applause which

greeted the conductor keyed him still higher.  He found

that he had taken off his gloves and twisted them to a

string.  When the lights went down and the violins began

the overture, the place looked larger than ever; a great pit,

shadowy and solemn.  The whole atmosphere, he reflected,

was somehow more serious than he had anticipated.



     After the curtains were drawn back upon the scene beside



<p 411>



the Scheldt, he got readily into the swing of the story.  He

was so much interested in the bass who sang KING HENRY

that he had almost forgotten for what he was waiting so

nervously, when the HERALD began in stentorian tones to

summon ELSA VON BRABANT.  Then he began to realize that

he was rather frightened.  There was a flutter of white at

the back of the stage, and women began to come in: two,

four, six, eight, but not the right one.  It flashed across

him that this was something like buck-fever, the paralyz-

ing moment that comes upon a man when his first elk

looks at him through the bushes, under its great antlers;

the moment when a man's mind is so full of shooting that

he forgets the gun in his hand until the buck nods adieu to

him from a distant hill.



     All at once, before the buck had left him, she was there.

Yes, unquestionably it was she.  Her eyes were downcast,

but the head, the cheeks, the chin--there could be no

mistake; she advanced slowly, as if she were walking in

her sleep.  Some one spoke to her; she only inclined her

head.  He spoke again, and she bowed her head still lower.

Archie had forgotten his libretto, and he had not counted

upon these long pauses.  He had expected her to appear

and sing and reassure him.  They seemed to be waiting for

her.  Did she ever forget?  Why in thunder didn't she--

She made a sound, a faint one.  The people on the stage

whispered together and seemed confounded.  His nervous-

ness was absurd.  She must have done this often before;

she knew her bearings.  She made another sound, but he

could make nothing of it.  Then the King sang to her, and

Archie began to remember where they were in the story.

She came to the front of the stage, lifted her eyes for the

first time, clasped her hands and began, "EINSAM IN TRUBEN

TAGEN."



     Yes, it was exactly like buck-fever.  Her face was there,

toward the house now, before his eyes, and he positively

could not see it.  She was singing, at last, and he positively



<p 412>



could not hear her.  He was conscious of nothing but an

uncomfortable dread and a sense of crushing disappoint-

ment.  He had, after all, missed her.  Whatever was there,

she was not there--for him.



     The King interrupted her.  She began again, "IN LICHTER

WAFFEN SCHEINE."  Archie did not know when his buck-

fever passed, but presently he found that he was sitting

quietly in a darkened house, not listening to but dreaming

upon a river of silver sound.  He felt apart from the others,

drifting alone on the melody, as if he had been alone with it

for a long while and had known it all before.  His power of

attention was not great just then, but in so far as it went

he seemed to be looking through an exalted calmness at a

beautiful woman from far away, from another sort of life

and feeling and understanding than his own, who had in her

face something he had known long ago, much brightened

and beautified.  As a lad he used to believe that the faces

of people who died were like that in the next world; the

same faces, but shining with the light of a new understand-

ing.  No, Ottenburg had not prepared him!



     What he felt was admiration and estrangement.  The

homely reunion, that he had somehow expected, now

seemed foolish.  Instead of feeling proud that he knew her

better than all these people about him, he felt chagrined

at his own ingenuousness.  For he did not know her better.

This woman he had never known; she had somehow de-

voured his little friend, as the wolf ate up Red Ridinghood.

Beautiful, radiant, tender as she was, she chilled his old

affection; that sort of feeling was not appropriate.  She

seemed much, much farther away from him than she had

seemed all those years when she was in Germany.  The

ocean he could cross, but there was something here he

could not cross.  There was a moment, when she turned to

the King and smiled that rare, sunrise smile of her child-

hood, when he thought she was coming back to him.  After

the HERALD'S second call for her champion, when she knelt



<p 413>



in her impassioned prayer, there was again something

familiar, a kind of wild wonder that she had had the power

to call up long ago.  But she merely reminded him of Thea;

this was not the girl herself.



     After the tenor came on, the doctor ceased trying to

make the woman before him fit into any of his cherished

recollections.  He took her, in so far as he could, for what

she was then and there.  When the knight raised the

kneeling girl and put his mailed hand on her hair, when she

lifted to him a face full of worship and passionate humility,

Archie gave up his last reservation.  He knew no more

about her than did the hundreds around him, who sat in

the shadow and looked on, as he looked, some with more

understanding, some with less.  He knew as much about

ORTRUDE or LOHENGRIN as he knew about ELSA--more, be-

cause she went further than they, she sustained the leg-

endary beauty of her conception more consistently.  Even

he could see that.  Attitudes, movements, her face, her

white arms and fingers, everything was suffused with a

rosy tenderness, a warm humility, a gracious and yet--

to him--wholly estranging beauty.



     During the balcony singing in the second act the doctor's

thoughts were as far away from Moonstone as the singer's

doubtless were.  He had begun, indeed, to feel the exhila-

ration of getting free from personalities, of being released

from his own past as well as from Thea Kronborg's.  It was

very much, he told himself, like a military funeral, exalting

and impersonal.  Something old died in one, and out of it

something new was born.  During the duet with ORTRUDE,

and the splendors of the wedding processional, this new

feeling grew and grew.  At the end of the act there were

many curtain calls and ELSA acknowledged them, brilliant,

gracious, spirited, with her far-breaking smile; but on the

whole she was harder and more self-contained before the

curtain than she was in the scene behind it.  Archie did his

part in the applause that greeted her, but it was the new



<p 414>



and wonderful he applauded, not the old and dear.  His

personal, proprietary pride in her was frozen out.



     He walked about the house during the ENTR'ACTE, and here

and there among the people in the foyer he caught the

name "Kronborg."  On the staircase, in front of the coffee-

room, a long-haired youth with a fat face was discoursing

to a group of old women about "die Kronborg."  Dr. Archie

gathered that he had crossed on the boat with her.



     After the performance was over, Archie took a taxi and

started for Riverside Drive.  He meant to see it through

to-night.  When he entered the reception hall of the hotel

before which he had strolled that morning, the hall porter

challenged him.  He said he was waiting for Miss Kronborg.

The porter looked at him suspiciously and asked whether

he had an appointment.  He answered brazenly that he

had.  He was not used to being questioned by hall boys.

Archie sat first in one tapestry chair and then in another,

keeping a sharp eye on the people who came in and went

up in the elevators.  He walked about and looked at his

watch.  An hour dragged by.  No one had come in from the

street now for about twenty minutes, when two women en-

tered, carrying a great many flowers and followed by a tall

young man in chauffeur's uniform.  Archie advanced to-

ward the taller of the two women, who was veiled and

carried her head very firmly.  He confronted her just as

she reached the elevator.  Although he did not stand di-

rectly in her way, something in his attitude compelled her

to stop.  She gave him a piercing, defiant glance through

the white scarf that covered her face.  Then she lifted her

hand and brushed the scarf back from her head.  There

was still black on her brows and lashes.  She was very pale

and her face was drawn and deeply lined.  She looked, the

doctor told himself with a sinking heart, forty years old.

Her suspicious, mystified stare cleared slowly.



     "Pardon me," the doctor murmured, not knowing just

how to address her here before the porters, "I came up



<p 415>



from the opera.  I merely wanted to say good-night to

you."



     Without speaking, still looking incredulous, she pushed

him into the elevator.  She kept her hand on his arm while

the cage shot up, and she looked away from him, frowning,

as if she were trying to remember or realize something.

When the cage stopped, she pushed him out of the elevator

through another door, which a maid opened, into a square

hall.  There she sank down on a chair and looked up at

him.



     "Why didn't you let me know?" she asked in a hoarse

voice.



     Archie heard himself laughing the old, embarrassed

laugh that seldom happened to him now.  "Oh, I wanted

to take my chance with you, like anybody else.  It's been

so long, now!"



     She took his hand through her thick glove and her head

dropped forward.  "Yes, it has been long," she said in the

same husky voice, "and so much has happened."



     "And you are so tired, and I am a clumsy old fellow to

break in on you to-night," the doctor added sympathetic-

ally.  "Forgive me, this time."  He bent over and put his

hand soothingly on her shoulder.  He felt a strong shudder

run through her from head to foot.



     Still bundled in her fur coat as she was, she threw both

arms about him and hugged him.  "Oh, Dr. Archie,

DR. ARCHIE,"--she shook him,--"don't let me go.  Hold

on, now you're here," she laughed, breaking away from

him at the same moment and sliding out of her fur coat.

She left it for the maid to pick up and pushed the doctor

into the sitting-room, where she turned on the lights.  "Let

me LOOK at you.  Yes; hands, feet, head, shoulders--just

the same.  You've grown no older.  You can't say as much

for me, can you?"



     She was standing in the middle of the room, in a white

silk shirtwaist and a short black velvet skirt, which some-



<p 416>



how suggested that they had `cut off her petticoats all

round about.'  She looked distinctly clipped and plucked.

Her hair was parted in the middle and done very close to

her head, as she had worn it under the wig.  She looked

like a fugitive, who had escaped from something in clothes

caught up at hazard.  It flashed across Dr. Archie that she

was running away from the other woman down at the

opera house, who had used her hardly.



     He took a step toward her.  "I can't tell a thing in the

world about you, Thea--if I may still call you that."



     She took hold of the collar of his overcoat.  "Yes, call

me that.  Do: I like to hear it.  You frighten me a little,

but I expect I frighten you more.  I'm always a scarecrow

after I sing a long part like that--so high, too."  She

absently pulled out the handkerchief that protruded from

his breast pocket and began to wipe the black paint off her

eyebrows and lashes.  "I can't take you in much to-night,

but I must see you for a little while."  She pushed him to a

chair.  "I shall be more recognizable to-morrow.  You

mustn't think of me as you see me to-night.  Come at four

to-morrow afternoon and have tea with me.  Can you?

That's good."



     She sat down in a low chair beside him and leaned for-

ward, drawing her shoulders together.  She seemed to him

inappropriately young and inappropriately old, shorn of

her long tresses at one end and of her long robes at the

other.



     "How do you happen to be here?" she asked abruptly.

"How can you leave a silver mine?  I couldn't!  Sure

nobody'll cheat you?  But you can explain everything to-

morrow."  She paused.  "You remember how you sewed

me up in a poultice, once?  I wish you could to-night.  I

need a poultice, from top to toe.  Something very disagree-

able happened down there.  You said you were out front?

Oh, don't say anything about it.  I always know exactly

how it goes, unfortunately.  I was rotten in the balcony.



<p 417>



I never get that.  You didn't notice it?  Probably not, but

I did."



     Here the maid appeared at the door and her mistress

rose.  "My supper?  Very well, I'll come.  I'd ask you to

stay, doctor, but there wouldn't be enough for two.  They

seldom send up enough for one,"--she spoke bitterly.

"I haven't got a sense of you yet,"--turning directly to

Archie again.  "You haven't been here.  You've only an-

nounced yourself, and told me you are coming to-morrow.

You haven't seen me, either.  This is not I.  But I'll be

here waiting for you to-morrow, my whole works!  Good-

night, till then."  She patted him absently on the sleeve

and gave him a little shove toward the door.







<p 418>





                                 V





     WHEN Archie got back to his hotel at two o'clock in

the morning, he found Fred Ottenburg's card under

his door, with a message scribbled across the top: "When

you come in, please call up room 811, this hotel."  A mo-

ment later Fred's voice reached him over the telephone.



     "That you, Archie?  Won't you come up?  I'm having

some supper and I'd like company.  Late?  What does that

matter?  I won't keep you long."



     Archie dropped his overcoat and set out for room 811.

He found Ottenburg in the act of touching a match to a

chafing-dish, at a table laid for two in his sitting-room.

"I'm catering here," he announced cheerfully.  "I let the

waiter off at midnight, after he'd set me up.  You'll have

to account for yourself, Archie."



     The doctor laughed, pointing to three wine-coolers under

the table.  "Are you expecting guests?"



     "Yes, two."  Ottenburg held up two fingers,--"you,

and my higher self.  He's a thirsty boy, and I don't invite

him often.  He has been known to give me a headache.

Now, where have you been, Archie, until this shocking

hour?"



     "Bah, you've been banting!" the doctor exclaimed,

pulling out his white gloves as he searched for his handker-

chief and throwing them into a chair.  Ottenburg was in

evening clothes and very pointed dress shoes.  His white

waistcoat, upon which the doctor had fixed a challenging

eye, went down straight from the top button, and he wore

a camelia.  He was conspicuously brushed and trimmed

and polished.  His smoothly controlled excitement was

wholly different from his usual easy cordiality, though he

had his face, as well as his figure, well in hand.  On the



<p 419>



serving-table there was an empty champagne pint and a

glass.  He had been having a little starter, the doctor told

himself, and would probably be running on high gear before

he got through.  There was even now an air of speed about

him.



     "Been, Freddy?"--the doctor at last took up his ques-

tion.  "I expect I've been exactly where you have.  Why

didn't you tell me you were coming on?"



     "I wasn't, Archie."  Fred lifted the cover of the chafing-

dish and stirred the contents.  He stood behind the table,

holding the lid with his handkerchief.  "I had never thought

of such a thing.  But Landry, a young chap who plays her

accompaniments and who keeps an eye out for me, tele-

graphed me that Madame Rheinecker had gone to Atlantic

City with a bad throat, and Thea might have a chance to

sing ELSA.  She has sung it only twice here before, and I

missed it in Dresden.  So I came on.  I got in at four this

afternoon and saw you registered, but I thought I would

n't butt in.  How lucky you got here just when she was

coming on for this.  You couldn't have hit a better time."

Ottenburg stirred the contents of the dish faster and put

in more sherry.  "And where have you been since twelve

o'clock, may I ask?"



     Archie looked rather self-conscious, as he sat down on a

fragile gilt chair that rocked under him, and stretched out

his long legs.  "Well, if you'll believe me, I had the bru-

tality to go to see her.  I wanted to identify her.  Couldn't

wait."



     Ottenburg placed the cover quickly on the chafing-dish

and took a step backward.  "You did, old sport?  My word!

None but the brave deserve the fair.  Well,"--he stooped

to turn the wine,--"and how was she?"



     "She seemed rather dazed, and pretty well used up.  She

seemed disappointed in herself, and said she hadn't done

herself justice in the balcony scene."



     "Well, if she didn't, she's not the first.  Beastly stuff to



<p 420>



sing right in there; lies just on the `break' in the voice."

Fred pulled a bottle out of the ice and drew the cork.

Lifting his glass he looked meaningly at Archie.  "You

know who, doctor.  Here goes!"  He drank off his glass

with a sigh of satisfaction.  After he had turned the lamp

low under the chafing-dish, he remained standing, looking

pensively down at the food on the table.  "Well, she

rather pulled it off!  As a backer, you're a winner, Archie.

I congratulate you."  Fred poured himself another glass.

"Now you must eat something, and so must I.  Here, get

off that bird cage and find a steady chair.  This stuff ought

to be rather good; head waiter's suggestion.  Smells all

right."  He bent over the chafing-dish and began to serve

the contents.  "Perfectly innocuous: mushrooms and truf-

fles and a little crab-meat.  And now, on the level, Archie,

how did it hit you?"



     Archie turned a frank smile to his friend and shook his

head.  "It was all miles beyond me, of course, but it gave

me a pulse.  The general excitement got hold of me, I sup-

pose.  I like your wine, Freddy."  He put down his glass.

"It goes to the spot to-night.  She WAS all right, then?

You weren't disappointed?"



     "Disappointed?  My dear Archie, that's the high voice

we dream of; so pure and yet so virile and human.  That

combination hardly ever happens with sopranos."  Otten-

burg sat down and turned to the doctor, speaking calmly

and trying to dispel his friend's manifest bewilderment.

"You see, Archie, there's the voice itself, so beautiful and

individual, and then there's something else; the thing in it

which responds to every shade of thought and feeling,

spontaneously, almost unconsciously.  That color has to

be born in a singer, it can't be acquired; lots of beautiful

voices haven't a vestige of it.  It's almost like another

gift--the rarest of all.  The voice simply is the mind and

is the heart.  It can't go wrong in interpretation, because it

has in it the thing that makes all interpretation.  That's



<p 421>



why you feel so sure of her.  After you've listened to her

for an hour or so, you aren't afraid of anything.  All the

little dreads you have with other artists vanish.  You lean

back and you say to yourself, `No, THAT voice will never be-

tray.'  TREULICH GEFUHRT, TREULICH BEWACHT."



     Archie looked envyingly at Fred's excited, triumphant

face.  How satisfactory it must be, he thought, to really

know what she was doing and not to have to take it on

hearsay.  He took up his glass with a sigh.  "I seem to

need a good deal of cooling off to-night.  I'd just as lief

forget the Reform Party for once.



     "Yes, Fred," he went on seriously; "I thought it

sounded very beautiful, and I thought she was very

beautiful, too.  I never imagined she could be as beautiful

as that."



     "Wasn't she?  Every attitude a picture, and always the

right kind of picture, full of that legendary, supernatural

thing she gets into it.  I never heard the prayer sung like

that before.  That look that came in her eyes; it went right

out through the back of the roof.  Of course, you get an

ELSA who can look through walls like that, and visions and

Grail-knights happen naturally.  She becomes an abbess,

that girl, after LOHENGRIN leaves her.  She's made to live

with ideas and enthusiasms, not with a husband."  Fred

folded his arms, leaned back in his chair, and began to

sing softly:--





          <"In lichter Waffen Scheine,



            Ein Ritter nahte da.">





     "Doesn't she die, then, at the end?" the doctor asked

guardedly.



     Fred smiled, reaching under the table.  "Some ELSAS do;

she didn't.  She left me with the distinct impression that

she was just beginning.  Now, doctor, here's a cold one."

He twirled a napkin smoothly about the green glass, the

cork gave and slipped out with a soft explosion.  "And now

we must have another toast.  It's up to you, this time."



<p 422>





     The doctor watched the agitation in his glass.  "The

same," he said without lifting his eyes.  "That's good

enough.  I can't raise you."



     Fred leaned forward, and looked sharply into his face.

"That's the point; how COULD you raise me?  Once again!"



     "Once again, and always the same!"  The doctor put

down his glass.  "This doesn't seem to produce any symp-

toms in me to-night."  He lit a cigar.  "Seriously, Freddy,

I wish I knew more about what she's driving at.  It makes

me jealous, when you are so in it and I'm not."



     "In it?"  Fred started up.  "My God, haven't you seen

her this blessed night?--when she'd have kicked any

other man down the elevator shaft, if I know her.  Leave

me something; at least what I can pay my five bucks for."



     "Seems to me you get a good deal for your five bucks,"

said Archie ruefully.  "And that, after all, is what she cares

about,--what people get."



     Fred lit a cigarette, took a puff or two, and then threw it

away.  He was lounging back in his chair, and his face was

pale and drawn hard by that mood of intense concentration

which lurks under the sunny shallows of the vineyard.  In

his voice there was a longer perspective than usual, a slight

remoteness.  "You see, Archie, it's all very simple, a natu-

ral development.  It's exactly what Mahler said back there

in the beginning, when she sang WOGLINDE.  It's the idea,

the basic idea, pulsing behind every bar she sings.  She

simplifies a character down to the musical idea it's built on,

and makes everything conform to that.  The people who

chatter about her being a great actress don't seem to get

the notion of where SHE gets the notion.  It all goes back to

her original endowment, her tremendous musical talent.

Instead of inventing a lot of business and expedients to

suggest character, she knows the thing at the root, and lets

the musical pattern take care of her.  The score pours her

into all those lovely postures, makes the light and shadow

go over her face, lifts her and drops her.  She lies on it, the



<p 423>



way she used to lie on the Rhine music.  Talk about

rhythm!"



     The doctor frowned dubiously as a third bottle made its

appearance above the cloth.  "Aren't you going in rather

strong?"



     Fred laughed.  "No, I'm becoming too sober.  You see

this is breakfast now; kind of wedding breakfast.  I feel

rather weddingish.  I don't mind.  You know," he went on

as the wine gurgled out, "I was thinking to-night when

they sprung the wedding music, how any fool can have

that stuff played over him when he walks up the aisle with

some dough-faced little hussy who's hooked him.  But it

isn't every fellow who can see--well, what we saw to-

night.  There are compensations in life, Dr. Howard Archie,

though they come in disguise.  Did you notice her when she

came down the stairs?  Wonder where she gets that bright-

and-morning star look?  Carries to the last row of the

family circle.  I moved about all over the house.  I'll tell

you a secret, Archie: that carrying power was one of the

first things that put me wise.  Noticed it down there in

Arizona, in the open.  That, I said, belongs only to the big

ones."  Fred got up and began to move rhythmically about

the room, his hands in his pockets.  The doctor was aston-

ished at his ease and steadiness, for there were slight lapses

in his speech.  "You see, Archie, ELSA isn't a part that's

particularly suited to Thea's voice at all, as I see her voice.

It's over-lyrical for her.  She makes it, but there's nothing

in it that fits her like a glove, except, maybe, that long

duet in the third act.  There, of course,"--he held out his

hands as if he were measuring something,--"we know

exactly where we are.  But wait until they give her a chance

at something that lies properly in her voice, and you'll see

me rosier than I am to-night."



     Archie smoothed the tablecloth with his hand.  "I am

sure I don't want to see you any rosier, Fred."



     Ottenburg threw back his head and laughed.  "It's en-



<p 424>



thusiasm, doctor.  It's not the wine.  I've got as much in-

flated as this for a dozen trashy things: brewers' dinners

and political orgies.  You, too, have your extravagances,

Archie.  And what I like best in you is this particular

enthusiasm, which is not at all practical or sensible, which

is downright Quixotic.  You are not altogether what you

seem, and you have your reservations.  Living among the

wolves, you have not become one.  LUPIBUS VIVENDI NON

LUPUS SUM."



     The doctor seemed embarrassed.  "I was just thinking

how tired she looked, plucked of all her fine feathers, while

we get all the fun.  Instead of sitting here carousing, we

ought to go solemnly to bed."



     "I get your idea."  Ottenburg crossed to the window and

threw it open.  "Fine night outside; a hag of a moon just

setting.  It begins to smell like morning.  After all, Archie,

think of the lonely and rather solemn hours we've spent

waiting for all this, while she's been--reveling."



     Archie lifted his brows.  "I somehow didn't get the idea

to-night that she revels much."



     "I don't mean this sort of thing."  Fred turned toward

the light and stood with his back to the window.  "That,"

with a nod toward the wine-cooler, "is only a cheap imita-

tion, that any poor stiff-fingered fool can buy and feel his

shell grow thinner.  But take it from me, no matter what

she pays, or how much she may see fit to lie about it, the

real, the master revel is hers."  He leaned back against the

window sill and crossed his arms.  "Anybody with all that

voice and all that talent and all that beauty, has her hour.

Her hour," he went on deliberately, "when she can say,

'there it is, at last, WIE IM TRAUM ICH--





          "`As in my dream I dreamed it,



            As in my will it was.'"





     He stood silent a moment, twisting the flower from his

coat by the stem and staring at the blank wall with hag-



<p 425>



gard abstraction.  "Even I can say to-night, Archie," he

brought out slowly,





          "`As in my dream I dreamed it,

            As in my will it was.'



Now, doctor, you may leave me.  I'm beautifully drunk,

but not with anything that ever grew in France."



     The doctor rose.  Fred tossed his flower out of the win-

dow behind him and came toward the door.  "I say," he

called, "have you a date with anybody?"



     The doctor paused, his hand on the knob.  "With Thea,

you mean?  Yes.  I'm to go to her at four this afternoon--

if you haven't paralyzed me."



     "Well, you won't eat me, will you, if I break in and send

up my card?  She'll probably turn me down cold, but that

won't hurt my feelings.  If she ducks me, you tell her for me,

that to spite me now she'd have to cut off more than she

can spare.  Good-night, Archie."







<p 426>





                                VI





     IT was late on the morning after the night she sang ELSA,

when Thea Kronborg stirred uneasily in her bed.  The

room was darkened by two sets of window shades, and the

day outside was thick and cloudy.  She turned and tried

to recapture unconsciousness, knowing that she would not

be able to do so.  She dreaded waking stale and disap-

pointed after a great effort.  The first thing that came was

always the sense of the futility of such endeavor, and of

the absurdity of trying too hard.  Up to a certain point,

say eighty degrees, artistic endeavor could be fat and

comfortable, methodical and prudent.  But if you went

further than that, if you drew yourself up toward ninety

degrees, you parted with your defenses and left yourself

exposed to mischance.  The legend was that in those upper

reaches you might be divine; but you were much likelier

to be ridiculous.  Your public wanted just about eighty

degrees; if you gave it more it blew its nose and put a

crimp in you.  In the morning, especially, it seemed to

her very probable that whatever struggled above the good

average was not quite sound.  Certainly very little of that

superfluous ardor, which cost so dear, ever got across the

footlights.  These misgivings waited to pounce upon her

when she wakened.  They hovered about her bed like

vultures.



     She reached under her pillow for her handkerchief, with-

out opening her eyes.  She had a shadowy memory that

there was to be something unusual, that this day held more

disquieting possibilities than days commonly held.  There

was something she dreaded; what was it?  Oh, yes, Dr.

Archie was to come at four.



     A reality like Dr. Archie, poking up out of the past, re-



<p 427>



minded one of disappointments and losses, of a freedom

that was no more: reminded her of blue, golden mornings

long ago, when she used to waken with a burst of joy at

recovering her precious self and her precious world; when

she never lay on her pillows at eleven o'clock like some-

thing the waves had washed up.  After all, why had he

come?  It had been so long, and so much had happened.

The things she had lost, he would miss readily enough.

What she had gained, he would scarcely perceive.  He, and

all that he recalled, lived for her as memories.  In sleep,

and in hours of illness or exhaustion, she went back to

them and held them to her heart.  But they were better

as memories.  They had nothing to do with the struggle

that made up her actual life.  She felt drearily that she

was not flexible enough to be the person her old friend

expected her to be, the person she herself wished to be

with him.



     Thea reached for the bell and rang twice,--a signal to

her maid to order her breakfast.  She rose and ran up the

window shades and turned on the water in her bathroom,

glancing into the mirror apprehensively as she passed it.

Her bath usually cheered her, even on low mornings like

this.  Her white bathroom, almost as large as her sleeping-

room, she regarded as a refuge.  When she turned the key

behind her, she left care and vexation on the other side of

the door.  Neither her maid nor the management nor her

letters nor her accompanist could get at her now.



     When she pinned her braids about her head, dropped

her nightgown and stepped out to begin her Swedish move-

ments, she was a natural creature again, and it was so that

she liked herself best.  She slid into the tub with anticipa-

tion and splashed and tumbled about a good deal.  What-

ever else she hurried, she never hurried her bath.  She

used her brushes and sponges and soaps like toys, fairly

playing in the water.  Her own body was always a cheer-

ing sight to her.  When she was careworn, when her mind



<p 428>



felt old and tired, the freshness of her physical self, her

long, firm lines, the smoothness of her skin, reassured her.

This morning, because of awakened memories, she looked

at herself more carefully than usual, and was not discour-

aged.  While she was in the tub she began to whistle

softly the tenor aria, "AH!  FUYEZ, DOUCE IMAGE," somehow

appropriate to the bath.  After a noisy moment under the

cold shower, she stepped out on the rug flushed and glow-

ing, threw her arms above her head, and rose on her toes,

keeping the elevation as long as she could.  When she

dropped back on her heels and began to rub herself with

the towels, she took up the aria again, and felt quite in the

humor for seeing Dr. Archie.  After she had returned to her

bed, the maid brought her letters and the morning papers

with her breakfast.



     "Telephone Mr. Landry and ask him if he can come at

half-past three, Theresa, and order tea to be brought up

at five."





     When Howard Archie was admitted to Thea's apart-

ment that afternoon, he was shown into the music-room

back of the little reception room.  Thea was sitting in a

davenport behind the piano, talking to a young man whom

she later introduced as her friend Mr. Landry.  As she

rose, and came to meet him, Archie felt a deep relief, a

sudden thankfulness.  She no longer looked clipped and

plucked, or dazed and fleeing.




     Dr. Archie neglected to take account of the young man

to whom he was presented.  He kept Thea's hands and

held her where he met her, taking in the light, lively sweep

of her hair, her clear green eyes and her throat that came

up strong and dazzlingly white from her green velvet gown.

The chin was as lovely as ever, the cheeks as smooth.

All the lines of last night had disappeared.  Only at the

outer corners of her eyes, between the eye and the temple,

were the faintest indications of a future attack--mere



<p 429>



kitten scratches that playfully hinted where one day the

cat would claw her.  He studied her without any embar-

rassment.  Last night everything had been awkward; but

now, as he held her hands, a kind of harmony came between

them, a reestablishment of confidence.



     "After all, Thea,--in spite of all, I still know you," he

murmured.



     She took his arm and led him up to the young man who

was standing beside the piano.  "Mr. Landry knows all

about you, Dr. Archie.  He has known about you for many

years."  While the two men shook hands she stood between

them, drawing them together by her presence and her

glances.  "When I first went to Germany, Landry was

studying there.  He used to be good enough to work with

me when I could not afford to have an accompanist for

more than two hours a day.  We got into the way of work-

ing together.  He is a singer, too, and has his own career to

look after, but he still manages to give me some time.  I

want you to be friends."  She smiled from one to the

other.



     The rooms, Archie noticed, full of last night's flowers,

were furnished in light colors, the hotel bleakness of them

a little softened by a magnificent Steinway piano, white

bookshelves full of books and scores, some drawings of

ballet dancers, and the very deep sofa behind the piano.



     "Of course," Archie asked apologetically, "you have

seen the papers?"



     "Very cordial, aren't they?  They evidently did not

expect as much as I did.  ELSA is not really in my voice.

I can sing the music, but I have to go after it."



     "That is exactly," the doctor came out boldly, "what

Fred Ottenburg said this morning."



     They had remained standing, the three of them, by the

piano, where the gray afternoon light was strongest.  Thea

turned to the doctor with interest.  "Is Fred in town?

They were from him, then--some flowers that came last



<p 430>



night without a card."  She indicated the white lilacs on

the window sill.  "Yes, he would know, certainly," she said

thoughtfully.  "Why don't we sit down?  There will be

some tea for you in a minute, Landry.  He's very depend-

ent upon it," disapprovingly to Archie.  "Now tell me,

Doctor, did you really have a good time last night, or were

you uncomfortable?  Did you feel as if I were trying to

hold my hat on by my eyebrows?"



     He smiled.  "I had all kinds of a time.  But I had no feel-

ing of that sort.  I couldn't be quite sure that it was you at

all.  That was why I came up here last night.  I felt as if

I'd lost you."



     She leaned toward him and brushed his sleeve reassur-

ingly.  "Then I didn't give you an impression of painful

struggle?  Landry was singing at Weber and Fields' last

night.  He didn't get in until the performance was half

over.  But I see the TRIBUNE man felt that I was working

pretty hard.  Did you see that notice, Oliver?"



     Dr. Archie looked closely at the red-headed young man

for the first time, and met his lively brown eyes, full of a

droll, confiding sort of humor.  Mr. Landry was not pre-

possessing.  He was undersized and clumsily made, with a

red, shiny face and a sharp little nose that looked as if it

had been whittled out of wood and was always in the air,

on the scent of something.  Yet it was this queer little

beak, with his eyes, that made his countenance anything

of a face at all.  From a distance he looked like the grocery-

man's delivery boy in a small town.  His dress seemed an

acknowledgment of his grotesqueness: a short coat, like a

little boys' roundabout, and a vest fantastically sprigged

and dotted, over a lavender shirt.



     At the sound of a muffled buzz, Mr. Landry sprang up.



     "May I answer the telephone for you?"  He went to the

writing-table and took up the receiver.  "Mr. Ottenburg is

downstairs," he said, turning to Thea and holding the

mouthpiece against his coat.



<p 431>





     "Tell him to come up," she replied without hesitation.

"How long are you going to be in town, Dr. Archie?"



     "Oh, several weeks, if you'll let me stay.  I won't hang

around and be a burden to you, but I want to try to get

educated up to you, though I expect it's late to begin."



     Thea rose and touched him lightly on the shoulder.

"Well, you'll never be any younger, will you?"



     "I'm not so sure about that," the doctor replied gal-

lantly.



     The maid appeared at the door and announced Mr. Fred-

erick Ottenburg.  Fred came in, very much got up, the

doctor reflected, as he watched him bending over Thea's

hand.  He was still pale and looked somewhat chastened,

and the lock of hair that hung down over his forehead was

distinctly moist.  But his black afternoon coat, his gray tie

and gaiters were of a correctness that Dr. Archie could

never attain for all the efforts of his faithful slave, Van

Deusen, the Denver haberdasher.  To be properly up to

those tricks, the doctor supposed, you had to learn them

young.  If he were to buy a silk hat that was the twin of

Ottenburg's, it would be shaggy in a week, and he could

never carry it as Fred held his.



     Ottenburg had greeted Thea in German, and as she

replied in the same language, Archie joined Mr. Landry at

the window.  "You know Mr. Ottenburg, he tells me?"



     Mr. Landry's eyes twinkled.  "Yes, I regularly follow

him about, when he's in town.  I would, even if he didn't

send me such wonderful Christmas presents: Russian vodka

by the half-dozen!"



     Thea called to them, "Come, Mr. Ottenburg is calling on

all of us.  Here's the tea."



     The maid opened the door and two waiters from down-

stairs appeared with covered trays.  The tea-table was in

the parlor.  Thea drew Ottenburg with her and went to

inspect it.  "Where's the rum?  Oh, yes, in that thing!

Everything seems to be here, but send up some currant



<p 432>



preserves and cream cheese for Mr. Ottenburg.  And in

about fifteen minutes, bring some fresh toast.  That's all,

thank you."



     For the next few minutes there was a clatter of teacups

and responses about sugar.  "Landry always takes rum.

I'm glad the rest of you don't.  I'm sure it's bad."  Thea

poured the tea standing and got through with it as quickly

as possible, as if it were a refreshment snatched between

trains.  The tea-table and the little room in which it stood

seemed to be out of scale with her long step, her long reach,

and the energy of her movements.  Dr. Archie, standing

near her, was pleasantly aware of the animation of her

figure.  Under the clinging velvet, her body seemed in-

dependent and unsubdued.



     They drifted, with their plates and cups, back to the

music-room.  When Thea followed them, Ottenburg put

down his tea suddenly.  "Aren't you taking anything?

Please let me."  He started back to the table.



     "No, thank you, nothing.  I'm going to run over that

aria for you presently, to convince you that I can do it.

How did the duet go, with Schlag?"



     She was standing in the doorway and Fred came up to

her: "That you'll never do any better.  You've worked

your voice into it perfectly.  Every NUANCE--wonder-

ful!"



     "Think so?"  She gave him a sidelong glance and spoke

with a certain gruff shyness which did not deceive anybody,

and was not meant to deceive.  The tone was equivalent to

"Keep it up.  I like it, but I'm awkward with it."



     Fred held her by the door and did keep it up, furiously,

for full five minutes.  She took it with some confusion, seem-

ing all the while to be hesitating, to be arrested in her

course and trying to pass him.  But she did not really try

to pass, and her color deepened.  Fred spoke in German,

and Archie caught from her an occasional JA?  SO? mut-

tered rather than spoken.



<p 433>





     When they rejoined Landry and Dr. Archie, Fred took

up his tea again.  "I see you're singing VENUS Saturday

night.  Will they never let you have a chance at ELIZABETH?"



     She shrugged her shoulders.  "Not here.  There are so

many singers here, and they try us out in such a stingy way.

Think of it, last year I came over in October, and it was the

first of December before I went on at all!  I'm often sorry

I left Dresden."



     "Still," Fred argued, "Dresden is limited."



     "Just so, and I've begun to sigh for those very limita-

tions.  In New York everything is impersonal.  Your audi-

ence never knows its own mind, and its mind is never twice

the same.  I'd rather sing where the people are pig-headed

and throw carrots at you if you don't do it the way they

like it.  The house here is splendid, and the night audi-

ences are exciting.  I hate the matinees; like singing at a

KAFFEKLATSCH."  She rose and turned on the lights.



     "Ah!" Fred exclaimed, "why do you do that?  That is

a signal that tea is over."  He got up and drew out his

gloves.



     "Not at all.  Shall you be here Saturday night?" She

sat down on the piano bench and leaned her elbow back on

the keyboard.  "Necker sings ELIZABETH.  Make Dr. Archie

go.  Everything she sings is worth hearing."



     "But she's failing so.  The last time I heard her she had

no voice at all.  She IS a poor vocalist!"



     Thea cut him off.  "She's a great artist, whether she's in

voice or not, and she's the only one here.  If you want a big

voice, you can take my ORTRUDE of last night; that's big

enough, and vulgar enough."



     Fred laughed and turned away, this time with decision.

"I don't want her!" he protested energetically.  "I only

wanted to get a rise out of you.  I like Necker's ELIZABETH

well enough.  I like your VENUS well enough, too."



     "It's a beautiful part, and it's often dreadfully sung.

It's very hard to sing, of course."



<p 434>





     Ottenburg bent over the hand she held out to him.  "For

an uninvited guest, I've fared very well.  You were nice

to let me come up.  I'd have been terribly cut up if you'd

sent me away.  May I?"  He kissed her hand lightly and

backed toward the door, still smiling, and promising to

keep an eye on Archie.  "He can't be trusted at all, Thea.

One of the waiters at Martin's worked a Tourainian hare

off on him at luncheon yesterday, for seven twenty-five."



     Thea broke into a laugh, the deep one he recognized.

"Did he have a ribbon on, this hare?  Did they bring him

in a gilt cage?"



     "No,"--Archie spoke up for himself,--"they brought

him in a brown sauce, which was very good.  He didn't

taste very different from any rabbit."



     "Probably came from a push-cart on the East Side."

Thea looked at her old friend commiseratingly.  "Yes, DO

keep an eye on him, Fred.  I had no idea," shaking her

head.  "Yes, I'll be obliged to you."



     "Count on me!"  Their eyes met in a gay smile, and

Fred bowed himself out.







<p 435>





                                VII





     ON Saturday night Dr. Archie went with Fred Otten-

burg to hear "Tannhauser."  Thea had a rehearsal

on Sunday afternoon, but as she was not on the bill again

until Wednesday, she promised to dine with Archie and

Ottenburg on Monday, if they could make the dinner

early.



     At a little after eight on Monday evening, the three

friends returned to Thea's apartment and seated them-

selves for an hour of quiet talk.



     "I'm sorry we couldn't have had Landry with us to-

night," Thea said, "but he's on at Weber and Fields' every

night now.  You ought to hear him, Dr. Archie.  He often

sings the old Scotch airs you used to love."



     "Why not go down this evening?" Fred suggested hope-

fully, glancing at his watch.  "That is, if you'd like to go.

I can telephone and find what time he comes on."



     Thea hesitated.  "No, I think not.  I took a long walk

this afternoon and I'm rather tired.  I think I can get to

sleep early and be so much ahead.  I don't mean at once,

however," seeing Dr. Archie's disappointed look.  "I al-

ways like to hear Landry," she added.  "He never had

much voice, and it's worn, but there's a sweetness about

it, and he sings with such taste."



     "Yes, doesn't he?  May I?"  Fred took out his cigarette

case.  "It really doesn't bother your throat?"



     "A little doesn't.  But cigar smoke does.  Poor Dr.

Archie!  Can you do with one of those?"



     "I'm learning to like them," the doctor declared, taking

one from the case Fred proffered him.



     "Landry's the only fellow I know in this country who

can do that sort of thing," Fred went on.  "Like the best



<p 436>



English ballad singers.  He can sing even popular stuff by

higher lights, as it were."



     Thea nodded.  "Yes; sometimes I make him sing his

most foolish things for me.  It's restful, as he does it.

That's when I'm homesick, Dr. Archie."



     "You knew him in Germany, Thea?"  Dr. Archie had

quietly abandoned his cigarette as a comfortless article.

"When you first went over?"



     "Yes.  He was a good friend to a green girl.  He helped me

with my German and my music and my general discourage-

ment.  Seemed to care more about my getting on than about

himself.  He had no money, either.  An old aunt had loaned

him a little to study on.-- Will you answer that, Fred?"



     Fred caught up the telephone and stopped the buzz

while Thea went on talking to Dr. Archie about Landry.

Telling some one to hold the wire, he presently put down

the instrument and approached Thea with a startled ex-

pression on his face.



     "It's the management," he said quietly.  "Gloeckler has

broken down: fainting fits.  Madame Rheinecker is in At-

lantic City and Schramm is singing in Philadelphia to-

night.  They want to know whether you can come down and

finish SIEGLINDE."



     "What time is it?"



     "Eight fifty-five.  The first act is just over.  They can

hold the curtain twenty-five minutes."



     Thea did not move.  "Twenty-five and thirty-five makes

sixty," she muttered.  "Tell them I'll come if they hold the

curtain till I am in the dressing-room.  Say I'll have to wear

her costumes, and the dresser must have everything ready.

Then call a taxi, please."



     Thea had not changed her position since he first inter-

rupted her, but she had grown pale and was opening and

shutting her hands rapidly.  She looked, Fred thought, ter-

rified.  He half turned toward the telephone, but hung on

one foot.



<p 437>





     "Have you ever sung the part?" he asked.



     "No, but I've rehearsed it.  That's all right.  Get the

cab."  Still she made no move.  She merely turned per-

fectly blank eyes to Dr. Archie and said absently, "It's

curious, but just at this minute I can't remember a bar of

'Walkure' after the first act.  And I let my maid go out."

She sprang up and beckoned Archie without so much, he

felt sure, as knowing who he was.  "Come with me."  She

went quickly into her sleeping-chamber and threw open a

door into a trunk-room.  "See that white trunk?  It's not

locked.  It's full of wigs, in boxes.  Look until you find one

marked `Ring 2.'  Bring it quick!"  While she directed

him, she threw open a square trunk and began tossing out

shoes of every shape and color.



     Ottenburg appeared at the door.  "Can I help you?"



     She threw him some white sandals with long laces and

silk stockings pinned to them.  "Put those in something,

and then go to the piano and give me a few measures in

there--you know."  She was behaving somewhat like a

cyclone now, and while she wrenched open drawers and

closet doors, Ottenburg got to the piano as quickly as pos-

sible and began to herald the reappearance of the Volsung

pair, trusting to memory.



     In a few moments Thea came out enveloped in her long

fur coat with a scarf over her head and knitted woolen

gloves on her hands.  Her glassy eye took in the fact that

Fred was playing from memory, and even in her distracted

state, a faint smile flickered over her colorless lips.  She

stretched out a woolly hand, "The score, please.  Behind

you, there."



     Dr. Archie followed with a canvas box and a satchel.  As

they went through the hall, the men caught up their hats

and coats.  They left the music-room, Fred noticed, just

seven minutes after he got the telephone message.  In the

elevator Thea said in that husky whisper which had so per-

plexed Dr. Archie when he first heard it, "Tell the driver



<p 438>



he must do it in twenty minutes, less if he can.  He must

leave the light on in the cab.  I can do a good deal in twenty

minutes.  If only you hadn't made me eat--  Damn

that duck!" she broke out bitterly; "why did you?"



     "Wish I had it back!  But it won't bother you, to-night.

You need strength," he pleaded consolingly.



     But she only muttered angrily under her breath, "Idiot,

idiot!"



     Ottenburg shot ahead and instructed the driver, while

the doctor put Thea into the cab and shut the door.  She

did not speak to either of them again.  As the driver scram-

bled into his seat she opened the score and fixed her eyes

upon it.  Her face, in the white light, looked as bleak as a

stone quarry.



     As her cab slid away, Ottenburg shoved Archie into a

second taxi that waited by the curb.  "We'd better trail

her," he explained.  "There might be a hold-up of some

kind."  As the cab whizzed off he broke into an eruption of

profanity.



     "What's the matter, Fred?" the doctor asked.  He

was a good deal dazed by the rapid evolutions of the last

ten minutes.



     "Matter enough!" Fred growled, buttoning his over-

coat with a shiver.  "What a way to sing a part for the first

time!  That duck really is on my conscience.  It will be a

wonder if she can do anything but quack!  Scrambling on

in the middle of a performance like this, with no rehearsal!

The stuff she has to sing in there is a fright--rhythm,

pitch,--and terribly difficult intervals."



     "She looked frightened," Dr. Archie said thoughtfully,

"but I thought she looked--determined."



     Fred sniffed.  "Oh, determined!  That's the kind of

rough deal that makes savages of singers.  Here's a part

she's worked on and got ready for for years, and now they

give her a chance to go on and butcher it.  Goodness knows

when she's looked at the score last, or whether she can use



<p 439>



the business she's studied with this cast.  Necker's singing

BRUNNHILDE; she may help her, if it's not one of her sore

nights."



     "Is she sore at Thea?" Dr. Archie asked wonderingly.



     "My dear man, Necker's sore at everything.  She's

breaking up; too early; just when she ought to be at her

best.  There's one story that she is struggling under some

serious malady, another that she learned a bad method at

the Prague Conservatory and has ruined her organ.  She's

the sorest thing in the world.  If she weathers this winter

through, it'll be her last.  She's paying for it with the last

rags of her voice.  And then--"  Fred whistled softly.



     "Well, what then?"



     "Then our girl may come in for some of it.  It's dog eat

dog, in this game as in every other."



     The cab stopped and Fred and Dr. Archie hurried to the

box office.  The Monday-night house was sold out.  They

bought standing room and entered the auditorium just as

the press representative of the house was thanking the

audience for their patience and telling them that although

Madame Gloeckler was too ill to sing, Miss Kronborg had

kindly consented to finish her part.  This announcement

was met with vehement applause from the upper circles of

the house.



     "She has her--constituents," Dr. Archie murmured.



     "Yes, up there, where they're young and hungry.  These

people down here have dined too well.  They won't mind,

however.  They like fires and accidents and DIVERTISSEMENTS.

Two SIEGLINDES are more unusual than one, so they'll be

satisfied."





     After the final disappearance of the mother of Siegfried,

Ottenburg and the doctor slipped out through the crowd

and left the house.  Near the stage entrance Fred found

the driver who had brought Thea down.  He dismissed him

and got a larger car.  He and Archie waited on the sidewalk,



<p 440>



and when Kronborg came out alone they gathered her into

the cab and sprang in after her.



     Thea sank back into a corner of the back seat and

yawned.  "Well, I got through, eh?"  Her tone was reas-

suring.  "On the whole, I think I've given you gentlemen a

pretty lively evening, for one who has no social accomplish-

ments."



     "Rather!  There was something like a popular uprising

at the end of the second act.  Archie and I couldn't keep

it up as long as the rest of them did.  A howl like that

ought to show the management which way the wind is

blowing.  You probably know you were magnificent."



     "I thought it went pretty well," she spoke impartially.

"I was rather smart to catch his tempo there, at the begin-

ning of the first recitative, when he came in too soon, don't

you think?  It's tricky in there, without a rehearsal.  Oh,

I was all right!  He took that syncopation too fast in the

beginning.  Some singers take it fast there--think it

sounds more impassioned.  That's one way!"  She sniffed,

and Fred shot a mirthful glance at Archie.  Her boastful-

ness would have been childish in a schoolboy.  In the light

of what she had done, of the strain they had lived through

during the last two hours, it made one laugh,--almost

cry.  She went on, robustly: "And I didn't feel my din-

ner, really, Fred.  I am hungry again, I'm ashamed to say,

--and I forgot to order anything at my hotel."



     Fred put his hand on the door.  "Where to?  You must

have food."



     "Do you know any quiet place, where I won't be stared

at?  I've still got make-up on."



     "I do.  Nice English chop-house on Forty-fourth Street.

Nobody there at night but theater people after the show,

and a few bachelors."  He opened the door and spoke to the

driver.



     As the car turned, Thea reached across to the front seat

and drew Dr. Archie's handkerchief out of his breast pocket.



<p 441>





     "This comes to me naturally," she said, rubbing her cheeks

and eyebrows.  "When I was little I always loved your

handkerchiefs because they were silk and smelled of Col-

ogne water.  I think they must have been the only really

clean handkerchiefs in Moonstone.  You were always

wiping my face with them, when you met me out in the

dust, I remember.  Did I never have any?"



     "I think you'd nearly always used yours up on your

baby brother."



     Thea sighed.  "Yes, Thor had such a way of getting

messy.  You say he's a good chauffeur?"  She closed her

eyes for a moment as if they were tired.  Suddenly she

looked up.  "Isn't it funny, how we travel in circles?  Here

you are, still getting me clean, and Fred is still feeding me.

I would have died of starvation at that boarding-house on

Indiana Avenue if he hadn't taken me out to the Bucking-

ham and filled me up once in a while.  What a cavern I was

to fill, too.  The waiters used to look astonished.  I'm still

singing on that food."



     Fred alighted and gave Thea his arm as they crossed the

icy sidewalk.  They were taken upstairs in an antiquated

lift and found the cheerful chop-room half full of supper

parties.  An English company playing at the Empire had

just come in.  The waiters, in red waistcoats, were hurry-

ing about.  Fred got a table at the back of the room,

in a corner, and urged his waiter to get the oysters on at

once.



     "Takes a few minutes to open them, sir," the man ex-

postulated.



     "Yes, but make it as few as possible, and bring the

lady's first.  Then grilled chops with kidneys, and salad."



     Thea began eating celery stalks at once, from the base

to the foliage.  "Necker said something nice to me to-

night.  You might have thought the management would

say something, but not they."  She looked at Fred from

under her blackened lashes.  "It WAS a stunt, to jump in



<p 442>



and sing that second act without rehearsal.  It doesn't

sing itself."



     Ottenburg was watching her brilliant eyes and her face.

She was much handsomer than she had been early in the

evening.  Excitement of this sort enriched her.  It was only

under such excitement, he reflected, that she was entirely

illuminated, or wholly present.  At other times there was

something a little cold and empty, like a big room with no

people in it.  Even in her most genial moods there was a

shadow of restlessness, as if she were waiting for something

and were exercising the virtue of patience.  During dinner

she had been as kind as she knew how to be, to him and to

Archie, and had given them as much of herself as she could.

But, clearly, she knew only one way of being really kind,

from the core of her heart out; and there was but one way in

which she could give herself to people largely and gladly,

spontaneously.  Even as a girl she had been at her best in

vigorous effort, he remembered; physical effort, when there

was no other kind at hand.  She could be expansive only in

explosions.  Old Nathanmeyer had seen it.  In the very first

song Fred had ever heard her sing, she had unconsciously

declared it.



     Thea Kronborg turned suddenly from her talk with

Archie and peered suspiciously into the corner where Otten-

burg sat with folded arms, observing her.  "What's the

matter with you, Fred?  I'm afraid of you when you're

quiet,--fortunately you almost never are.  What are you

thinking about?"



     "I was wondering how you got right with the orchestra

so quickly, there at first.  I had a flash of terror," he re-

plied easily.



     She bolted her last oyster and ducked her head.  "So

had I!  I don't know how I did catch it.  Desperation, I

suppose; same way the Indian babies swim when they're

thrown into the river.  I HAD to.  Now it's over, I'm glad I

had to.  I learned a whole lot to-night."



<p 443>





     Archie, who usually felt that it behooved him to be silent

during such discussions, was encouraged by her geniality

to venture, "I don't see how you can learn anything in such

a turmoil; or how you can keep your mind on it, for that

matter."



     Thea glanced about the room and suddenly put her hand

up to her hair.  "Mercy, I've no hat on!  Why didn't you

tell me?  And I seem to be wearing a rumpled dinner dress,

with all this paint on my face!  I must look like something

you picked up on Second Avenue.  I hope there are no

Colorado reformers about, Dr. Archie.  What a dreadful

old pair these people must be thinking you!  Well, I had to

eat."  She sniffed the savor of the grill as the waiter uncov-

ered it.  "Yes, draught beer, please.  No, thank you, Fred,

NO champagne.--  To go back to your question, Dr. Archie,

you can believe I keep my mind on it.  That's the whole

trick, in so far as stage experience goes; keeping right there

every second.  If I think of anything else for a flash, I'm

gone, done for.  But at the same time, one can take things

in--with another part of your brain, maybe.  It's different

from what you get in study, more practical and conclusive.

There are some things you learn best in calm, and some in

storm.  You learn the delivery of a part only before an

audience."



     "Heaven help us," gasped Ottenburg.  "Weren't you

hungry, though!  It's beautiful to see you eat."



     "Glad you like it.  Of course I'm hungry.  Are you stay-

ing over for `Rheingold' Friday afternoon?"



     "My dear Thea,"--Fred lit a cigarette,--"I'm a seri-

ous business man now.  I have to sell beer.  I'm due in

Chicago on Wednesday.  I'd come back to hear you, but

FRICKA is not an alluring part."



     "Then you've never heard it well done."  She spoke up

hotly.  "Fat German woman scolding her husband, eh?

That's not my idea.  Wait till you hear my FRICKA.  It's a

beautiful part."  Thea leaned forward on the table and



<p 444>



touched Archie's arm.  "You remember, Dr. Archie, how

my mother always wore her hair, parted in the middle

and done low on her neck behind, so you got the shape of

her head and such a calm, white forehead?  I wear mine like

that for FRICKA.  A little more coronet effect, built up a lit-

tle higher at the sides, but the idea's the same.  I think

you'll notice it."  She turned to Ottenburg reproachfully:

"It's noble music, Fred, from the first measure.  There's

nothing lovelier than the WONNIGER HAUSRATH.  It's all such

comprehensive sort of music--fateful.  Of course, FRICKA

KNOWS," Thea ended quietly.



     Fred sighed.  "There, you've spoiled my itinerary.

Now I'll have to come back, of course.  Archie, you'd bet-

ter get busy about seats to-morrow."



     "I can get you box seats, somewhere.  I know nobody

here, and I never ask for any."  Thea began hunting among

her wraps.  "Oh, how funny!  I've only these short woolen

gloves, and no sleeves.  Put on my coat first.  Those Eng-

lish people can't make out where you got your lady, she's

so made up of contradictions."  She rose laughing and

plunged her arms into the coat Dr. Archie held for her.  As

she settled herself into it and buttoned it under her chin,

she gave him an old signal with her eyelid.  "I'd like to

sing another part to-night.  This is the sort of evening I

fancy, when there's something to do.  Let me see: I have to

sing in `Trovatore' Wednesday night, and there are re-

hearsals for the `Ring' every day this week.  Consider me

dead until Saturday, Dr. Archie.  I invite you both to dine

with me on Saturday night, the day after `Rheingold.'

And Fred must leave early, for I want to talk to you alone.

You've been here nearly a week, and I haven't had a seri-

ous word with you.  TAK FOR MAD, Fred, as the Norwegians

say."







<p 445>





                               VIII





     THE "Ring of the Niebelungs" was to be given at the

Metropolitan on four successive Friday afternoons.

After the first of these performances, Fred Ottenburg went

home with Landry for tea.  Landry was one of the few pub-

lic entertainers who own real estate in New York.  He lived

in a little three-story brick house on Jane Street, in Green-

wich Village, which had been left to him by the same aunt

who paid for his musical education.



     Landry was born, and spent the first fifteen years of

his life, on a rocky Connecticut farm not far from Cos Cob.

His father was an ignorant, violent man, a bungling farmer

and a brutal husband.  The farmhouse, dilapidated and

damp, stood in a hollow beside a marshy pond.  Oliver had

worked hard while he lived at home, although he was never

clean or warm in winter and had wretched food all the year

round.  His spare, dry figure, his prominent larynx, and the

peculiar red of his face and hands belonged to the chore-

boy he had never outgrown.  It was as if the farm, knowing

he would escape from it as early as he could, had ground its

mark on him deep.  When he was fifteen Oliver ran away

and went to live with his Catholic aunt, on Jane Street,

whom his mother was never allowed to visit.  The priest of

St. Joseph's Parish discovered that he had a voice.



     Landry had an affection for the house on Jane Street,

where he had first learned what cleanliness and order and

courtesy were.  When his aunt died he had the place done

over, got an Irish housekeeper, and lived there with a great

many beautiful things he had collected.  His living ex-

penses were never large, but he could not restrain himself

from buying graceful and useless objects.  He was a collec-

tor for much the same reason that he was a Catholic, and



<p 446>



he was a Catholic chiefly because his father used to sit

in the kitchen and read aloud to his hired men disgusting

"exposures" of the Roman Church, enjoying equally the

hideous stories and the outrage to his wife's feelings.



     At first Landry bought books; then rugs, drawings,

china.  He had a beautiful collection of old French and

Spanish fans.  He kept them in an escritoire he had brought

from Spain, but there were always a few of them lying

about in his sitting-room.



     While Landry and his guest were waiting for the tea to

be brought, Ottenburg took up one of these fans from the

low marble mantel-shelf and opened it in the firelight.  One

side was painted with a pearly sky and floating clouds.

On the other was a formal garden where an elegant shep-

herdess with a mask and crook was fleeing on high heels

from a satin-coated shepherd.



     "You ought not to keep these things about, like this,

Oliver.  The dust from your grate must get at them."



     "It does, but I get them to enjoy them, not to have

them.  They're pleasant to glance at and to play with at

odd times like this, when one is waiting for tea or some-

thing."



     Fred smiled.  The idea of Landry stretched out before his

fire playing with his fans, amused him.  Mrs. McGinnis

brought the tea and put it before the hearth: old teacups

that were velvety to the touch and a pot-bellied silver

cream pitcher of an Early Georgian pattern, which was

always brought, though Landry took rum.



     Fred drank his tea walking about, examining Landry's

sumptuous writing-table in the alcove and the Boucher

drawing in red chalk over the mantel.  "I don't see how

you can stand this place without a heroine.  It would give

me a raging thirst for gallantries."



     Landry was helping himself to a second cup of tea.

"Works quite the other way with me.  It consoles me for

the lack of her.  It's just feminine enough to be pleasant to



<p 447>



return to.  Not any more tea?  Then sit down and play for

me.  I'm always playing for other people, and I never have

a chance to sit here quietly and listen."



     Ottenburg opened the piano and began softly to boom

forth the shadowy introduction to the opera they had just

heard.  "Will that do?" he asked jokingly.  "I can't seem

to get it out of my head."



     "Oh, excellently!  Thea told me it was quite wonderful,

the way you can do Wagner scores on the piano.  So few

people can give one any idea of the music.  Go ahead, as

long as you like.  I can smoke, too."  Landry flattened him-

self out on his cushions and abandoned himself to ease with

the circumstance of one who has never grown quite accus-

tomed to ease.



     Ottenburg played on, as he happened to remember.  He

understood now why Thea wished him to hear her in

"Rheingold."  It had been clear to him as soon as FRICKA

rose from sleep and looked out over the young world,

stretching one white arm toward the new Gotterburg

shining on the heights.  "WOTAN!  GEMAHL! ERWACHE!"  She

was pure Scandinavian, this FRICKA: "Swedish summer"!

he remembered old Mr. Nathanmeyer's phrase.  She had

wished him to see her because she had a distinct kind of

loveliness for this part, a shining beauty like the light of

sunset on distant sails.  She seemed to take on the look

of immortal loveliness, the youth of the golden apples, the

shining body and the shining mind.  FRICKA had been a

jealous spouse to him for so long that he had forgot she

meant wisdom before she meant domestic order, and that,

in any event, she was always a goddess.  The FRICKA of

that afternoon was so clear and sunny, so nobly conceived,

that she made a whole atmosphere about herself and quite

redeemed from shabbiness the helplessness and unscrupu-

lousness of the gods.  Her reproaches to WOTAN were the

pleadings of a tempered mind, a consistent sense of beauty.

In the long silences of her part, her shining presence was a



<p 448>



visible complement to the discussion of the orchestra.  As

the themes which were to help in weaving the drama to its

end first came vaguely upon the ear, one saw their import

and tendency in the face of this clearest-visioned of the

gods.



     In the scene between FRICKA and WOTAN, Ottenburg

stopped.  "I can't seem to get the voices, in there."



     Landry chuckled.  "Don't try.  I know it well enough.

I expect I've been over that with her a thousand times.  I

was playing for her almost every day when she was first

working on it.  When she begins with a part she's hard to

work with: so slow you'd think she was stupid if you didn't

know her.  Of course she blames it all on her accompanist.

It goes on like that for weeks sometimes.  This did.  She

kept shaking her head and staring and looking gloomy.

All at once, she got her line--it usually comes suddenly,

after stretches of not getting anywhere at all--and after

that it kept changing and clearing.  As she worked her voice

into it, it got more and more of that `gold' quality that

makes her FRICKA so different."



     Fred began FRICKA'S first aria again.  "It's certainly

different.  Curious how she does it.  Such a beautiful idea,

out of a part that's always been so ungrateful.  She's a

lovely thing, but she was never so beautiful as that, really.

Nobody is."  He repeated the loveliest phrase.  "How does

she manage it, Landry?  You've worked with her."



     Landry drew cherishingly on the last cigarette he meant

to permit himself before singing.  "Oh, it's a question of a

big personality--and all that goes with it.  Brains, of

course.  Imagination, of course.  But the important thing

is that she was born full of color, with a rich personality.

That's a gift of the gods, like a fine nose.  You have it, or

you haven't.  Against it, intelligence and musicianship

and habits of industry don't count at all.  Singers are a

conventional race.  When Thea was studying in Berlin the

other girls were mortally afraid of her.  She has a pretty



<p 449>



rough hand with women, dull ones, and she could be rude,

too!  The girls used to call her DIE WOLFIN."



     Fred thrust his hands into his pockets and leaned back

against the piano.  "Of course, even a stupid woman

could get effects with such machinery: such a voice and

body and face.  But they couldn't possibly belong to a

stupid woman, could they?"



     Landry shook his head.  "It's personality; that's as near

as you can come to it.  That's what constitutes real equip-

ment.  What she does is interesting because she does it.

Even the things she discards are suggestive.  I regret some

of them.  Her conceptions are colored in so many different

ways.  You've heard her ELIZABETH?  Wonderful, isn't it?

She was working on that part years ago when her mother

was ill.  I could see her anxiety and grief getting more

and more into the part.  The last act is heart-breaking.

It's as homely as a country prayer meeting: might be

any lonely woman getting ready to die.  It's full of the

thing every plain creature finds out for himself, but that

never gets written down.  It's unconscious memory, maybe;

inherited memory, like folk-music.  I call it personality."



     Fred laughed, and turning to the piano began coaxing

the FRICKA music again.  "Call it anything you like, my

boy.  I have a name for it myself, but I shan't tell you."

He looked over his shoulder at Landry, stretched out by

the fire.  "You have a great time watching her, don't

you?"



     "Oh, yes!" replied Landry simply.  "I'm not interested

in much that goes on in New York.  Now, if you'll excuse

me, I'll have to dress."  He rose with a reluctant sigh.

"Can I get you anything?  Some whiskey?"



     "Thank you, no.  I'll amuse myself here.  I don't often

get a chance at a good piano when I'm away from home.

You haven't had this one long, have you?  Action's a bit

stiff.  I say," he stopped Landry in the doorway, "has

Thea ever been down here?"



<p 450>





     Landry turned back.  "Yes.  She came several times

when I had erysipelas.  I was a nice mess, with two

nurses.  She brought down some inside window-boxes,

planted with crocuses and things.  Very cheering, only I

couldn't see them or her."



     "Didn't she like your place?"



     "She thought she did, but I fancy it was a good deal

cluttered up for her taste.  I could hear her pacing about

like something in a cage.  She pushed the piano back

against the wall and the chairs into corners, and she broke

my amber elephant."  Landry took a yellow object some

four inches high from one of his low bookcases.  "You can

see where his leg is glued on,--a souvenir.  Yes, he's

lemon amber, very fine."



     Landry disappeared behind the curtains and in a moment

Fred heard the wheeze of an atomizer.  He put the amber

elephant on the piano beside him and seemed to get a great

deal of amusement out of the beast.







<p 451>





                                IX





     WHEN Archie and Ottenburg dined with Thea on

Saturday evening, they were served downstairs in

the hotel dining-room, but they were to have their coffee

in her own apartment.  As they were going up in the ele-

vator after dinner, Fred turned suddenly to Thea.  "And

why, please, did you break Landry's amber elephant?"



     She looked guilty and began to laugh.  "Hasn't he got

over that yet?  I didn't really mean to break it.  I was per-

haps careless.  His things are so over-petted that I was

tempted to be careless with a lot of them."



     "How can you be so heartless, when they're all he has

in the world?"



     "He has me.  I'm a great deal of diversion for him; all he

needs.  There," she said as she opened the door into her

own hall, "I shouldn't have said that before the elevator

boy."



     "Even an elevator boy couldn't make a scandal about

Oliver.  He's such a catnip man."



     Dr. Archie laughed, but Thea, who seemed suddenly to

have thought of something annoying, repeated blankly,

"Catnip man?"



     "Yes, he lives on catnip, and rum tea.  But he's not the

only one.  You are like an eccentric old woman I know in

Boston, who goes about in the spring feeding catnip to

street cats.  You dispense it to a lot of fellows.  Your pull

seems to be more with men than with women, you know;

with seasoned men, about my age, or older.  Even on Fri-

day afternoon I kept running into them, old boys I hadn't

seen for years, thin at the part and thick at the girth, until

I stood still in the draft and held my hair on.  They're al-

ways there; I hear them talking about you in the smoking-



<p 452>



room.  Probably we don't get to the point of apprehending

anything good until we're about forty.  Then, in the light

of what is going, and of what, God help us! is coming, we

arrive at understanding."



     "I don't see why people go to the opera, anyway,--seri-

ous people."  She spoke discontentedly.  "I suppose they

get something, or think they do.  Here's the coffee.  There,

please," she directed the waiter.  Going to the table she be-

gan to pour the coffee, standing.  She wore a white dress

trimmed with crystals which had rattled a good deal dur-

ing dinner, as all her movements had been impatient and

nervous, and she had twisted the dark velvet rose at her

girdle until it looked rumpled and weary.  She poured the

coffee as if it were a ceremony in which she did not believe.

"Can you make anything of Fred's nonsense, Dr. Archie?"

she asked, as he came to take his cup.



     Fred approached her.  "My nonsense is all right.  The

same brand has gone with you before.  It's you who won't

be jollied.  What's the matter?  You have something on

your mind."



     "I've a good deal.  Too much to be an agreeable hos-

tess."  She turned quickly away from the coffee and sat

down on the piano bench, facing the two men.  "For one

thing, there's a change in the cast for Friday afternoon.

They're going to let me sing SIEGLINDE."  Her frown did not

conceal the pleasure with which she made this announce-

ment.



     "Are you going to keep us dangling about here forever,

Thea?  Archie and I are supposed to have other things to

do."  Fred looked at her with an excitement quite as ap-

parent as her own.



     "Here I've been ready to sing SIEGLINDE for two years,

kept in torment, and now it comes off within two weeks,

just when I want to be seeing something of Dr. Archie.  I

don't know what their plans are down there.  After Friday

they may let me cool for several weeks, and they may rush



<p 453>



me.  I suppose it depends somewhat on how things go Fri-

day afternoon."



     "Oh, they'll go fast enough!  That's better suited to

your voice than anything you've sung here.  That gives

you every opportunity I've waited for."  Ottenburg

crossed the room and standing beside her began to play

"DU BIST DER LENZ."



     With a violent movement Thea caught his wrists and

pushed his hands away from the keys.



     "Fred, can't you be serious?  A thousand things may

happen between this and Friday to put me out.  Some-

thing will happen.  If that part were sung well, as well as

it ought to be, it would be one of the most beautiful things

in the world.  That's why it never is sung right, and never

will be."  She clenched her hands and opened them de-

spairingly, looking out of the open window.  "It's inac-

cessibly beautiful!" she brought out sharply.



     Fred and Dr. Archie watched her.  In a moment she

turned back to them.  "It's impossible to sing a part like

that well for the first time, except for the sort who will

never sing it any better.  Everything hangs on that first

night, and that's bound to be bad.  There you are," she

shrugged impatiently.  "For one thing, they change the

cast at the eleventh hour and then rehearse the life out of

me."



     Ottenburg put down his cup with exaggerated care.

"Still, you really want to do it, you know."



     "Want to?" she repeated indignantly; "of course I want

to!  If this were only next Thursday night--  But between

now and Friday I'll do nothing but fret away my strength.

Oh, I'm not saying I don't need the rehearsals!  But I

don't need them strung out through a week.  That sys-

tem's well enough for phlegmatic singers; it only drains

me.  Every single feature of operatic routine is detri-

mental to me.  I usually go on like a horse that's been

fixed to lose a race.  I have to work hard to do my worst,



<p 454>



let alone my best.  I wish you could hear me sing well,

once," she turned to Fred defiantly; "I have, a few times

in my life, when there was nothing to gain by it."



     Fred approached her again and held out his hand.  "I

recall my instructions, and now I'll leave you to fight it out

with Archie.  He can't possibly represent managerial stu-

pidity to you as I seem to have a gift for doing."



     As he smiled down at her, his good humor, his good

wishes, his understanding, embarrassed her and recalled

her to herself.  She kept her seat, still holding his hand.

"All the same, Fred, isn't it too bad, that there are so

many things--"  She broke off with a shake of the head.



     "My dear girl, if I could bridge over the agony between

now and Friday for you--  But you know the rules of the

game; why torment yourself?  You saw the other night

that you had the part under your thumb.  Now walk, sleep,

play with Archie, keep your tiger hungry, and she'll spring

all right on Friday.  I'll be there to see her, and there'll be

more than I, I suspect.  Harsanyi's on the Wilhelm der

Grosse; gets in on Thursday."



     "Harsanyi?"  Thea's eye lighted.  "I haven't seen him

for years.  We always miss each other."  She paused, hesi-

tating.  "Yes, I should like that.  But he'll be busy, may-

be?"



     "He gives his first concert at Carnegie Hall, week after

next.  Better send him a box if you can."



     "Yes, I'll manage it."  Thea took his hand again.  "Oh,

I should like that, Fred!" she added impulsively.  "Even

if I were put out, he'd get the idea,"--she threw back

her head,--"for there is an idea!"



     "Which won't penetrate here," he tapped his brow and

began to laugh.  "You are an ungrateful huzzy, COMME LES

AUTRES!"



     Thea detained him as he turned away.  She pulled a

flower out of a bouquet on the piano and absently drew

the stem through the lapel of his coat.  "I shall be walking



<p 455>



in the Park to-morrow afternoon, on the reservoir path,

between four and five, if you care to join me.  You know

that after Harsanyi I'd rather please you than anyone else.

You know a lot, but he knows even more than you."



     "Thank you.  Don't try to analyze it.  SCHLAFEN SIE

WOHL!" he kissed her fingers and waved from the door,

closing it behind him.



     "He's the right sort, Thea."  Dr. Archie looked warmly

after his disappearing friend.  "I've always hoped you'd

make it up with Fred."



     "Well, haven't I?  Oh, marry him, you mean!  Perhaps

it may come about, some day.  Just at present he's not

in the marriage market any more than I am, is he?"



     "No, I suppose not.  It's a damned shame that a man

like Ottenburg should be tied up as he is, wasting all the

best years of his life.  A woman with general paresis ought

to be legally dead."



     "Don't let us talk about Fred's wife, please.  He had no

business to get into such a mess, and he had no business to

stay in it.  He's always been a softy where women were

concerned."



     "Most of us are, I'm afraid," Dr. Archie admitted

meekly.



     "Too much light in here, isn't there?  Tires one's eyes.

The stage lights are hard on mine."  Thea began turning

them out.  "We'll leave the little one, over the piano."

She sank down by Archie on the deep sofa.  "We two have

so much to talk about that we keep away from it altogether;

have you noticed?  We don't even nibble the edges.  I wish

we had Landry here to-night to play for us.  He's very

comforting."



     "I'm afraid you don't have enough personal life, outside

your work, Thea."  The doctor looked at her anxiously.



     She smiled at him with her eyes half closed.  "My dear

doctor, I don't have any.  Your work becomes your per-

sonal life.  You are not much good until it does.  It's like



<p 456>



being woven into a big web.  You can't pull away, because

all your little tendrils are woven into the picture.  It takes

you up, and uses you, and spins you out; and that is your

life.  Not much else can happen to you."



     "Didn't you think of marrying, several years ago?"



     "You mean Nordquist?  Yes; but I changed my mind.

We had been singing a good deal together.  He's a splendid

creature."



     "Were you much in love with him, Thea?" the doctor

asked hopefully.



     She smiled again.  "I don't think I know just what that

expression means.  I've never been able to find out.  I

think I was in love with you when I was little, but not

with any one since then.  There are a great many ways of

caring for people.  It's not, after all, a simple state, like

measles or tonsilitis.  Nordquist is a taking sort of man.

He and I were out in a rowboat once in a terrible storm.

The lake was fed by glaciers,--ice water,--and we

couldn't have swum a stroke if the boat had filled.  If we

hadn't both been strong and kept our heads, we'd have

gone down.  We pulled for every ounce there was in us,

and we just got off with our lives.  We were always being

thrown together like that, under some kind of pressure.

Yes, for a while I thought he would make everything

right."  She paused and sank back, resting her head on a

cushion, pressing her eyelids down with her fingers.  "You

see," she went on abruptly, "he had a wife and two chil-

dren.  He hadn't lived with her for several years, but

when she heard that he wanted to marry again, she began

to make trouble.  He earned a good deal of money, but he

was careless and always wretchedly in debt.  He came to

me one day and told me he thought his wife would settle

for a hundred thousand marks and consent to a divorce.

I got very angry and sent him away.  Next day he came

back and said he thought she'd take fifty thousand."



     Dr. Archie drew away from her, to the end of the sofa.



<p 457>





     "Good God, Thea,"--  He ran his handkerchief over his

forehead.  "What sort of people--"  He stopped and shook

his head.



     Thea rose and stood beside him, her hand on his shoul-

der.  "That's exactly how it struck me," she said quietly.

"Oh, we have things in common, things that go away back,

under everything.  You understand, of course.  Nordquist

didn't.  He thought I wasn't willing to part with the

money.  I couldn't let myself buy him from Fru Nord-

quist, and he couldn't see why.  He had always thought I

was close about money, so he attributed it to that.  I am

careful,"--she ran her arm through Archie's and when

he rose began to walk about the room with him.  "I

can't be careless with money.  I began the world on six

hundred dollars, and it was the price of a man's life.  Ray

Kennedy had worked hard and been sober and denied him-

self, and when he died he had six hundred dollars to show

for it.  I always measure things by that six hundred dol-

lars, just as I measure high buildings by the Moonstone

standpipe.  There are standards we can't get away from."



     Dr. Archie took her hand.  "I don't believe we should

be any happier if we did get away from them.  I think it

gives you some of your poise, having that anchor.  You

look," glancing down at her head and shoulders, "some-

times so like your mother."



     "Thank you.  You couldn't say anything nicer to me

than that.  On Friday afternoon, didn't you think?"



     "Yes, but at other times, too.  I love to see it.  Do you

know what I thought about that first night when I heard

you sing?  I kept remembering the night I took care of you

when you had pneumonia, when you were ten years old.

You were a terribly sick child, and I was a country doctor

without much experience.  There were no oxygen tanks

about then.  You pretty nearly slipped away from me.

If you had--"



     Thea dropped her head on his shoulder.  "I'd have



<p 458>



saved myself and you a lot of trouble, wouldn't I?  Dear

Dr. Archie!" she murmured.



     "As for me, life would have been a pretty bleak stretch,

with you left out."  The doctor took one of the crystal

pendants that hung from her shoulder and looked into it

thoughtfully.  "I guess I'm a romantic old fellow, under-

neath.  And you've always been my romance.  Those

years when you were growing up were my happiest.  When

I dream about you, I always see you as a little girl."



     They paused by the open window.  "Do you?  Nearly

all my dreams, except those about breaking down on the

stage or missing trains, are about Moonstone.  You tell

me the old house has been pulled down, but it stands in

my mind, every stick and timber.  In my sleep I go all

about it, and look in the right drawers and cupboards for

everything.  I often dream that I'm hunting for my rub-

bers in that pile of overshoes that was always under the

hatrack in the hall.  I pick up every overshoe and know

whose it is, but I can't find my own.  Then the school bell

begins to ring and I begin to cry.  That's the house I rest

in when I'm tired.  All the old furniture and the worn

spots in the carpet--it rests my mind to go over them."



     They were looking out of the window.  Thea kept his

arm.  Down on the river four battleships were anchored in

line, brilliantly lighted, and launches were coming and

going, bringing the men ashore.  A searchlight from one

of the ironclads was playing on the great headland up the

river, where it makes its first resolute turn.  Overhead the

night-blue sky was intense and clear.



     "There's so much that I want to tell you," she said at

last, "and it's hard to explain.  My life is full of jealousies

and disappointments, you know.  You get to hating people

who do contemptible work and who get on just as well as you

do.  There are many disappointments in my profession, and

bitter, bitter contempts!"  Her face hardened, and looked

much older.  "If you love the good thing vitally, enough to



<p 459>



give up for it all that one must give up for it, then you

must hate the cheap thing just as hard.  I tell you, there

is such a thing as creative hate!  A contempt that drives

you through fire, makes you risk everything and lose

everything, makes you a long sight better than you ever

knew you could be."  As she glanced at Dr. Archie's face,

Thea stopped short and turned her own face away.  Her

eyes followed the path of the searchlight up the river and

rested upon the illumined headland.



     "You see," she went on more calmly, "voices are acci-

dental things.  You find plenty of good voices in common

women, with common minds and common hearts.  Look

at that woman who sang ORTRUDE with me last week.  She's

new here and the people are wild about her.  `Such a beau-

tiful volume of tone!' they say.  I give you my word she's

as stupid as an owl and as coarse as a pig, and any one

who knows anything about singing would see that in an

instant.  Yet she's quite as popular as Necker, who's a

great artist.  How can I get much satisfaction out of the

enthusiasm of a house that likes her atrociously bad per-

formance at the same time that it pretends to like mine?

If they like her, then they ought to hiss me off the stage.

We stand for things that are irreconcilable, absolutely.

You can't try to do things right and not despise the peo-

ple who do them wrong.  How can I be indifferent?  If

that doesn't matter, then nothing matters.  Well, some-

times I've come home as I did the other night when you

first saw me, so full of bitterness that it was as if my mind

were full of daggers.  And I've gone to sleep and wakened

up in the Kohlers' garden, with the pigeons and the white

rabbits, so happy!  And that saves me."  She sat down

on the piano bench.  Archie thought she had forgotten all

about him, until she called his name.  Her voice was soft

now, and wonderfully sweet.  It seemed to come from some-

where deep within her, there were such strong vibrations

in it.  "You see, Dr. Archie, what one really strives for in



<p 460>



art is not the sort of thing you are likely to find when

you drop in for a performance at the opera.  What one

strives for is so far away, so deep, so beautiful"--she

lifted her shoulders with a long breath, folded her hands

in her lap and sat looking at him with a resignation that

made her face noble,--"that there's nothing one can

say about it, Dr. Archie."



     Without knowing very well what it was all about,

Archie was passionately stirred for her.  "I've always be-

lieved in you, Thea; always believed," he muttered.



     She smiled and closed her eyes.  "They save me: the old

things, things like the Kohlers' garden.  They are in every-

thing I do."



     "In what you sing, you mean?"



     "Yes.  Not in any direct way,"--she spoke hurriedly,

--"the light, the color, the feeling.  Most of all the feeling.

It comes in when I'm working on a part, like the smell of

a garden coming in at the window.  I try all the new

things, and then go back to the old.  Perhaps my feelings

were stronger then.  A child's attitude toward everything

is an artist's attitude.  I am more or less of an artist now,

but then I was nothing else.  When I went with you to

Chicago that first time, I carried with me the essentials,

the foundation of all I do now.  The point to which I could

go was scratched in me then.  I haven't reached it yet, by

a long way."



     Archie had a swift flash of memory.  Pictures passed

before him.  "You mean," he asked wonderingly, "that

you knew then that you were so gifted?"



     Thea looked up at him and smiled.  "Oh, I didn't know

anything!  Not enough to ask you for my trunk when I

needed it.  But you see, when I set out from Moonstone

with you, I had had a rich, romantic past.  I had lived a

long, eventful life, and an artist's life, every hour of it.

Wagner says, in his most beautiful opera, that art is only

a way of remembering youth.  And the older we grow the



<p 461>



more precious it seems to us, and the more richly we can

present that memory.  When we've got it all out,--the

last, the finest thrill of it, the brightest hope of it,"--she

lifted her hand above her head and dropped it,--"then

we stop.  We do nothing but repeat after that.  The stream

has reached the level of its source.  That's our measure."



     There was a long, warm silence.  Thea was looking hard

at the floor, as if she were seeing down through years and

years, and her old friend stood watching her bent head.

His look was one with which he used to watch her long

ago, and which, even in thinking about her, had become a

habit of his face.  It was full of solicitude, and a kind of

secret gratitude, as if to thank her for some inexpressible

pleasure of the heart.  Thea turned presently toward the

piano and began softly to waken an old air:--





          "Ca' the yowes to the knowes,



           Ca' them where the heather grows,



           Ca' them where the burnie rowes,



               My bonnie dear-ie."





     Archie sat down and shaded his eyes with his hand.  She

turned her head and spoke to him over her shoulder.

"Come on, you know the words better than I.  That's

right."





          "We'll gae down by Clouden's side,



           Through the hazels spreading wide,



           O'er the waves that sweetly glide,



               To the moon sae clearly.



           Ghaist nor bogle shalt thou fear,



           Thou'rt to love and Heav'n sae dear,



           Nocht of ill may come thee near,



               My bonnie dear-ie!"





     "We can get on without Landry.  Let's try it again, I

have all the words now.  Then we'll have `Sweet Afton.'

Come: `CA' THE YOWES TO THE KNOWES'--"







<p 462>





                                 X





     OTTENBURG dismissed his taxicab at the 91st Street

entrance of the Park and floundered across the drive

through a wild spring snowstorm.  When he reached the

reservoir path he saw Thea ahead of him, walking rapidly

against the wind.  Except for that one figure, the path was

deserted.  A flock of gulls were hovering over the reservoir,

seeming bewildered by the driving currents of snow that

whirled above the black water and then disappeared with-

in it.  When he had almost overtaken Thea, Fred called

to her, and she turned and waited for him with her back

to the wind.  Her hair and furs were powdered with snow-

flakes, and she looked like some rich-pelted animal, with

warm blood, that had run in out of the woods.  Fred

laughed as he took her hand.



     "No use asking how you do.  You surely needn't feel

much anxiety about Friday, when you can look like

this."



     She moved close to the iron fence to make room for him

beside her, and faced the wind again.  "Oh, I'm WELL enough,

in so far as that goes.  But I'm not lucky about stage

appearances.  I'm easily upset, and the most perverse

things happen."



     "What's the matter?  Do you still get nervous?"



     "Of course I do.  I don't mind nerves so much as getting

numbed," Thea muttered, sheltering her face for a mo-

ment with her muff.  "I'm under a spell, you know, hoo-

dooed.  It's the thing I WANT to do that I can never do.

Any other effects I can get easily enough."



     "Yes, you get effects, and not only with your voice.

That's where you have it over all the rest of them; you're

as much at home on the stage as you were down in



<p 463>



Panther Canyon--as if you'd just been let out of a cage.

Didn't you get some of your ideas down there?"



     Thea nodded.  "Oh, yes!  For heroic parts, at least.  Out

of the rocks, out of the dead people.  You mean the idea

of standing up under things, don't you, meeting catas-

trophe?  No fussiness.  Seems to me they must have been

a reserved, somber people, with only a muscular language,

all their movements for a purpose; simple, strong, as if

they were dealing with fate bare-handed."  She put her

gloved fingers on Fred's arm.  "I don't know how I can

ever thank you enough.  I don't know if I'd ever have got

anywhere without Panther Canyon.  How did you know

that was the one thing to do for me?  It's the sort of thing

nobody ever helps one to, in this world.  One can learn how

to sing, but no singing teacher can give anybody what I

got down there.  How did you know?"



     "I didn't know.  Anything else would have done as well.

It was your creative hour.  I knew you were getting a lot,

but I didn't realize how much."



     Thea walked on in silence.  She seemed to be thinking.



     "Do you know what they really taught me?" she

came out suddenly.  "They taught me the inevitable

hardness of human life.  No artist gets far who doesn't

know that.  And you can't know it with your mind.  You

have to realize it in your body, somehow; deep.  It's an

animal sort of feeling.  I sometimes think it's the strongest

of all.  Do you know what I'm driving at?"



     "I think so.  Even your audiences feel it, vaguely: that

you've sometime or other faced things that make you

different."



     Thea turned her back to the wind, wiping away the snow

that clung to her brows and lashes.  "Ugh!" she exclaimed;

"no matter how long a breath you have, the storm has

a longer.  I haven't signed for next season, yet, Fred.  I'm

holding out for a big contract: forty performances.  Necker

won't be able to do much next winter.  It's going to be one



<p 464>



of those between seasons; the old singers are too old, and

the new ones are too new.  They might as well risk me as

anybody.  So I want good terms.  The next five or six

years are going to be my best."



     "You'll get what you demand, if you are uncompro-

mising.  I'm safe in congratulating you now."



     Thea laughed.  "It's a little early.  I may not get it at

all.  They don't seem to be breaking their necks to meet

me.  I can go back to Dresden."



     As they turned the curve and walked westward they

got the wind from the side, and talking was easier.



     Fred lowered his collar and shook the snow from his

shoulders.  "Oh, I don't mean on the contract particularly.

I congratulate you on what you can do, Thea, and on all

that lies behind what you do.  On the life that's led up to

it, and on being able to care so much.  That, after all, is

the unusual thing."



     She looked at him sharply, with a certain apprehension.

"Care?  Why shouldn't I care?  If I didn't, I'd be in a

bad way.  What else have I got?"  She stopped with a

challenging interrogation, but Ottenburg did not reply.

"You mean," she persisted, "that you don't care as much

as you used to?"



     "I care about your success, of course."  Fred fell into a

slower pace.  Thea felt at once that he was talking seri-

ously and had dropped the tone of half-ironical exaggera-

tion he had used with her of late years.  "And I'm

grateful to you for what you demand from yourself, when

you might get off so easily.  You demand more and more

all the time, and you'll do more and more.  One is grateful

to anybody for that; it makes life in general a little less

sordid.  But as a matter of fact, I'm not much interested

in how anybody sings anything."



     "That's too bad of you, when I'm just beginning to

see what is worth doing, and how I want to do it!"  Thea

spoke in an injured tone.



<p 465>





     "That's what I congratulate you on.  That's the great

difference between your kind and the rest of us.  It's how

long you're able to keep it up that tells the story.  When

you needed enthusiasm from the outside, I was able to

give it to you.  Now you must let me withdraw."



     "I'm not tying you, am I?" she flashed out.  "But with-

draw to what?  What do you want?"



     Fred shrugged.  "I might ask you, What have I got?

I want things that wouldn't interest you; that you prob-

ably wouldn't understand.  For one thing, I want a son

to bring up."



     "I can understand that.  It seems to me reasonable.

Have you also found somebody you want to marry?"



     "Not particularly."  They turned another curve, which

brought the wind to their backs, and they walked on in

comparative calm, with the snow blowing past them.  "It's

not your fault, Thea, but I've had you too much in my

mind.  I've not given myself a fair chance in other direc-

tions.  I was in Rome when you and Nordquist were there.

If that had kept up, it might have cured me."



     "It might have cured a good many things," remarked

Thea grimly.



     Fred nodded sympathetically and went on.  "In my

library in St. Louis, over the fireplace, I have a property

spear I had copied from one in Venice,--oh, years ago,

after you first went abroad, while you were studying.

You'll probably be singing BRUNNHILDE pretty soon now,

and I'll send it on to you, if I may.  You can take it and

its history for what they're worth.  But I'm nearly forty

years old, and I've served my turn.  You've done what

I hoped for you, what I was honestly willing to lose you

for--then.  I'm older now, and I think I was an ass.  I

wouldn't do it again if I had the chance, not much!  But

I'm not sorry.  It takes a great many people to make

one--BRUNNHILDE."



     Thea stopped by the fence and looked over into the



<p 466>



black choppiness on which the snowflakes fell and dis-

appeared with magical rapidity.  Her face was both angry

and troubled.  "So you really feel I've been ungrateful.

I thought you sent me out to get something.  I didn't

know you wanted me to bring in something easy.  I

thought you wanted something--"  She took a deep

breath and shrugged her shoulders.  "But there! nobody

on God's earth wants it, REALLY!  If one other person wanted

it,"--she thrust her hand out before him and clenched

it,--"my God, what I could do!"



     Fred laughed dismally.  "Even in my ashes I feel my-

self pushing you!  How can anybody help it?  My dear

girl, can't you see that anybody else who wanted it as you

do would be your rival, your deadliest danger?  Can't you

see that it's your great good fortune that other people

can't care about it so much?"



     But Thea seemed not to take in his protest at all.  She

went on vindicating herself.  "It's taken me a long while

to do anything, of course, and I've only begun to see day-

light.  But anything good is--expensive.  It hasn't

seemed long.  I've always felt responsible to you."



     Fred looked at her face intently, through the veil of

snowflakes, and shook his head.  "To me?  You are a truth-

ful woman, and you don't mean to lie to me.  But after the

one responsibility you do feel, I doubt if you've enough

left to feel responsible to God!  Still, if you've ever in an

idle hour fooled yourself with thinking I had anything to

do with it, Heaven knows I'm grateful."



     "Even if I'd married Nordquist," Thea went on, turn-

ing down the path again, "there would have been some-

thing left out.  There always is.  In a way, I've always been

married to you.  I'm not very flexible; never was and never

shall be.  You caught me young.  I could never have that

over again.  One can't, after one begins to know anything.

But I look back on it.  My life hasn't been a gay one, any

more than yours.  If I shut things out from you, you shut



<p 467>



them out from me.  We've been a help and a hindrance to

each other.  I guess it's always that way, the good and the

bad all mixed up.  There's only one thing that's all beau-

tiful--and always beautiful!  That's why my interest keeps

up."



     "Yes, I know."  Fred looked sidewise at the outline of

her head against the thickening atmosphere.  "And you

give one the impression that that is enough.  I've gradu-

ally, gradually given you up."



     "See, the lights are coming out."  Thea pointed to where

they flickered, flashes of violet through the gray tree-tops.

Lower down the globes along the drives were becoming a

pale lemon color.  "Yes, I don't see why anybody wants

to marry an artist, anyhow.  I remember Ray Kennedy

used to say he didn't see how any woman could marry a

gambler, for she would only be marrying what the game

left."  She shook her shoulders impatiently.  "Who marries

who is a small matter, after all.  But I hope I can bring

back your interest in my work.  You've cared longer and

more than anybody else, and I'd like to have somebody

human to make a report to once in a while.  You can send

me your spear.  I'll do my best.  If you're not interested,

I'll do my best anyhow.  I've only a few friends, but I

can lose every one of them, if it has to be.  I learned how

to lose when my mother died.--  We must hurry now.  My

taxi must be waiting."



     The blue light about them was growing deeper and

darker, and the falling snow and the faint trees had be-

come violet.  To the south, over Broadway, there was an

orange reflection in the clouds.  Motors and carriage lights

flashed by on the drive below the reservoir path, and the

air was strident with horns and shrieks from the whistles

of the mounted policemen.



     Fred gave Thea his arm as they descended from the

embankment.  "I guess you'll never manage to lose me or

Archie, Thea.  You do pick up queer ones.  But loving



<p 468>



you is a heroic discipline.  It wears a man out.  Tell me

one thing: could I have kept you, once, if I'd put on every

screw?"



     Thea hurried him along, talking rapidly, as if to get it

over.  "You might have kept me in misery for a while,

perhaps.  I don't know.  I have to think well of myself, to

work.  You could have made it hard.  I'm not ungrateful.

I was a difficult proposition to deal with.  I understand now,

of course.  Since you didn't tell me the truth in the be-

ginning, you couldn't very well turn back after I'd set

my head.  At least, if you'd been the sort who could, you

wouldn't have had to,--for I'd not have cared a button

for that sort, even then."  She stopped beside a car that

waited at the curb and gave him her hand.  "There.  We

part friends?"



     Fred looked at her.  "You know.  Ten years."



     "I'm not ungrateful," Thea repeated as she got into

her cab.



     "Yes," she reflected, as the taxi cut into the Park carriage

road, "we don't get fairy tales in this world, and he has,

after all, cared more and longer than anybody else."  It

was dark outside now, and the light from the lamps along

the drive flashed into the cab.  The snowflakes hovered

like swarms of white bees about the globes.



     Thea sat motionless in one corner staring out of the

window at the cab lights that wove in and out among

the trees, all seeming to be bent upon joyous courses.

Taxicabs were still new in New York, and the theme of

popular minstrelsy.  Landry had sung her a ditty he heard

in some theater on Third Avenue, about





          "But there passed him a bright-eyed taxi



               With the girl of his heart inside."



Almost inaudibly Thea began to hum the air, though she

was thinking of something serious, something that had

touched her deeply.  At the beginning of the season, when



<p 469>



she was not singing often, she had gone one afternoon to

hear Paderewski's recital.  In front of her sat an old Ger-

man couple, evidently poor people who had made sacri-

fices to pay for their excellent seats.  Their intelligent

enjoyment of the music, and their friendliness with each

other, had interested her more than anything on the pro-

gramme.  When the pianist began a lovely melody in the

first movement of the Beethoven D minor sonata, the

old lady put out her plump hand and touched her hus-

band's sleeve and they looked at each other in recognition.

They both wore glasses, but such a look!  Like forget-me-

nots, and so full of happy recollections.  Thea wanted to

put her arms around them and ask them how they had

been able to keep a feeling like that, like a nosegay in a

glass of water.







<p 470>





                                XI





     DR. ARCHIE saw nothing of Thea during the follow-

ing week.  After several fruitless efforts, he succeeded

in getting a word with her over the telephone, but she

sounded so distracted and driven that he was glad to say

good-night and hang up the instrument.  There were, she

told him, rehearsals not only for "Walkure," but also for

"Gotterdammerung," in which she was to sing WALTRAUTE

two weeks later.



     On Thursday afternoon Thea got home late, after an

exhausting rehearsal.  She was in no happy frame of mind.

Madame Necker, who had been very gracious to her

that night when she went on to complete Gloeckler's

performance of SIEGLINDE, had, since Thea was cast to sing

the part instead of Gloeckler in the production of the

"Ring," been chilly and disapproving, distinctly hostile.

Thea had always felt that she and Necker stood for the

same sort of endeavor, and that Necker recognized it and

had a cordial feeling for her.  In Germany she had several

times sung BRANGAENA to Necker's ISOLDE, and the older

artist had let her know that she thought she sang it beau-

tifully.  It was a bitter disappointment to find that the

approval of so honest an artist as Necker could not stand

the test of any significant recognition by the management.

Madame Necker was forty, and her voice was failing just

when her powers were at their height.  Every fresh young

voice was an enemy, and this one was accompanied by

gifts which she could not fail to recognize.



     Thea had her dinner sent up to her apartment, and it

was a very poor one.  She tasted the soup and then indig-

nantly put on her wraps to go out and hunt a dinner.  As

she was going to the elevator, she had to admit that she



<p 471>



was behaving foolishly.  She took off her hat and coat

and ordered another dinner.  When it arrived, it was no

better than the first.  There was even a burnt match under

the milk toast.  She had a sore throat, which made swal-

lowing painful and boded ill for the morrow.  Although she

had been speaking in whispers all day to save her throat,

she now perversely summoned the housekeeper and de-

manded an account of some laundry that had been lost.

The housekeeper was indifferent and impertinent, and

Thea got angry and scolded violently.  She knew it was

very bad for her to get into a rage just before bedtime, and

after the housekeeper left she realized that for ten dollars'

worth of underclothing she had been unfitting herself for

a performance which might eventually mean many thous-

ands.  The best thing now was to stop reproaching herself

for her lack of sense, but she was too tired to control her

thoughts.



     While she was undressing--Therese was brushing out

her SIEGLINDE wig in the trunk-room--she went on chid-

ing herself bitterly.  "And how am I ever going to get to

sleep in this state?" she kept asking herself.  "If I don't

sleep, I'll be perfectly worthless to-morrow.  I'll go down

there to-morrow and make a fool of myself.  If I'd let that

laundry alone with whatever nigger has stolen it--  WHY

did I undertake to reform the management of this hotel

to-night?  After to-morrow I could pack up and leave the

place.  There's the Phillamon--I liked the rooms there

better, anyhow--and the Umberto--"  She began going

over the advantages and disadvantages of different apart-

ment hotels.  Suddenly she checked herself.  "What AM

I doing this for?  I can't move into another hotel to-night.

I'll keep this up till morning.  I shan't sleep a wink."



     Should she take a hot bath, or shouldn't she?  Some-

times it relaxed her, and sometimes it roused her and fairly

put her beside herself.  Between the conviction that she

must sleep and the fear that she couldn't, she hung para-



<p 472>



lyzed.  When she looked at her bed, she shrank from it in

every nerve.  She was much more afraid of it than she had

ever been of the stage of any opera house.  It yawned be-

fore her like the sunken road at Waterloo.



     She rushed into her bathroom and locked the door.  She

would risk the bath, and defer the encounter with the bed a

little longer.  She lay in the bath half an hour.  The warmth

of the water penetrated to her bones, induced pleasant

reflections and a feeling of well-being.  It was very nice to

have Dr. Archie in New York, after all, and to see him get

so much satisfaction out of the little companionship she

was able to give him.  She liked people who got on, and

who became more interesting as they grew older.  There

was Fred; he was much more interesting now than he had

been at thirty.  He was intelligent about music, and he

must be very intelligent in his business, or he would not

be at the head of the Brewers' Trust.  She respected that

kind of intelligence and success.  Any success was good.

She herself had made a good start, at any rate, and now,

if she could get to sleep--  Yes, they were all more inter-

esting than they used to be.  Look at Harsanyi, who had

been so long retarded; what a place he had made for him-

self in Vienna.  If she could get to sleep, she would show

him something to-morrow that he would understand.



     She got quickly into bed and moved about freely be-

tween the sheets.  Yes, she was warm all over.  A cold,

dry breeze was coming in from the river, thank goodness!

She tried to think about her little rock house and the Ari-

zona sun and the blue sky.  But that led to memories which

were still too disturbing.  She turned on her side, closed

her eyes, and tried an old device.



     She entered her father's front door, hung her hat and

coat on the rack, and stopped in the parlor to warm her

hands at the stove.  Then she went out through the dining-

room, where the boys were getting their lessons at the long

table; through the sitting-room, where Thor was asleep in



<p 473>



his cot bed, his dress and stocking hanging on a chair.  In

the kitchen she stopped for her lantern and her hot brick.

She hurried up the back stairs and through the windy loft

to her own glacial room.  The illusion was marred only by

the consciousness that she ought to brush her teeth before

she went to bed, and that she never used to do it.  Why--?

The water was frozen solid in the pitcher, so she got over

that.  Once between the red blankets there was a short,

fierce battle with the cold; then, warmer--warmer.  She

could hear her father shaking down the hard-coal burner

for the night, and the wind rushing and banging down the

village street.  The boughs of the cottonwood, hard as

bone, rattled against her gable.  The bed grew softer and

warmer.  Everybody was warm and well downstairs.  The

sprawling old house had gathered them all in, like a hen,

and had settled down over its brood.  They were all warm

in her father's house.  Softer and softer.  She was asleep.

She slept ten hours without turning over.  From sleep like

that, one awakes in shining armor.





     On Friday afternoon there was an inspiring audience;

there was not an empty chair in the house.  Ottenburg

and Dr. Archie had seats in the orchestra circle, got from

a ticket broker.  Landry had not been able to get a seat,

so he roamed about in the back of the house, where he

usually stood when he dropped in after his own turn in

vaudeville was over.  He was there so often and at such

irregular hours that the ushers thought he was a singer's

husband, or had something to do with the electrical

plant.



     Harsanyi and his wife were in a box, near the stage,

in the second circle.  Mrs. Harsanyi's hair was noticeably

gray, but her face was fuller and handsomer than in those

early years of struggle, and she was beautifully dressed.

Harsanyi himself had changed very little.  He had put on

his best afternoon coat in honor of his pupil, and wore a



<p 474>



pearl in his black ascot.  His hair was longer and more

bushy than he used to wear it, and there was now one

gray lock on the right side.  He had always been an elegant

figure, even when he went about in shabby clothes and

was crushed with work.  Before the curtain rose he was

restless and nervous, and kept looking at his watch and

wishing he had got a few more letters off before he left his

hotel.  He had not been in New York since the advent of

the taxicab, and had allowed himself too much time.  His

wife knew that he was afraid of being disappointed this

afternoon.  He did not often go to the opera because the

stupid things that singers did vexed him so, and it always

put him in a rage if the conductor held the tempo or in

any way accommodated the score to the singer.



     When the lights went out and the violins began to

quaver their long D against the rude figure of the basses,

Mrs. Harsanyi saw her husband's fingers fluttering on his

knee in a rapid tattoo.  At the moment when SIEGLINDE

entered from the side door, she leaned toward him and

whispered in his ear, "Oh, the lovely creature!"  But he

made no response, either by voice or gesture.  Throughout

the first scene he sat sunk in his chair, his head forward

and his one yellow eye rolling restlessly and shining like a

tiger's in the dark.  His eye followed SIEGLINDE about the

stage like a satellite, and as she sat at the table listening to

SIEGMUND'S long narrative, it never left her.  When she

prepared the sleeping draught and disappeared after

HUNDING, Harsanyi bowed his head still lower and put

his hand over his eye to rest it.  The tenor,--a young

man who sang with great vigor, went on:--





          "WALSE!  WALSE!

              WO IST DEIN SCHWERT?"



Harsanyi smiled, but he did not look forth again until

SIEGLINDE reappeared.  She went through the story of her

shameful bridal feast and into the Walhall' music, which



<p 475>



she always sang so nobly, and the entrance of the one-

eyed stranger:--





          "MIR ALLEIN

              WECKTE DAS AUGE."



Mrs. Harsanyi glanced at her husband, wondering whether

the singer on the stage could not feel his commanding

glance.  On came the CRESCENDO:--





          "WAS JE ICH VERLOR,

              WAS JE ICH BEWEINT

              WAR' MIR GEWONNEN."





          (All that I have lost,

           All that I have mourned,

           Would I then have won.)



Harsanyi touched his wife's arm softly.



     Seated in the moonlight, the VOLSUNG pair began their

loving inspection of each other's beauties, and the music

born of murmuring sound passed into her face, as the old

poet said,--and into her body as well.  Into one lovely

attitude after another the music swept her, love impelled

her.  And the voice gave out all that was best in it.  Like

the spring, indeed, it blossomed into memories and prophe-

cies, it recounted and it foretold, as she sang the story of

her friendless life, and of how the thing which was truly

herself, "bright as the day, rose to the surface" when in

the hostile world she for the first time beheld her Friend.

Fervently she rose into the hardier feeling of action and

daring, the pride in hero-strength and hero-blood, until in

a splendid burst, tall and shining like a Victory, she chris-

tened him:--





          "SIEGMUND--



              SO NENN ICH DICH!"





     Her impatience for the sword swelled with her antici-

pation of his act, and throwing her arms above her head,

she fairly tore a sword out of the empty air for him, before

NOTHUNG had left the tree.  IN HOCHSTER TRUNKENHEIT, in-



<p 476>



deed, she burst out with the flaming cry of their kinship:

"If you are SIEGMUND, I am SIEGLINDE!"  Laughing, sing-

ing, bounding, exulting,--with their passion and their

sword,--the VOLSUNGS ran out into the spring night.



     As the curtain fell, Harsanyi turned to his wife.  "At

last," he sighed, "somebody with ENOUGH!  Enough voice

and talent and beauty, enough physical power.  And such

a noble, noble style!"



     "I can scarcely believe it, Andor.  I can see her now, that

clumsy girl, hunched up over your piano.  I can see her shoul-

ders.  She always seemed to labor so with her back.  And I

shall never forget that night when you found her voice."



     The audience kept up its clamor until, after many re-

appearances with the tenor, Kronborg came before the cur-

tain alone.  The house met her with a roar, a greeting that

was almost savage in its fierceness.  The singer's eyes,

sweeping the house, rested for a moment on Harsanyi, and

she waved her long sleeve toward his box.



     "She OUGHT to be pleased that you are here," said Mrs.

Harsanyi.  "I wonder if she knows how much she owes to

you."



     "She owes me nothing," replied her husband quickly.

"She paid her way.  She always gave something back,

even then."



     "I remember you said once that she would do nothing

common," said Mrs. Harsanyi thoughtfully.



     "Just so.  She might fail, die, get lost in the pack.  But

if she achieved, it would be nothing common.  There are

people whom one can trust for that.  There is one way in

which they will never fail."  Harsanyi retired into his own

reflections.



     After the second act Fred Ottenburg brought Archie

to the Harsanyis' box and introduced him as an old friend

of Miss Kronborg.  The head of a musical publishing house

joined them, bringing with him a journalist and the presi-

dent of a German singing society.  The conversation was



<p 477>



chiefly about the new SIEGLINDE.  Mrs. Harsanyi was gra-

cious and enthusiastic, her husband nervous and uncom-

municative.  He smiled mechanically, and politely an-

swered questions addressed to him.  "Yes, quite so."  "Oh,

certainly."  Every one, of course, said very usual things

with great conviction.  Mrs. Harsanyi was used to hearing

and uttering the commonplaces which such occasions de-

manded.  When her husband withdrew into the shadow,

she covered his retreat by her sympathy and cordiality.

In reply to a direct question from Ottenburg, Harsanyi

said, flinching, "ISOLDE?  Yes, why not?  She will sing all

the great roles, I should think."



     The chorus director said something about "dramatic

temperament."  The journalist insisted that it was "ex-

plosive force," "projecting power."



     Ottenburg turned to Harsanyi.  "What is it, Mr. Har-

sanyi?  Miss Kronborg says if there is anything in her,

you are the man who can say what it is."



     The journalist scented copy and was eager.  "Yes, Har-

sanyi.  You know all about her.  What's her secret?"



     Harsanyi rumpled his hair irritably and shrugged his

shoulders.  "Her secret?  It is every artist's secret,"--he

waved his hand,--"passion.  That is all.  It is an open

secret, and perfectly safe.  Like heroism, it is inimitable

in cheap materials."



     The lights went out.  Fred and Archie left the box as

the second act came on.



     Artistic growth is, more than it is anything else, a refining

of the sense of truthfulness.  The stupid believe that to

be truthful is easy; only the artist, the great artist, knows

how difficult it is.  That afternoon nothing new came to

Thea Kronborg, no enlightenment, no inspiration.  She

merely came into full possession of things she had been

refining and perfecting for so long.  Her inhibitions chanced

to be fewer than usual, and, within herself, she entered

into the inheritance that she herself had laid up, into the



<p 478>



fullness of the faith she had kept before she knew its name

or its meaning.



     Often when she sang, the best she had was unavailable;

she could not break through to it, and every sort of dis-

traction and mischance came between it and her.  But

this afternoon the closed roads opened, the gates dropped.

What she had so often tried to reach, lay under her hand.

She had only to touch an idea to make it live.



     While she was on the stage she was conscious that every

movement was the right movement, that her body was

absolutely the instrument of her idea.  Not for nothing

had she kept it so severely, kept it filled with such energy

and fire.  All that deep-rooted vitality flowered in her

voice, her face, in her very finger-tips.  She felt like a tree

bursting into bloom.  And her voice was as flexible as her

body; equal to any demand, capable of every NUANCE.

With the sense of its perfect companionship, its entire

trustworthiness, she had been able to throw herself into

the dramatic exigencies of the part, everything in her at

its best and everything working together.



     The third act came on, and the afternoon slipped by.

Thea Kronborg's friends, old and new, seated about the

house on different floors and levels, enjoyed her triumph

according to their natures.  There was one there, whom

nobody knew, who perhaps got greater pleasure out of

that afternoon than Harsanyi himself.  Up in the top gal-

lery a gray-haired little Mexican, withered and bright as

a string of peppers beside a'dobe door, kept praying and

cursing under his breath, beating on the brass railing

and shouting "Bravo!  Bravo!" until he was repressed by

his neighbors.



     He happened to be there because a Mexican band was

to be a feature of Barnum and Bailey's circus that year.

One of the managers of the show had traveled about the

Southwest, signing up a lot of Mexican musicians at low

wages, and had brought them to New York.  Among them



<p 479>



was Spanish Johnny.  After Mrs. Tellamantez died, Johnny

abandoned his trade and went out with his mandolin to

pick up a living for one.  His irregularities had become

his regular mode of life.



     When Thea Kronborg came out of the stage entrance

on Fortieth Street, the sky was still flaming with the last

rays of the sun that was sinking off behind the North

River.  A little crowd of people was lingering about the

door--musicians from the orchestra who were waiting

for their comrades, curious young men, and some poorly

dressed girls who were hoping to get a glimpse of the

singer.  She bowed graciously to the group, through her

veil, but she did not look to the right or left as she crossed

the sidewalk to her cab.  Had she lifted her eyes an instant

and glanced out through her white scarf, she must have

seen the only man in the crowd who had removed his hat

when she emerged, and who stood with it crushed up in

his hand.  And she would have known him, changed as he

was.  His lustrous black hair was full of gray, and his face

was a good deal worn by the EXTASI, so that it seemed to

have shrunk away from his shining eyes and teeth and left

them too prominent.  But she would have known him.

She passed so near that he could have touched her, and he

did not put on his hat until her taxi had snorted away.

Then he walked down Broadway with his hands in his

overcoat pockets, wearing a smile which embraced all the

stream of life that passed him and the lighted towers that

rose into the limpid blue of the evening sky.  If the singer,

going home exhausted in her cab, was wondering what

was the good of it all, that smile, could she have seen it,

would have answered her.  It is the only commensurate

answer.





     Here we must leave Thea Kronborg.  From this time

on the story of her life is the story of her achievement.

The growth of an artist is an intellectual and spiritual



<p 480>



development which can scarcely be followed in a personal

narrative.  This story attempts to deal only with the sim-

ple and concrete beginnings which color and accent an

artist's work, and to give some account of how a Moon-

stone girl found her way out of a vague, easy-going world

into a life of disciplined endeavor.  Any account of the

loyalty of young hearts to some exalted ideal, and the

passion with which they strive, will always, in some of

us, rekindle generous emotions.




End of Part VI
