

                       THE SONG OF THE LARK

                           by WILLA CATHER




                              PART I



                       FRIENDS OF CHILDHOOD



                                 I





     Dr. Howard Archie had just come up from a

game of pool with the Jewish clothier and two travel-

ing men who happened to be staying overnight in Moon-

stone.  His offices were in the Duke Block, over the drug

store.  Larry, the doctor's man, had lit the overhead light

in the waiting-room and the double student's lamp on the

desk in the study.  The isinglass sides of the hard-coal

burner were aglow, and the air in the study was so hot that

as he came in the doctor opened the door into his little

operating-room, where there was no stove.  The waiting-

room was carpeted and stiffly furnished, something like a

country parlor.  The study had worn, unpainted floors, but

there was a look of winter comfort about it.  The doctor's

flat-top desk was large and well made; the papers were in

orderly piles, under glass weights.  Behind the stove a wide

bookcase, with double glass doors, reached from the floor

to the ceiling.  It was filled with medical books of every

thickness and color.  On the top shelf stood a long row of

thirty or forty volumes, bound all alike in dark mottled

board covers, with imitation leather backs.



     As the doctor in New England villages is proverbially

old, so the doctor in small Colorado towns twenty-five

years ago was generally young.  Dr. Archie was barely

thirty.  He was tall, with massive shoulders which he held

stiffly, and a large, well-shaped head.  He was a distin-

guished-looking man, for that part of the world, at least.



<p 4>



There was something individual in the way in which his

reddish-brown hair, parted cleanly at the side, bushed over

his high forehead.  His nose was straight and thick, and his

eyes were intelligent.  He wore a curly, reddish mustache

and an imperial, cut trimly, which made him look a little

like the pictures of Napoleon III.  His hands were large and

well kept, but ruggedly formed, and the backs were shaded

with crinkly reddish hair.  He wore a blue suit of woolly,

wide-waled serge; the traveling men had known at a glance

that it was made by a Denver tailor.  The doctor was al-

ways well dressed.



     Dr. Archie turned up the student's lamp and sat down in

the swivel chair before his desk.  He sat uneasily, beating

a tattoo on his knees with his fingers, and looked about him

as if he were bored.  He glanced at his watch, then absently

took from his pocket a bunch of small keys, selected one

and looked at it.  A contemptuous smile, barely percepti-

ble, played on his lips, but his eyes remained meditative.

Behind the door that led into the hall, under his buffalo-

skin driving-coat, was a locked cupboard.  This the doctor

opened mechanically, kicking aside a pile of muddy over-

shoes.  Inside, on the shelves, were whiskey glasses and

decanters, lemons, sugar, and bitters.  Hearing a step in

the empty, echoing hall without, the doctor closed the cup-

board again, snapping the Yale lock.  The door of the

waiting-room opened, a man entered and came on into

the consulting-room.



     "Good-evening, Mr. Kronborg," said the doctor care-

lessly.  "Sit down."



     His visitor was a tall, loosely built man, with a thin

brown beard, streaked with gray.  He wore a frock coat, a

broad-brimmed black hat, a white lawn necktie, and steel-

rimmed spectacles.  Altogether there was a pretentious and

important air about him, as he lifted the skirts of his coat

and sat down.



     "Good-evening, doctor.  Can you step around to the



<p 5>



house with me?  I think Mrs. Kronborg will need you this

evening."  This was said with profound gravity and, curi-

ously enough, with a slight embarrassment.



     "Any hurry?" the doctor asked over his shoulder as he

went into his operating-room.



     Mr. Kronborg coughed behind his hand, and contracted

his brows.  His face threatened at every moment to break

into a smile of foolish excitement.  He controlled it only by

calling upon his habitual pulpit manner.  "Well, I think it

would be as well to go immediately.  Mrs. Kronborg will be

more comfortable if you are there.  She has been suffering

for some time."



     The doctor came back and threw a black bag upon his

desk.  He wrote some instructions for his man on a pre-

scription pad and then drew on his overcoat.  "All ready,"

he announced, putting out his lamp.  Mr. Kronborg rose

and they tramped through the empty hall and down the

stairway to the street.  The drug store below was dark, and

the saloon next door was just closing.  Every other light on

Main Street was out.



     On either side of the road and at the outer edge of the

board sidewalk, the snow had been shoveled into breast-

works.  The town looked small and black, flattened down

in the snow, muffled and all but extinguished.  Overhead

the stars shone gloriously.  It was impossible not to notice

them.  The air was so clear that the white sand hills to the

east of Moonstone gleamed softly.  Following the Reverend

Mr. Kronborg along the narrow walk, past the little dark,

sleeping houses, the doctor looked up at the flashing night

and whistled softly.  It did seem that people were stupider

than they need be; as if on a night like this there ought to

be something better to do than to sleep nine hours, or to

assist Mrs. Kronborg in functions which she could have

performed so admirably unaided.  He wished he had gone

down to Denver to hear Fay Templeton sing "See-Saw."

Then he remembered that he had a personal interest in this



<p 6>



family, after all.  They turned into another street and saw

before them lighted windows; a low story-and-a-half house,

with a wing built on at the right and a kitchen addition at

the back, everything a little on the slant--roofs, windows,

and doors.  As they approached the gate, Peter Kron-

borg's pace grew brisker.  His nervous, ministerial cough

annoyed the doctor.  "Exactly as if he were going to give

out a text," he thought.  He drew off his glove and felt

in his vest pocket.  "Have a troche, Kronborg," he said,

producing some.  "Sent me for samples.  Very good for a

rough throat."



     "Ah, thank you, thank you.  I was in something of a

hurry.  I neglected to put on my overshoes.  Here we are,

doctor."  Kronborg opened his front door--seemed de-

lighted to be at home again.



     The front hall was dark and cold; the hatrack was hung

with an astonishing number of children's hats and caps and

cloaks.  They were even piled on the table beneath the

hatrack.  Under the table was a heap of rubbers and over-

shoes.  While the doctor hung up his coat and hat, Peter

Kronborg opened the door into the living-room.  A glare of

light greeted them, and a rush of hot, stale air, smelling of

warming flannels.





     At three o'clock in the morning Dr. Archie was in the

parlor putting on his cuffs and coat--there was no spare

bedroom in that house.  Peter Kronborg's seventh child,

a boy, was being soothed and cosseted by his aunt, Mrs.

Kronborg was asleep, and the doctor was going home.  But

he wanted first to speak to Kronborg, who, coatless and

fluttery, was pouring coal into the kitchen stove.  As the

doctor crossed the dining-room he paused and listened.

From one of the wing rooms, off to the left, he heard rapid,

distressed breathing.  He went to the kitchen door.



     "One of the children sick in there?" he asked, nodding

toward the partition.



<p 7>





     Kronborg hung up the stove-lifter and dusted his fingers.

"It must be Thea.  I meant to ask you to look at her.  She

has a croupy cold.  But in my excitement--Mrs. Kronborg

is doing finely, eh, doctor?  Not many of your patients with

such a constitution, I expect."



     "Oh, yes.  She's a fine mother."  The doctor took up the

lamp from the kitchen table and unceremoniously went

into the wing room.  Two chubby little boys were asleep

in a double bed, with the coverlids over their noses and

their feet drawn up.  In a single bed, next to theirs, lay a

little girl of eleven, wide awake, two yellow braids sticking

up on the pillow behind her.  Her face was scarlet and her

eyes were blazing.



     The doctor shut the door behind him.  "Feel pretty sick,

Thea?" he asked as he took out his thermometer.  "Why

didn't you call somebody?"



     She looked at him with greedy affection.  "I thought you

were here," she spoke between quick breaths.  "There is a

new baby, isn't there?  Which?"



     "Which?" repeated the doctor.



     "Brother or sister?"



     He smiled and sat down on the edge of the bed.  "Bro-

ther," he said, taking her hand.  "Open."



     "Good.  Brothers are better," she murmured as he put

the glass tube under her tongue.



     "Now, be still, I want to count."  Dr. Archie reached

for her hand and took out his watch.  When he put her

hand back under the quilt he went over to one of the win-

dows--they were both tight shut--and lifted it a little

way.  He reached up and ran his hand along the cold, un-

papered wall.  "Keep under the covers; I'll come back to

you in a moment," he said, bending over the glass lamp

with his thermometer.  He winked at her from the door

before he shut it.



     Peter Kronborg was sitting in his wife's room, holding

the bundle which contained his son.  His air of cheerful



<p 8>



importance, his beard and glasses, even his shirt-sleeves,

annoyed the doctor.  He beckoned Kronborg into the liv-

ing-room and said sternly:--



     "You've got a very sick child in there.  Why didn't you

call me before?  It's pneumonia, and she must have been

sick for several days.  Put the baby down somewhere,

please, and help me make up the bed-lounge here in the

parlor.  She's got to be in a warm room, and she's got to

be quiet.  You must keep the other children out.  Here, this

thing opens up, I see," swinging back the top of the car-

pet lounge.  "We can lift her mattress and carry her in

just as she is.  I don't want to disturb her more than is

necessary."



     Kronborg was all concern immediately.  The two men

took up the mattress and carried the sick child into the parlor.

"I'll have to go down to my office to get some medicine,

Kronborg.  The drug store won't be open.  Keep the covers

on her.  I won't be gone long.  Shake down the stove and

put on a little coal, but not too much; so it'll catch quickly,

I mean.  Find an old sheet for me, and put it there to warm."



     The doctor caught his coat and hurried out into the dark

street.  Nobody was stirring yet, and the cold was bitter.

He was tired and hungry and in no mild humor.  "The

idea!" he muttered; "to be such an ass at his age, about the

seventh!  And to feel no responsibility about the little girl.

Silly old goat!  The baby would have got into the world

somehow; they always do.  But a nice little girl like that

--she's worth the whole litter.  Where she ever got it

from--"  He turned into the Duke Block and ran up the

stairs to his office.



     Thea Kronborg, meanwhile, was wondering why she

happened to be in the parlor, where nobody but company

--usually visiting preachers--ever slept.  She had mo-

ments of stupor when she did not see anything, and mo-

ments of excitement when she felt that something unusual

and pleasant was about to happen, when she saw every-



<p 9>



thing clearly in the red light from the isinglass sides of the

hard-coal burner--the nickel trimmings on the stove

itself, the pictures on the wall, which she thought very

beautiful, the flowers on the Brussels carpet, Czerny's

"Daily Studies" which stood open on the upright piano.

She forgot, for the time being, all about the new baby.



     When she heard the front door open, it occurred to her

that the pleasant thing which was going to happen was

Dr. Archie himself.  He came in and warmed his hands at

the stove.  As he turned to her, she threw herself wearily

toward him, half out of her bed.  She would have tumbled

to the floor had he not caught her.  He gave her some medi-

cine and went to the kitchen for something he needed.  She

drowsed and lost the sense of his being there.  When she

opened her eyes again, he was kneeling before the stove,

spreading something dark and sticky on a white cloth, with

a big spoon; batter, perhaps.  Presently she felt him taking

off her nightgown.  He wrapped the hot plaster about her

chest.  There seemed to be straps which he pinned over her

shoulders.  Then he took out a thread and needle and be-

gan to sew her up in it.  That, she felt, was too strange;

she must be dreaming anyhow, so she succumbed to her

drowsiness.



     Thea had been moaning with every breath since the

doctor came back, but she did not know it.  She did not

realize that she was suffering pain.  When she was con-

scious at all, she seemed to be separated from her body; to

be perched on top of the piano, or on the hanging lamp,

watching the doctor sew her up.  It was perplexing and

unsatisfactory, like dreaming.  She wished she could waken

up and see what was going on.



     The doctor thanked God that he had persuaded Peter

Kronborg to keep out of the way.  He could do better by

the child if he had her to himself.  He had no children of his

own.  His marriage was a very unhappy one.  As he lifted

and undressed Thea, he thought to himself what a beauti-



<p 10>



ful thing a little girl's body was,--like a flower.  It was

so neatly and delicately fashioned, so soft, and so milky

white.  Thea must have got her hair and her silky skin from

her mother.  She was a little Swede, through and through.

Dr. Archie could not help thinking how he would cherish

a little creature like this if she were his.  Her hands, so lit-

tle and hot, so clever, too,--he glanced at the open exer-

cise book on the piano.  When he had stitched up the flax-

seed jacket, he wiped it neatly about the edges, where the

paste had worked out on the skin.  He put on her the clean

nightgown he had warmed before the fire, and tucked the

blankets about her.  As he pushed back the hair that had

fuzzed down over her eyebrows, he felt her head thought-

fully with the tips of his fingers.  No, he couldn't say

that it was different from any other child's head, though

he believed that there was something very different about

her.  He looked intently at her wide, flushed face, freckled

nose, fierce little mouth, and her delicate, tender chin--the

one soft touch in her hard little Scandinavian face, as if

some fairy godmother had caressed her there and left a

cryptic promise.  Her brows were usually drawn together

defiantly, but never when she was with Dr. Archie.  Her

affection for him was prettier than most of the things that

went to make up the doctor's life in Moonstone.



     The windows grew gray.  He heard a tramping on the

attic floor, on the back stairs, then cries: "Give me my

shirt!"  "Where's my other stocking?"



     "I'll have to stay till they get off to school," he reflected,

"or they'll be in here tormenting her, the whole lot of

them."



<p 11>









                                II





     For the next four days it seemed to Dr. Archie that

his patient might slip through his hands, do what he

might.  But she did not.  On the contrary, after that she

recovered very rapidly.  As her father remarked, she must

have inherited the "constitution" which he was never tired

of admiring in her mother.



     One afternoon, when her new brother was a week old, the

doctor found Thea very comfortable and happy in her bed

in the parlor.  The sunlight was pouring in over her shoulders,

the baby was asleep on a pillow in a big rocking-chair beside

her.  Whenever he stirred, she put out her hand and rocked

him.  Nothing of him was visible but a flushed, puffy fore-

head and an uncompromisingly big, bald cranium.  The

door into her mother's room stood open, and Mrs. Kronborg

was sitting up in bed darning stockings.  She was a short,

stalwart woman, with a short neck and a determined-looking

head.  Her skin was very fair, her face calm and unwrinkled,

and her yellow hair, braided down her back as she lay in

bed, still looked like a girl's.  She was a woman whom

Dr. Archie respected; active, practical, unruffled; good-

humored, but determined.  Exactly the sort of woman to

take care of a flighty preacher.  She had brought her hus-

band some property, too,--one fourth of her father's broad

acres in Nebraska,--but this she kept in her own name.

She had profound respect for her husband's erudition and

eloquence.  She sat under his preaching with deep humility,

and was as much taken in by his stiff shirt and white neck-

ties as if she had not ironed them herself by lamplight the

night before they appeared correct and spotless in the pul-

pit.  But for all this, she had no confidence in his adminis-

tration of worldly affairs.  She looked to him for morning



<p 12>



prayers and grace at table; she expected him to name the

babies and to supply whatever parental sentiment there

was in the house, to remember birthdays and anniver-

saries, to point the children to moral and patriotic ideals.

It was her work to keep their bodies, their clothes, and

their conduct in some sort of order, and this she accom-

plished with a success that was a source of wonder to her

neighbors.  As she used to remark, and her husband ad-

miringly to echo, she "had never lost one."  With all his

flightiness, Peter Kronborg appreciated the matter-of-fact,

punctual way in which his wife got her children into the

world and along in it.  He believed, and he was right in

believing, that the sovereign State of Colorado was much

indebted to Mrs. Kronborg and women like her.



     Mrs. Kronborg believed that the size of every family was

decided in heaven.  More modern views would not have

startled her; they would simply have seemed foolish--

thin chatter, like the boasts of the men who built the tower

of Babel, or like Axel's plan to breed ostriches in the chicken

yard.  From what evidence Mrs. Kronborg formed her

opinions on this and other matters, it would have been

difficult to say, but once formed, they were unchangeable.

She would no more have questioned her convictions than

she would have questioned revelation.  Calm and even-

tempered, naturally kind, she was capable of strong pre-

judices, and she never forgave.



     When the doctor came in to see Thea, Mrs. Kronborg

was reflecting that the washing was a week behind, and de-

ciding what she had better do about it.  The arrival of a

new baby meant a revision of her entire domestic schedule,

and as she drove her needle along she had been working out

new sleeping arrangements and cleaning days.  The doctor

had entered the house without knocking, after making

noise enough in the hall to prepare his patients.  Thea

was reading, her book propped up before her in the sun-

light.



<p 13>





     "Mustn't do that; bad for your eyes," he said, as Thea

shut the book quickly and slipped it under the covers.



     Mrs. Kronborg called from her bed: "Bring the baby

here, doctor, and have that chair.  She wanted him in there

for company."



     Before the doctor picked up the baby, he put a yellow

paper bag down on Thea's coverlid and winked at her.

They had a code of winks and grimaces.  When he went in

to chat with her mother, Thea opened the bag cautiously,

trying to keep it from crackling.  She drew out a long bunch

of white grapes, with a little of the sawdust in which they

had been packed still clinging to them.  They were called

Malaga grapes in Moonstone, and once or twice during the

winter the leading grocer got a keg of them.  They were

used mainly for table decoration, about Christmas-time.

Thea had never had more than one grape at a time before.

When the doctor came back she was holding the almost

transparent fruit up in the sunlight, feeling the pale-green

skins softly with the tips of her fingers.  She did not thank

him; she only snapped her eyes at him in a special way

which he understood, and, when he gave her his hand,

put it quickly and shyly under her cheek, as if she were

trying to do so without knowing it--and without his

knowing it.



     Dr. Archie sat down in the rocking-chair.  "And how's

Thea feeling to-day?"



     He was quite as shy as his patient, especially when a

third person overheard his conversation.  Big and hand-

some and superior to his fellow townsmen as Dr. Archie

was, he was seldom at his ease, and like Peter Kronborg

he often dodged behind a professional manner.  There

was sometimes a contraction of embarrassment and self-

consciousness all over his big body, which made him awk-

ward--likely to stumble, to kick up rugs, or to knock over

chairs.  If any one was very sick, he forgot himself, but he

had a clumsy touch in convalescent gossip.



<p 14>





     Thea curled up on her side and looked at him with

pleasure.  "All right.  I like to be sick.  I have more fun then

than other times."



     "How's that?"



     "I don't have to go to school, and I don't have to prac-

tice.  I can read all I want to, and have good things,"--

she patted the grapes.  "I had lots of fun that time I

mashed my finger and you wouldn't let Professor Wunsch

make me practice.  Only I had to do left hand, even then.

I think that was mean."



     The doctor took her hand and examined the forefinger,

where the nail had grown back a little crooked.  "You

mustn't trim it down close at the corner there, and then it

will grow straight.  You won't want it crooked when you're

a big girl and wear rings and have sweethearts."



     She made a mocking little face at him and looked at his

new scarf-pin.  "That's the prettiest one you ev-ER had.

I wish you'd stay a long while and let me look at it.  What

is it?"



     Dr. Archie laughed.  "It's an opal.  Spanish Johnny

brought it up for me from Chihuahua in his shoe.  I had it

set in Denver, and I wore it to-day for your benefit."



     Thea had a curious passion for jewelry.  She wanted

every shining stone she saw, and in summer she was always

going off into the sand hills to hunt for crystals and agates

and bits of pink chalcedony.  She had two cigar boxes full

of stones that she had found or traded for, and she imagined

that they were of enormous value.  She was always plan-

ning how she would have them set.



     "What are you reading?"  The doctor reached under the

covers and pulled out a book of Byron's poems.  "Do you

like this?"



     She looked confused, turned over a few pages rapidly,

and pointed to "My native land, good-night."  "That,"

she said sheepishly.



     "How about `Maid of Athens'?"



<p 15>





     She blushed and looked at him suspiciously.  "I like

'There was a sound of revelry,'" she muttered.



     The doctor laughed and closed the book.  It was clumsily

bound in padded leather and had been presented to the

Reverend Peter Kronborg by his Sunday-School class as

an ornament for his parlor table.



     "Come into the office some day, and I'll lend you a nice

book.  You can skip the parts you don't understand.  You

can read it in vacation.  Perhaps you'll be able to under-

stand all of it by then."



     Thea frowned and looked fretfully toward the piano.

"In vacation I have to practice four hours every day, and

then there'll be Thor to take care of."  She pronounced it

"Tor."



     "Thor?  Oh, you've named the baby Thor?" exclaimed

the doctor.



     Thea frowned again, still more fiercely, and said quickly,

"That's a nice name, only maybe it's a little--old-

fashioned."  She was very sensitive about being thought a

foreigner, and was proud of the fact that, in town, her

father always preached in English; very bookish English,

at that, one might add.



     Born in an old Scandinavian colony in Minnesota, Peter

Kronborg had been sent to a small divinity school in

Indiana by the women of a Swedish evangelical mission,

who were convinced of his gifts and who skimped and

begged and gave church suppers to get the long, lazy youth

through the seminary.  He could still speak enough Swed-

ish to exhort and to bury the members of his country

church out at Copper Hole, and he wielded in his Moon-

stone pulpit a somewhat pompous English vocabulary he

had learned out of books at college.  He always spoke

of "the infant Saviour," "our Heavenly Father," etc.  The

poor man had no natural, spontaneous human speech.  If

he had his sincere moments, they were perforce inarticu-

late.  Probably a good deal of his pretentiousness was due



<p 16>



to the fact that he habitually expressed himself in a book-

learned language, wholly remote from anything personal,

native, or homely.  Mrs. Kronborg spoke Swedish to her

own sisters and to her sister-in-law Tillie, and colloquial

English to her neighbors.  Thea, who had a rather sensitive

ear, until she went to school never spoke at all, except in

monosyllables, and her mother was convinced that she was

tongue-tied.  She was still inept in speech for a child so

intelligent.  Her ideas were usually clear, but she seldom

attempted to explain them, even at school, where she

excelled in "written work" and never did more than mutter

a reply.



     "Your music professor stopped me on the street to-day

and asked me how you were," said the doctor, rising.

"He'll be sick himself, trotting around in this slush with

no overcoat or overshoes."



     "He's poor," said Thea simply.



     The doctor sighed.  "I'm afraid he's worse than that.

Is he always all right when you take your lessons?  Never

acts as if he'd been drinking?"



     Thea looked angry and spoke excitedly.  "He knows a

lot.  More than anybody.  I don't care if he does drink;

he's old and poor."  Her voice shook a little.



     Mrs. Kronborg spoke up from the next room.  "He's a

good teacher, doctor.  It's good for us he does drink.  He'd

never be in a little place like this if he didn't have some

weakness.  These women that teach music around here

don't know nothing.  I wouldn't have my child wasting

time with them.  If Professor Wunsch goes away, Thea'll

have nobody to take from.  He's careful with his scholars;

he don't use bad language.  Mrs. Kohler is always present

when Thea takes her lesson.  It's all right."  Mrs. Kronborg

spoke calmly and judicially.  One could see that she had

thought the matter out before.



     "I'm glad to hear that, Mrs. Kronborg.  I wish we could

get the old man off his bottle and keep him tidy.  Do you



<p 17>



suppose if I gave you an old overcoat you could get him to

wear it?"  The doctor went to the bedroom door and Mrs.

Kronborg looked up from her darning.



     "Why, yes, I guess he'd be glad of it.  He'll take most

anything from me.  He won't buy clothes, but I guess he'd

wear 'em if he had 'em.  I've never had any clothes to give

him, having so many to make over for."



     "I'll have Larry bring the coat around to-night.  You

aren't cross with me, Thea?" taking her hand.



     Thea grinned warmly.  "Not if you give Professor

Wunsch a coat--and things," she tapped the grapes sig-

nificantly.  The doctor bent over and kissed her.







                                III





     Being sick was all very well, but Thea knew from

experience that starting back to school again was

attended by depressing difficulties.  One Monday morning

she got up early with Axel and Gunner, who shared her

wing room, and hurried into the back living-room, between

the dining-room and the kitchen.  There, beside a soft-coal

stove, the younger children of the family undressed at night

and dressed in the morning.  The older daughter, Anna,

and the two big boys slept upstairs, where the rooms were

theoretically warmed by stovepipes from below.  The first

(and the worst!) thing that confronted Thea was a suit of

clean, prickly red flannel, fresh from the wash.  Usually

the torment of breaking in a clean suit of flannel came on

Sunday, but yesterday, as she was staying in the house,

she had begged off.  Their winter underwear was a trial to

all the children, but it was bitterest to Thea because she

happened to have the most sensitive skin.  While she was

tugging it on, her Aunt Tillie brought in warm water from

the boiler and filled the tin pitcher.  Thea washed her face,

brushed and braided her hair, and got into her blue cash-

mere dress.  Over this she buttoned a long apron, with

sleeves, which would not be removed until she put on her

cloak to go to school.  Gunner and Axel, on the soap box

behind the stove, had their usual quarrel about which

should wear the tightest stockings, but they exchanged

reproaches in low tones, for they were wholesomely afraid

of Mrs. Kronborg's rawhide whip.  She did not chastise

her children often, but she did it thoroughly.  Only a some-

what stern system of discipline could have kept any degree

of order and quiet in that overcrowded house.



     Mrs. Kronborg's children were all trained to dress them-



<p 19>



selves at the earliest possible age, to make their own beds,

--the boys as well as the girls,--to take care of their

clothes, to eat what was given them, and to keep out of

the way.  Mrs. Kronborg would have made a good chess-

player; she had a head for moves and positions.



     Anna, the elder daughter, was her mother's lieutenant.

All the children knew that they must obey Anna, who was

an obstinate contender for proprieties and not always fair-

minded.  To see the young Kronborgs headed for Sunday-

School was like watching a military drill.  Mrs. Kronborg

let her children's minds alone.  She did not pry into their

thoughts or nag them.  She respected them as individuals,

and outside of the house they had a great deal of liberty.

But their communal life was definitely ordered.



     In the winter the children breakfasted in the kitchen;

Gus and Charley and Anna first, while the younger chil-

dren were dressing.  Gus was nineteen and was a clerk in

a dry-goods store.  Charley, eighteen months younger,

worked in a feed store.  They left the house by the kitchen

door at seven o'clock, and then Anna helped her Aunt

Tillie get the breakfast for the younger ones.  Without the

help of this sister-in-law, Tillie Kronborg, Mrs. Kronborg's

life would have been a hard one.  Mrs. Kronborg often

reminded Anna that "no hired help would ever have taken

the same interest."



     Mr. Kronborg came of a poorer stock than his wife; from

a lowly, ignorant family that had lived in a poor part of

Sweden.  His great-grandfather had gone to Norway to

work as a farm laborer and had married a Norwegian girl.

This strain of Norwegian blood came out somewhere in

each generation of the Kronborgs.  The intemperance of

one of Peter Kronborg's uncles, and the religious mania

of another, had been alike charged to the Norwegian

grandmother.  Both Peter Kronborg and his sister Tillie

were more like the Norwegian root of the family than

like the Swedish, and this same Norwegian strain was



<p 20>



strong in Thea, though in her it took a very different

character.



     Tillie was a queer, addle-pated thing, as flighty as a girl

at thirty-five, and overweeningly fond of gay clothes--

which taste, as Mrs. Kronborg philosophically said, did

nobody any harm.  Tillie was always cheerful, and her

tongue was still for scarcely a minute during the day.  She

had been cruelly overworked on her father's Minnesota

farm when she was a young girl, and she had never been

so happy as she was now; had never before, as she said,

had such social advantages.  She thought her brother the

most important man in Moonstone.  She never missed a

church service, and, much to the embarrassment of the

children, she always "spoke a piece" at the Sunday-School

concerts.  She had a complete set of "Standard Recita-

tions," which she conned on Sundays.  This morning, when

Thea and her two younger brothers sat down to breakfast,

Tillie was remonstrating with Gunner because he had not

learned a recitation assigned to him for George Washington

Day at school.  The unmemorized text lay heavily on

Gunner's conscience as he attacked his buckwheat cakes

and sausage.  He knew that Tillie was in the right, and

that "when the day came he would be ashamed of himself."



     "I don't care," he muttered, stirring his coffee; "they

oughtn't to make boys speak.  It's all right for girls.  They

like to show off."



     "No showing off about it.  Boys ought to like to speak

up for their country.  And what was the use of your father

buying you a new suit, if you're not going to take part in

anything?"



     "That was for Sunday-School.  I'd rather wear my old

one, anyhow.  Why didn't they give the piece to Thea?"

Gunner grumbled.



     Tillie was turning buckwheat cakes at the griddle.

"Thea can play and sing, she don't need to speak.  But

you've got to know how to do something, Gunner, that



<p 21>



you have.  What are you going to do when you git big and

want to git into society, if you can't do nothing?  Every-

body'll say, `Can you sing?  Can you play?  Can you

speak?  Then git right out of society.'  An' that's what

they'll say to you, Mr. Gunner."



     Gunner and Alex grinned at Anna, who was preparing

her mother's breakfast.  They never made fun of Tillie, but

they understood well enough that there were subjects upon

which her ideas were rather foolish.  When Tillie struck

the shallows, Thea was usually prompt in turning the

conversation.



     "Will you and Axel let me have your sled at recess?"

she asked.



     "All the time?" asked Gunner dubiously.



     "I'll work your examples for you to-night, if you do."



     "Oh, all right.  There'll be a lot of 'em."



     "I don't mind, I can work 'em fast.  How about yours,

Axel?"



     Axel was a fat little boy of seven, with pretty, lazy blue

eyes.  "I don't care," he murmured, buttering his last

buckwheat cake without ambition; "too much trouble to

copy 'em down.  Jenny Smiley'll let me have hers."



     The boys were to pull Thea to school on their sled, as

the snow was deep.  The three set off together.  Anna was

now in the high school, and she no longer went with the

family party, but walked to school with some of the older

girls who were her friends, and wore a hat, not a hood like

Thea.



<p 22>









                                IV





     And it was Summer, beautiful Summer!"  Those were

the closing words of Thea's favorite fairy tale, and

she thought of them as she ran out into the world one

Saturday morning in May, her music book under her arm.

She was going to the Kohlers' to take her lesson, but she

was in no hurry.



     It was in the summer that one really lived.  Then all

the little overcrowded houses were opened wide, and the

wind blew through them with sweet, earthy smells of

garden-planting.  The town looked as if it had just been

washed.  People were out painting their fences.  The cotton-

wood trees were a-flicker with sticky, yellow little leaves,

and the feathery tamarisks were in pink bud.  With the

warm weather came freedom for everybody.  People were

dug up, as it were.  The very old people, whom one had not

seen all winter, came out and sunned themselves in the

yard.  The double windows were taken off the houses, the

tormenting flannels in which children had been encased all

winter were put away in boxes, and the youngsters felt a

pleasure in the cool cotton things next their skin.



     Thea had to walk more than a mile to reach the Kohlers'

house, a very pleasant mile out of town toward the glitter-

ing sand hills,--yellow this morning, with lines of deep

violet where the clefts and valleys were.  She followed the

sidewalk to the depot at the south end of the town; then

took the road east to the little group of adobe houses where

the Mexicans lived, then dropped into a deep ravine; a dry

sand creek, across which the railroad track ran on a trestle.

Beyond that gulch, on a little rise of ground that faced the

open sandy plain, was the Kohlers' house, where Professor

Wunsch lived.  Fritz Kohler was the town tailor, one of the



<p 23>



first settlers.  He had moved there, built a little house and

made a garden, when Moonstone was first marked down on

the map.  He had three sons, but they now worked on the

railroad and were stationed in distant cities.  One of them

had gone to work for the Santa Fe, and lived in New

Mexico.



     Mrs. Kohler seldom crossed the ravine and went into the

town except at Christmas-time, when she had to buy pres-

ents and Christmas cards to send to her old friends in

Freeport, Illinois.  As she did not go to church, she did not

possess such a thing as a hat.  Year after year she wore the

same red hood in winter and a black sunbonnet in summer.

She made her own dresses; the skirts came barely to her

shoe-tops, and were gathered as full as they could possibly

be to the waistband.  She preferred men's shoes, and usu-

ally wore the cast-offs of one of her sons.  She had never

learned much English, and her plants and shrubs were her

companions.  She lived for her men and her garden.  Beside

that sand gulch, she had tried to reproduce a bit of her own

village in the Rhine Valley.  She hid herself behind the

growth she had fostered, lived under the shade of what she

had planted and watered and pruned.  In the blaze of the

open plain she was stupid and blind like an owl.  Shade,

shade; that was what she was always planning and making.

Behind the high tamarisk hedge, her garden was a jungle

of verdure in summer.  Above the cherry trees and peach

trees and golden plums stood the windmill, with its tank

on stilts, which kept all this verdure alive.  Outside, the

sage-brush grew up to the very edge of the garden, and the

sand was always drifting up to the tamarisks.



     Every one in Moonstone was astonished when the

Kohlers took the wandering music-teacher to live with

them.  In seventeen years old Fritz had never had a crony,

except the harness-maker and Spanish Johnny.  This

Wunsch came from God knew where,--followed Spanish

Johnny into town when that wanderer came back from one



<p 24>



of his tramps.  Wunsch played in the dance orchestra,

tuned pianos, and gave lessons.  When Mrs. Kohler rescued

him, he was sleeping in a dirty, unfurnished room over one

of the saloons, and he had only two shirts in the world.

Once he was under her roof, the old woman went at him as

she did at her garden.  She sewed and washed and mended

for him, and made him so clean and respectable that he was

able to get a large class of pupils and to rent a piano.  As

soon as he had money ahead, he sent to the Narrow Gauge

lodging-house, in Denver, for a trunkful of music which

had been held there for unpaid board.  With tears in his

eyes the old man--he was not over fifty, but sadly bat-

tered--told Mrs. Kohler that he asked nothing better of

God than to end his days with her, and to be buried in the

garden, under her linden trees.  They were not American

basswood, but the European linden, which has honey-

colored blooms in summer, with a fragrance that sur-

passes all trees and flowers and drives young people wild

with joy.



     Thea was reflecting as she walked along that had it not

been for Professor Wunsch she might have lived on for

years in Moonstone without ever knowing the Kohlers,

without ever seeing their garden or the inside of their

house.  Besides the cuckoo clock,--which was wonderful

enough, and which Mrs. Kohler said she kept for "company

when she was lonesome,"--the Kohlers had in their house

the most wonderful thing Thea had ever seen--but of that

later.



     Professor Wunsch went to the houses of his other pupils

to give them their lessons, but one morning he told Mrs.

Kronborg that Thea had talent, and that if she came to

him he could teach her in his slippers, and that would

be better.  Mrs. Kronborg was a strange woman.  That

word "talent," which no one else in Moonstone, not even

Dr. Archie, would have understood, she comprehended

perfectly.  To any other woman there, it would have meant



<p 25>



that a child must have her hair curled every day and must

play in public.  Mrs. Kronborg knew it meant that Thea

must practice four hours a day.  A child with talent must

be kept at the piano, just as a child with measles must be

kept under the blankets.  Mrs. Kronborg and her three

sisters had all studied piano, and all sang well, but none of

them had talent.  Their father had played the oboe in an

orchestra in Sweden, before he came to America to better

his fortunes.  He had even known Jenny Lind.  A child with

talent had to be kept at the piano; so twice a week in sum-

mer and once a week in winter Thea went over the gulch to

the Kohlers', though the Ladies' Aid Society thought it

was not proper for their preacher's daughter to go "where

there was so much drinking."  Not that the Kohler sons

ever so much as looked at a glass of beer.  They were

ashamed of their old folks and got out into the world as

fast as possible; had their clothes made by a Denver tailor

and their necks shaved up under their hair and forgot

the past.  Old Fritz and Wunsch, however, indulged in a

friendly bottle pretty often.  The two men were like com-

rades; perhaps the bond between them was the glass wherein

lost hopes are found; perhaps it was common memories of

another country; perhaps it was the grapevine in the gar-

den--knotty, fibrous shrub, full of homesickness and senti-

ment, which the Germans have carried around the world

with them.



     As Thea approached the house she peeped between the

pink sprays of the tamarisk hedge and saw the Professor

and Mrs. Kohler in the garden, spading and raking.  The

garden looked like a relief-map now, and gave no indication

of what it would be in August; such a jungle!  Pole beans

and potatoes and corn and leeks and kale and red cabbage

--there would even be vegetables for which there is no

American name.  Mrs. Kohler was always getting by mail

packages of seeds from Freeport and from the old country.

Then the flowers!  There were big sunflowers for the canary



<p 26>



bird, tiger lilies and phlox and zinnias and lady's-slippers

and portulaca and hollyhocks,--giant hollyhocks.  Beside

the fruit trees there was a great umbrella-shaped catalpa,

and a balm-of-Gilead, two lindens, and even a ginka,--a

rigid, pointed tree with leaves shaped like butterflies, which

shivered, but never bent to the wind.



     This morning Thea saw to her delight that the two ole-

ander trees, one white and one red, had been brought up

from their winter quarters in the cellar.  There is hardly a

German family in the most arid parts of Utah, New Mex-

ico, Arizona, but has its oleander trees.  However loutish

the American-born sons of the family may be, there was

never one who refused to give his muscle to the back-break-

ing task of getting those tubbed trees down into the cellar in

the fall and up into the sunlight in the spring.  They may

strive to avert the day, but they grapple with the tub at

last.



     When Thea entered the gate, her professor leaned his

spade against the white post that supported the turreted

dove-house, and wiped his face with his shirt-sleeve; some-

way he never managed to have a handkerchief about him.

Wunsch was short and stocky, with something rough and

bear-like about his shoulders.  His face was a dark, bricky

red, deeply creased rather than wrinkled, and the skin was

like loose leather over his neck band--he wore a brass

collar button but no collar.  His hair was cropped close;

iron-gray bristles on a bullet-like head.  His eyes were

always suffused and bloodshot.  He had a coarse, scornful

mouth, and irregular, yellow teeth, much worn at the edges.

His hands were square and red, seldom clean, but always

alive, impatient, even sympathetic.



     "MORGEN," he greeted his pupil in a businesslike way,

put on a black alpaca coat, and conducted her at once to

the piano in Mrs. Kohler's sitting-room.  He twirled the

stool to the proper height, pointed to it, and sat down in a

wooden chair beside Thea.



<p 27>





     "The scale of B flat major," he directed, and then fell

into an attitude of deep attention.  Without a word his

pupil set to work.



     To Mrs. Kohler, in the garden, came the cheerful sound

of effort, of vigorous striving.  Unconsciously she wielded

her rake more lightly.  Occasionally she heard the teacher's

voice.  "Scale of E minor. . . .  WEITER, WEITER! . . . IMMER

I hear the thumb, like a lame foot.  WEITER . . . WEITER, once;

. . . SCHON!  The chords, quick!"



     The pupil did not open her mouth until they began the

second movement of the Clementi sonata, when she remon-

strated in low tones about the way he had marked the

fingering of a passage.



     "It makes no matter what you think," replied her

teacher coldly.  "There is only one right way.  The thumb

there.  EIN, ZWEI, DREI, VIER," etc.  Then for an hour there

was no further interruption.



     At the end of the lesson Thea turned on her stool and

leaned her arm on the keyboard.  They usually had a little

talk after the lesson.



     Herr Wunsch grinned.  "How soon is it you are free from

school?  Then we make ahead faster, eh?"



     "First week in June.  Then will you give me the `Invi-

tation to the Dance'?"



     He shrugged his shoulders.  "It makes no matter.  If

you want him, you play him out of lesson hours."



     "All right."  Thea fumbled in her pocket and brought

out a crumpled slip of paper.  "What does this mean, please?

I guess it's Latin."



     Wunsch blinked at the line penciled on the paper.

"Wherefrom you get this?" he asked gruffly.



     "Out of a book Dr. Archie gave me to read.  It's all Eng-

lish but that.  Did you ever see it before?" she asked,

watching his face.



     "Yes.  A long time ago," he muttered, scowling.

"Ovidius!"  He took a stub of lead pencil from his vest



<p 28>



pocket, steadied his hand by a visible effort, and under

the words



     "LENTE CURRITE, LENTE CURRITE, NOCTIS EQUI,"

he wrote in a clear, elegant Gothic hand,--



     "GO SLOWLY, GO SLOWLY, YE STEEDS OF THE NIGHT."

He put the pencil back in his pocket and continued to stare

at the Latin.  It recalled the poem, which he had read as a

student, and thought very fine.  There were treasures of

memory which no lodging-house keeper could attach.  One

carried things about in one's head, long after one's linen

could be smuggled out in a tuning-bag.  He handed the

paper back to Thea.  "There is the English, quite elegant,"

he said, rising.



     Mrs. Kohler stuck her head in at the door, and Thea slid

off the stool.  "Come in, Mrs. Kohler," she called, "and

show me the piece-picture."



     The old woman laughed, pulled off her big gardening-

gloves, and pushed Thea to the lounge before the object of

her delight.  The "piece-picture," which hung on the wall

and nearly covered one whole end of the room, was the

handiwork of Fritz Kohler.  He had learned his trade under

an old-fashioned tailor in Magdeburg who required from

each of his apprentices a thesis: that is, before they left his

shop, each apprentice had to copy in cloth some well-

known German painting, stitching bits of colored stuff

together on a linen background; a kind of mosaic.  The

pupil was allowed to select his subject, and Fritz Kohler

had chosen a popular painting of Napoleon's retreat from

Moscow.  The gloomy Emperor and his staff were repre-

sented as crossing a stone bridge, and behind them was the

blazing city, the walls and fortresses done in gray cloth

with orange tongues of flame darting about the domes and

minarets.  Napoleon rode his white horse; Murat, in Ori-

ental dress, a bay charger.  Thea was never tired of exam-

ining this work, of hearing how long it had taken Fritz to



<p 29>



make it, how much it had been admired, and what narrow

escapes it had had from moths and fire.  Silk, Mrs. Kohler

explained, would have been much easier to manage than

woolen cloth, in which it was often hard to get the right

shades.  The reins of the horses, the wheels of the spurs,

the brooding eyebrows of the Emperor, Murat's fierce

mustaches, the great shakos of the Guard, were all worked

out with the minutest fidelity.  Thea's admiration for this

picture had endeared her to Mrs. Kohler.  It was now many

years since she used to point out its wonders to her own

little boys.  As Mrs. Kohler did not go to church, she never

heard any singing, except the songs that floated over from

Mexican Town, and Thea often sang for her after the lesson

was over.  This morning Wunsch pointed to the piano.



     "On Sunday, when I go by the church, I hear you sing

something."



     Thea obediently sat down on the stool again and began,

"COME, YE DISCONSOLATE."  Wunsch listened thoughtfully,

his hands on his knees.  Such a beautiful child's voice!

Old Mrs. Kohler's face relaxed in a smile of happiness;

she half closed her eyes.  A big fly was darting in and out

of the window; the sunlight made a golden pool on the

rag carpet and bathed the faded cretonne pillows on the

lounge, under the piece-picture.  "EARTH HAS NO SORROW

THAT HEAVEN CANNOT HEAL," the song died away.



     "That is a good thing to remember," Wunsch shook him-

self.  "You believe that?" looking quizzically at Thea.



     She became confused and pecked nervously at a black

key with her middle finger.  "I don't know.  I guess so,"

she murmured.



     Her teacher rose abruptly.  "Remember, for next time,

thirds.  You ought to get up earlier."



     That night the air was so warm that Fritz and Herr

Wunsch had their after-supper pipe in the grape arbor,

smoking in silence while the sound of fiddles and guitars

came across the ravine from Mexican Town.  Long after



<p 30>



Fritz and his old Paulina had gone to bed, Wunsch sat

motionless in the arbor, looking up through the woolly

vine leaves at the glittering machinery of heaven.





          "LENTE CURRITE, NOCTIS EQUI."



That line awoke many memories.  He was thinking of

youth; of his own, so long gone by, and of his pupil's, just

beginning.  He would even have cherished hopes for her,

except that he had become superstitious.  He believed that

whatever he hoped for was destined not to be; that his

affection brought ill-fortune, especially to the young; that

if he held anything in his thoughts, he harmed it.  He had

taught in music schools in St. Louis and Kansas City, where

the shallowness and complacency of the young misses had

maddened him.  He had encountered bad manners and bad

faith, had been the victim of sharpers of all kinds, was

dogged by bad luck.  He had played in orchestras that were

never paid and wandering opera troupes which disbanded

penniless.  And there was always the old enemy, more

relentless than the others.  It was long since he had wished

anything or desired anything beyond the necessities of the

body.  Now that he was tempted to hope for another, he

felt alarmed and shook his head.



     It was his pupil's power of application, her rugged will,

that interested him.  He had lived for so long among people

whose sole ambition was to get something for nothing that

he had learned not to look for seriousness in anything.  Now

that he by chance encountered it, it recalled standards, am-

bitions, a society long forgot.  What was it she reminded

him of?  A yellow flower, full of sunlight, perhaps.  No; a

thin glass full of sweet-smelling, sparkling Moselle wine.  He

seemed to see such a glass before him in the arbor, to watch

the bubbles rising and breaking, like the silent discharge

of energy in the nerves and brain, the rapid florescence in

young blood--Wunsch felt ashamed and dragged his slip-

pers along the path to the kitchen, his eyes on the ground.



<p 31>







                                 V





     The children in the primary grades were sometimes

required to make relief maps of Moonstone in sand.

Had they used colored sands, as the Navajo medicine men

do in their sand mosaics, they could easily have indicated

the social classifications of Moonstone, since these con-

formed to certain topographical boundaries, and every

child understood them perfectly.



     The main business street ran, of course, through the

center of the town.  To the west of this street lived all the

people who were, as Tillie Kronborg said, "in society."

Sylvester Street, the third parallel with Main Street on the

west, was the longest in town, and the best dwellings were

built along it.  Far out at the north end, nearly a mile from

the court-house and its cottonwood grove, was Dr. Archie's

house, its big yard and garden surrounded by a white paling

fence.  The Methodist Church was in the center of the

town, facing the court-house square.  The Kronborgs lived

half a mile south of the church, on the long street that

stretched out like an arm to the depot settlement.  This

was the first street west of Main, and was built up only on

one side.  The preacher's house faced the backs of the brick

and frame store buildings and a draw full of sunflowers

and scraps of old iron.  The sidewalk which ran in front

of the Kronborgs' house was the one continuous sidewalk

to the depot, and all the train men and roundhouse em-

ployees passed the front gate every time they came up-

town.  Thea and Mrs. Kronborg had many friends among

the railroad men, who often paused to chat across the fence,

and of one of these we shall have more to say.



     In the part of Moonstone that lay east of Main Street,

toward the deep ravine which, farther south, wound by



<p 32>



Mexican Town, lived all the humbler citizens, the people

who voted but did not run for office.  The houses were little

story-and-a-half cottages, with none of the fussy archi-

tectural efforts that marked those on Sylvester Street.

They nestled modestly behind their cottonwoods and Vir-

ginia creeper; their occupants had no social pretensions to

keep up.  There were no half-glass front doors with door-

bells, or formidable parlors behind closed shutters.  Here

the old women washed in the back yard, and the men sat

in the front doorway and smoked their pipes.  The people

on Sylvester Street scarcely knew that this part of the

town existed.  Thea liked to take Thor and her express

wagon and explore these quiet, shady streets, where the

people never tried to have lawns or to grow elms and pine

trees, but let the native timber have its way and spread in

luxuriance.  She had many friends there, old women who

gave her a yellow rose or a spray of trumpet vine and

appeased Thor with a cooky or a doughnut.  They called

Thea "that preacher's girl," but the demonstrative was

misplaced, for when they spoke of Mr. Kronborg they

called him "the Methodist preacher."



     Dr. Archie was very proud of his yard and garden, which

he worked himself.  He was the only man in Moonstone

who was successful at growing rambler roses, and his

strawberries were famous.  One morning when Thea was

downtown on an errand, the doctor stopped her, took her

hand and went over her with a quizzical eye, as he nearly

always did when they met.



     "You haven't been up to my place to get any straw-

berries yet, Thea.  They're at their best just now.  Mrs.

Archie doesn't know what to do with them all.  Come up

this afternoon.  Just tell Mrs. Archie I sent you.  Bring a

big basket and pick till you are tired."



     When she got home Thea told her mother that she didn't

want to go, because she didn't like Mrs. Archie.



     "She is certainly one queer woman," Mrs. Kronborg



<p 33>



assented, "but he's asked you so often, I guess you'll have

to go this time.  She won't bite you."



     After dinner Thea took a basket, put Thor in his baby-

buggy, and set out for Dr. Archie's house at the other end

of town.  As soon as she came within sight of the house,

she slackened her pace.  She approached it very slowly,

stopping often to pick dandelions and sand-peas for Thor

to crush up in his fist.



     It was his wife's custom, as soon as Dr. Archie left the

house in the morning, to shut all the doors and windows

to keep the dust out, and to pull down the shades to keep

the sun from fading the carpets.  She thought, too, that

neighbors were less likely to drop in if the house was closed

up.  She was one of those people who are stingy without

motive or reason, even when they can gain nothing by it.

She must have known that skimping the doctor in heat

and food made him more extravagant than he would have

been had she made him comfortable.  He never came home

for lunch, because she gave him such miserable scraps and

shreds of food.  No matter how much milk he bought, he

could never get thick cream for his strawberries.  Even

when he watched his wife lift it from the milk in smooth,

ivory-colored blankets, she managed, by some sleight-of-

hand, to dilute it before it got to the breakfast table.  The

butcher's favorite joke was about the kind of meat he sold

Mrs. Archie.  She felt no interest in food herself, and she

hated to prepare it.  She liked nothing better than to have

Dr. Archie go to Denver for a few days--he often went

chiefly because he was hungry--and to be left alone to

eat canned salmon and to keep the house shut up from

morning until night.



     Mrs. Archie would not have a servant because, she said,

"they ate too much and broke too much"; she even said

they knew too much.  She used what mind she had in

devising shifts to minimize her housework.  She used to

tell her neighbors that if there were no men, there would



<p 34>



be no housework.  When Mrs. Archie was first married,

she had been always in a panic for fear she would have

children.  Now that her apprehensions on that score had

grown paler, she was almost as much afraid of having dust

in the house as she had once been of having children in it.

If dust did not get in, it did not have to be got out, she said.

She would take any amount of trouble to avoid trouble.

Why, nobody knew.  Certainly her husband had never

been able to make her out.  Such little, mean natures are

among the darkest and most baffling of created things.

There is no law by which they can be explained.  The or-

dinary incentives of pain and pleasure do not account for

their behavior.  They live like insects, absorbed in petty

activities that seem to have nothing to do with any genial

aspect of human life.



     Mrs. Archie, as Mrs. Kronborg said, "liked to gad."

She liked to have her house clean, empty, dark, locked, and

to be out of it--anywhere.  A church social, a prayer

meeting, a ten-cent show; she seemed to have no prefer-

ence.  When there was nowhere else to go, she used to sit

for hours in Mrs. Smiley's millinery and notion store, lis-

tening to the talk of the women who came in, watching

them while they tried on hats, blinking at them from her

corner with her sharp, restless little eyes.  She never talked

much herself, but she knew all the gossip of the town and

she had a sharp ear for racy anecdotes--"traveling men's

stories," they used to be called in Moonstone.  Her clicking

laugh sounded like a typewriting machine in action, and,

for very pointed stories, she had a little screech.



     Mrs. Archie had been Mrs. Archie for only six years,

and when she was Belle White she was one of the "pretty"

girls in Lansing, Michigan.  She had then a train of suitors.

She could truly remind Archie that "the boys hung around

her."  They did.  They thought her very spirited and were

always saying, "Oh, that Belle White, she's a case!"  She

used to play heavy practical jokes which the young men



<p 35>



thought very clever.  Archie was considered the most

promising young man in "the young crowd," so Belle

selected him.  She let him see, made him fully aware, that

she had selected him, and Archie was the sort of boy who

could not withstand such enlightenment.  Belle's family

were sorry for him.  On his wedding day her sisters looked

at the big, handsome boy--he was twenty-four--as he

walked down the aisle with his bride, and then they looked

at each other.  His besotted confidence, his sober, radiant

face, his gentle, protecting arm, made them uncomfort-

able.  Well, they were glad that he was going West at once,

to fulfill his doom where they would not be onlookers.  Any-

how, they consoled themselves, they had got Belle off their

hands.



     More than that, Belle seemed to have got herself off her

hands.  Her reputed prettiness must have been entirely

the result of determination, of a fierce little ambition.  Once

she had married, fastened herself on some one, come to

port,--it vanished like the ornamental plumage which

drops away from some birds after the mating season.  The

one aggressive action of her life was over.  She began to

shrink in face and stature.  Of her harum-scarum spirit

there was nothing left but the little screech.  Within a few

years she looked as small and mean as she was.



     Thor's chariot crept along.  Thea approached the house

unwillingly.  She didn't care about the strawberries, any-

how.  She had come only because she did not want to hurt

Dr. Archie's feelings.  She not only disliked Mrs. Archie,

she was a little afraid of her.  While Thea was getting the

heavy baby-buggy through the iron gate she heard some

one call, "Wait a minute!" and Mrs. Archie came running

around the house from the back door, her apron over her

head.  She came to help with the buggy, because she was

afraid the wheels might scratch the paint off the gate-

posts.  She was a skinny little woman with a great pile of

frizzy light hair on a small head.



<p 36>





     "Dr. Archie told me to come up and pick some straw-

berries," Thea muttered, wishing she had stayed at home.



     Mrs. Archie led the way to the back door, squinting and

shading her eyes with her hand.  "Wait a minute," she said

again, when Thea explained why she had come.



     She went into her kitchen and Thea sat down on the

porch step.  When Mrs. Archie reappeared she carried in

her hand a little wooden butter-basket trimmed with

fringed tissue paper, which she must have brought home

from some church supper.  "You'll have to have something

to put them in," she said, ignoring the yawning willow

basket which stood empty on Thor's feet.  "You can have

this, and you needn't mind about returning it.  You know

about not trampling the vines, don't you?"



     Mrs. Archie went back into the house and Thea leaned

over in the sand and picked a few strawberries.  As soon as

she was sure that she was not going to cry, she tossed the

little basket into the big one and ran Thor's buggy along

the gravel walk and out of the gate as fast as she could push

it.  She was angry, and she was ashamed for Dr. Archie.  She

could not help thinking how uncomfortable he would be if

he ever found out about it.  Little things like that were the

ones that cut him most.  She slunk home by the back way,

and again almost cried when she told her mother about it.



     Mrs. Kronborg was frying doughnuts for her husband's

supper.  She laughed as she dropped a new lot into the hot

grease.  "It's wonderful, the way some people are made,"

she declared.  "But I wouldn't let that upset me if I was

you.  Think what it would be to live with it all the time.

You look in the black pocketbook inside my handbag and

take a dime and go downtown and get an ice-cream soda.

That'll make you feel better.  Thor can have a little of the

ice-cream if you feed it to him with a spoon.  He likes it,

don't you, son?"  She stooped to wipe his chin.  Thor was

only six months old and inarticulate, but it was quite true

that he liked ice-cream.



<p 37>







                                VI





     Seen from a balloon, Moonstone would have looked

like a Noah's ark town set out in the sand and lightly

shaded by gray-green tamarisks and cottonwoods.  A few

people were trying to make soft maples grow in their

turfed lawns, but the fashion of planting incongruous

trees from the North Atlantic States had not become gen-

eral then, and the frail, brightly painted desert town was

shaded by the light-reflecting, wind-loving trees of the

desert, whose roots are always seeking water and whose

leaves are always talking about it, making the sound of

rain.  The long porous roots of the cottonwood are irre-

pressible.  They break into the wells as rats do into grana-

ries, and thieve the water.



     The long street which connected Moonstone with the

depot settlement traversed in its course a considerable

stretch of rough open country, staked out in lots but not

built up at all, a weedy hiatus between the town and the

railroad.  When you set out along this street to go to the

station, you noticed that the houses became smaller and

farther apart, until they ceased altogether, and the board

sidewalk continued its uneven course through sunflower

patches, until you reached the solitary, new brick Catholic

Church.  The church stood there because the land was

given to the parish by the man who owned the adjoining

waste lots, in the hope of making them more salable--

"Farrier's Addition," this patch of prairie was called in the

clerk's office.  An eighth of a mile beyond the church was

a washout, a deep sand-gully, where the board sidewalk

became a bridge for perhaps fifty feet.  Just beyond the

gully was old Uncle Billy Beemer's grove,--twelve town

lots set out in fine, well-grown cottonwood trees, delightful



<p 38>



to look upon, or to listen to, as they swayed and rippled in

the wind.  Uncle Billy had been one of the most worthless

old drunkards who ever sat on a store box and told filthy

stories.  One night he played hide-and-seek with a switch

engine and got his sodden brains knocked out.  But his

grove, the one creditable thing he had ever done in his life,

rustled on.  Beyond this grove the houses of the depot

settlement began, and the naked board walk, that had run

in out of the sunflowers, again became a link between

human dwellings.



     One afternoon, late in the summer, Dr. Howard Archie

was fighting his way back to town along this walk through

a blinding sandstorm, a silk handkerchief tied over his

mouth.  He had been to see a sick woman down in the depot

settlement, and he was walking because his ponies had

been out for a hard drive that morning.



     As he passed the Catholic Church he came upon Thea

and Thor.  Thea was sitting in a child's express wagon, her

feet out behind, kicking the wagon along and steering by

the tongue.  Thor was on her lap and she held him with one

arm.  He had grown to be a big cub of a baby, with a con-

stitutional grievance, and he had to be continually amused.

Thea took him philosophically, and tugged and pulled

him about, getting as much fun as she could under her

encumbrance.  Her hair was blowing about her face, and

her eyes were squinting so intently at the uneven board

sidewalk in front of her that she did not see the doctor

until he spoke to her.



     "Look out, Thea.  You'll steer that youngster into the

ditch."



     The wagon stopped.  Thea released the tongue, wiped

her hot, sandy face, and pushed back her hair.  "Oh, no,

I won't!  I never ran off but once, and then he didn't get

anything but a bump.  He likes this better than a baby-

buggy, and so do I."



     "Are you going to kick that cart all the way home?"



<p 39>





     "Of course.  We take long trips; wherever there is a side-

walk.  It's no good on the road."



     "Looks to me like working pretty hard for your fun.

Are you going to be busy to-night?  Want to make a call

with me?  Spanish Johnny's come home again, all used up.

His wife sent me word this morning, and I said I'd go over

to see him to-night.  He's an old chum of yours, isn't

he?"



     "Oh, I'm glad.  She's been crying her eyes out.  When

did he come?"



     "Last night, on Number Six.  Paid his fare, they tell me.

Too sick to beat it.  There'll come a time when that boy

won't get back, I'm afraid.  Come around to my office about

eight o'clock,--and you needn't bring that!"



     Thor seemed to understand that he had been insulted,

for he scowled and began to kick the side of the wagon,

shouting, "Go-go, go-go!"  Thea leaned forward and

grabbed the wagon tongue.  Dr. Archie stepped in front of

her and blocked the way.  "Why don't you make him wait?

What do you let him boss you like that for?"



     "If he gets mad he throws himself, and then I can't do

anything with him.  When he's mad he's lots stronger than

me, aren't you, Thor?"  Thea spoke with pride, and the

idol was appeased.  He grunted approvingly as his sister

began to kick rapidly behind her, and the wagon rattled off

and soon disappeared in the flying currents of sand.



     That evening Dr. Archie was seated in his office, his desk

chair tilted back, reading by the light of a hot coal-oil lamp.

All the windows were open, but the night was breathless

after the sandstorm, and his hair was moist where it hung

over his forehead.  He was deeply engrossed in his book

and sometimes smiled thoughtfully as he read.  When

Thea Kronborg entered quietly and slipped into a seat, he

nodded, finished his paragraph, inserted a bookmark, and

rose to put the book back into the case.  It was one out of

the long row of uniform volumes on the top shelf.



<p 40>





     "Nearly every time I come in, when you're alone, you're

reading one of those books," Thea remarked thoughtfully.

"They must be very nice."



     The doctor dropped back into his swivel chair, the mot-

tled volume still in his hand.  "They aren't exactly books,

Thea," he said seriously.  "They're a city."



     "A history, you mean?"



     "Yes, and no.  They're a history of a live city, not a

dead one.  A Frenchman undertook to write about a whole

cityful of people, all the kinds he knew.  And he got them

nearly all in, I guess.  Yes, it's very interesting.  You'll

like to read it some day, when you're grown up."



     Thea leaned forward and made out the title on the back,

"A Distinguished Provincial in Paris."



     "It doesn't sound very interesting."



     "Perhaps not, but it is."  The doctor scrutinized her

broad face, low enough to be in the direct light from under

the green lamp shade.  "Yes," he went on with some sat-

isfaction, "I think you'll like them some day.  You're

always curious about people, and I expect this man knew

more about people than anybody that ever lived."



     "City people or country people?"



     "Both.  People are pretty much the same everywhere."



     "Oh, no, they're not.  The people who go through in the

dining-car aren't like us."



     "What makes you think they aren't, my girl?  Their

clothes?"



     Thea shook her head.  "No, it's something else.  I don't

know."  Her eyes shifted under the doctor's searching gaze

and she glanced up at the row of books.  "How soon will

I be old enough to read them?"



     "Soon enough, soon enough, little girl."  The doctor

patted her hand and looked at her index finger.  "The

nail's coming all right, isn't it?  But I think that man

makes you practice too much.  You have it on your mind

all the time."  He had noticed that when she talked to him



<p 41>



she was always opening and shutting her hands.  "It makes

you nervous."



     "No, he don't," Thea replied stubbornly, watching Dr.

Archie return the book to its niche.



     He took up a black leather case, put on his hat, and they

went down the dark stairs into the street.  The summer

moon hung full in the sky.  For the time being, it was the

great fact in the world.  Beyond the edge of the town the

plain was so white that every clump of sage stood out dis-

tinct from the sand, and the dunes looked like a shining

lake.  The doctor took off his straw hat and carried it in his

hand as they walked toward Mexican Town, across the

sand.



     North of Pueblo, Mexican settlements were rare in

Colorado then.  This one had come about accidentally.

Spanish Johnny was the first Mexican who came to Moon-

stone.  He was a painter and decorator, and had been

working in Trinidad, when Ray Kennedy told him there

was a "boom" on in Moonstone, and a good many new

buildings were going up.  A year after Johnny settled in

Moonstone, his cousin, Famos Serrenos, came to work in

the brickyard; then Serrenos' cousins came to help him.

During the strike, the master mechanic put a gang of

Mexicans to work in the roundhouse.  The Mexicans had

arrived so quietly, with their blankets and musical instru-

ments, that before Moonstone was awake to the fact, there

was a Mexican quarter; a dozen families or more.



     As Thea and the doctor approached the 'dobe houses,

they heard a guitar, and a rich barytone voice--that of

Famos Serrenos--singing "La Golandrina."  All the

Mexican houses had neat little yards, with tamarisk hedges

and flowers, and walks bordered with shells or white-

washed stones.  Johnny's house was dark.  His wife, Mrs.

Tellamantez, was sitting on the doorstep, combing her

long, blue-black hair.  (Mexican women are like the Spar-

tans; when they are in trouble, in love, under stress of any



<p 42>



kind, they comb and comb their hair.)  She rose without

embarrassment or apology, comb in hand, and greeted the

doctor.



     "Good-evening; will you go in?" she asked in a low,

musical voice.  "He is in the back room.  I will make a

light."  She followed them indoors, lit a candle and handed

it to the doctor, pointing toward the bedroom.  Then she

went back and sat down on her doorstep.



     Dr. Archie and Thea went into the bedroom, which was

dark and quiet.  There was a bed in the corner, and a man

was lying on the clean sheets.  On the table beside him was

a glass pitcher, half-full of water.  Spanish Johnny looked

younger than his wife, and when he was in health he was

very handsome: slender, gold-colored, with wavy black

hair, a round, smooth throat, white teeth, and burning

black eyes.  His profile was strong and severe, like an

Indian's.  What was termed his "wildness" showed itself

only in his feverish eyes and in the color that burned on his

tawny cheeks.  That night he was a coppery green, and his

eyes were like black holes.  He opened them when the doc-

tor held the candle before his face.



     "MI TESTA!" he muttered, "MI TESTA, doctor.  "LA

FIEBRE!"  Seeing the doctor's companion at the foot of the bed, he

attempted a smile.  "MUCHACHA!" he exclaimed deprecat-

ingly.



     Dr. Archie stuck a thermometer into his mouth.  "Now,

Thea, you can run outside and wait for me."



     Thea slipped noiselessly through the dark house and

joined Mrs. Tellamantez.  The somber Mexican woman

did not seem inclined to talk, but her nod was friendly.

Thea sat down on the warm sand, her back to the moon,

facing Mrs. Tellamantez on her doorstep, and began to

count the moonflowers on the vine that ran over the house.

Mrs. Tellamantez was always considered a very homely

woman.  Her face was of a strongly marked type not sym-

pathetic to Americans.  Such long, oval faces, with a full



<p 43>



chin, a large, mobile mouth, a high nose, are not uncom-

mon in Spain.  Mrs. Tellamantez could not write her name,

and could read but little.  Her strong nature lived upon

itself.  She was chiefly known in Moonstone for her forbear-

ance with her incorrigible husband.



     Nobody knew exactly what was the matter with Johnny,

and everybody liked him.  His popularity would have been

unusual for a white man, for a Mexican it was unprece-

dented.  His talents were his undoing.  He had a high,

uncertain tenor voice, and he played the mandolin with

exceptional skill.  Periodically he went crazy.  There was

no other way to explain his behavior.  He was a clever

workman, and, when he worked, as regular and faithful

as a burro.  Then some night he would fall in with a crowd

at the saloon and begin to sing.  He would go on until

he had no voice left, until he wheezed and rasped.  Then

he would play his mandolin furiously, and drink until his

eyes sank back into his head.  At last, when he was put

out of the saloon at closing time, and could get nobody

to listen to him, he would run away--along the railroad

track, straight across the desert.  He always managed to

get aboard a freight somewhere.  Once beyond Denver,

he played his way southward from saloon to saloon until

he got across the border.  He never wrote to his wife; but

she would soon begin to get newspapers from La Junta,

Albuquerque, Chihuahua, with marked paragraphs an-

nouncing that Juan Tellamantez and his wonderful man-

dolin could be heard at the Jack Rabbit Grill, or the Pearl

of Cadiz Saloon.  Mrs. Tellamantez waited and wept and

combed her hair.  When he was completely wrung out and

burned up,--all but destroyed,--her Juan always came

back to her to be taken care of,--once with an ugly knife

wound in the neck, once with a finger missing from his

right hand,--but he played just as well with three fingers

as he had with four.



     Public sentiment was lenient toward Johnny, but every-



<p 44>



body was disgusted with Mrs. Tellamantez for putting up

with him.  She ought to discipline him, people said; she

ought to leave him; she had no self-respect.  In short, Mrs.

Tellamantez got all the blame.  Even Thea thought she

was much too humble.  To-night, as she sat with her back

to the moon, looking at the moonflowers and Mrs. Tella-

mantez's somber face, she was thinking that there is noth-

ing so sad in the world as that kind of patience and resigna-

tion.  It was much worse than Johnny's craziness.  She even

wondered whether it did not help to make Johnny crazy.

People had no right to be so passive and resigned.  She

would like to roll over and over in the sand and screech at

Mrs. Tellamantez.  She was glad when the doctor came out.



     The Mexican woman rose and stood respectful and ex-

pectant.  The doctor held his hat in his hand and looked

kindly at her.



     "Same old thing, Mrs. Tellamantez.  He's no worse than

he's been before.  I've left some medicine.  Don't give him

anything but toast water until I see him again.  You're a

good nurse; you'll get him out."  Dr. Archie smiled en-

couragingly.  He glanced about the little garden and

wrinkled his brows.  "I can't see what makes him behave

so.  He's killing himself, and he's not a rowdy sort of fel-

low.  Can't you tie him up someway?  Can't you tell when

these fits are coming on?"



     Mrs. Tellamantez put her hand to her forehead.  "The

saloon, doctor, the excitement; that is what makes him.

People listen to him, and it excites him."



     The doctor shook his head.  "Maybe.  He's too much for

my calculations.  I don't see what he gets out of it."



     "He is always fooled,"--the Mexican woman spoke

rapidly and tremulously, her long under lip quivering.



     "He is good at heart, but he has no head.  He fools himself.

You do not understand in this country, you are progressive.

But he has no judgment, and he is fooled."  She stooped

quickly, took up one of the white conch-shells that bordered



<p 45>



the walk, and, with an apologetic inclination of her head,

held it to Dr. Archie's ear.  "Listen, doctor.  You hear

something in there?  You hear the sea; and yet the sea is

very far from here.  You have judgment, and you know

that.  But he is fooled.  To him, it is the sea itself.  A

little thing is big to him."  She bent and placed the shell

in the white row, with its fellows.  Thea took it up softly

and pressed it to her own ear.  The sound in it startled

her; it was like something calling one.  So that was why

Johnny ran away.  There was something awe-inspiring

about Mrs. Tellamantez and her shell.



     Thea caught Dr. Archie's hand and squeezed it hard

as she skipped along beside him back toward Moonstone.

She went home, and the doctor went back to his lamp

and his book.  He never left his office until after midnight.

If he did not play whist or pool in the evening, he read.

It had become a habit with him to lose himself.



<p 46>







                                VII





     Thea's twelfth birthday had passed a few weeks

before her memorable call upon Mrs. Tellamantez.

There was a worthy man in Moonstone who was already

planning to marry Thea as soon as she should be old enough.

His name was Ray Kennedy, his age was thirty, and he was

conductor on a freight train, his run being from Moonstone

to Denver.  Ray was a big fellow, with a square, open

American face, a rock chin, and features that one would

never happen to remember.  He was an aggressive idealist,

a freethinker, and, like most railroad men, deeply senti-

mental.  Thea liked him for reasons that had to do with

the adventurous life he had led in Mexico and the South-

west, rather than for anything very personal.  She liked

him, too, because he was the only one of her friends who

ever took her to the sand hills.  The sand hills were a con-

stant tantalization; she loved them better than anything

near Moonstone, and yet she could so seldom get to them.

The first dunes were accessible enough; they were only a

few miles beyond the Kohlers', and she could run out there

any day when she could do her practicing in the morning

and get Thor off her hands for an afternoon.  But the real

hills--the Turquoise Hills, the Mexicans called them--

were ten good miles away, and one reached them by a

heavy, sandy road.  Dr. Archie sometimes took Thea on

his long drives, but as nobody lived in the sand hills, he

never had calls to make in that direction.  Ray Kennedy

was her only hope of getting there.



     This summer Thea had not been to the hills once, though

Ray had planned several Sunday expeditions.  Once Thor

was sick, and once the organist in her father's church was

away and Thea had to play the organ for the three Sunday



<p 47>



services.  But on the first Sunday in September, Ray drove

up to the Kronborgs' front gate at nine o'clock in the morn-

ing and the party actually set off.  Gunner and Axel went

with Thea, and Ray had asked Spanish Johnny to come

and to bring Mrs. Tellamantez and his mandolin.  Ray was

artlessly fond of music, especially of Mexican music.  He

and Mrs. Tellamantez had got up the lunch between them,

and they were to make coffee in the desert.



     When they left Mexican Town, Thea was on the front

seat with Ray and Johnny, and Gunner and Axel sat be-

hind with Mrs. Tellamantez.  They objected to this, of

course, but there were some things about which Thea would

have her own way.  "As stubborn as a Finn," Mrs. Kron-

borg sometimes said of her, quoting an old Swedish saying.

When they passed the Kohlers', old Fritz and Wunsch

were cutting grapes at the arbor.  Thea gave them a busi-

nesslike nod.  Wunsch came to the gate and looked after

them.  He divined Ray Kennedy's hopes, and he dis-

trusted every expedition that led away from the piano.

Unconsciously he made Thea pay for frivolousness of this

sort.



     As Ray Kennedy's party followed the faint road across

the sagebrush, they heard behind them the sound of church

bells, which gave them a sense of escape and boundless

freedom.  Every rabbit that shot across the path, every

sage hen that flew up by the trail, was like a runaway

thought, a message that one sent into the desert.  As they

went farther, the illusion of the mirage became more in-

stead of less convincing; a shallow silver lake that spread

for many miles, a little misty in the sunlight.  Here and

there one saw reflected the image of a heifer, turned loose

to live upon the sparse sand-grass.  They were magnified

to a preposterous height and looked like mammoths, pre-

historic beasts standing solitary in the waters that for

many thousands of years actually washed over that desert;

--the mirage itself may be the ghost of that long-vanished



<p 48>



sea.  Beyond the phantom lake lay the line of many-colored

hills; rich, sun-baked yellow, glowing turquoise, lavender,

purple; all the open, pastel colors of the desert.



     After the first five miles the road grew heavier.  The

horses had to slow down to a walk and the wheels sank

deep into the sand, which now lay in long ridges, like waves,

where the last high wind had drifted it.  Two hours brought

the party to Pedro's Cup, named for a Mexican desperado

who had once held the sheriff at bay there.  The Cup was a

great amphitheater, cut out in the hills, its floor smooth

and packed hard, dotted with sagebrush and greasewood.



     On either side of the Cup the yellow hills ran north and

south, with winding ravines between them, full of soft sand

which drained down from the crumbling banks.  On the

surface of this fluid sand, one could find bits of brilliant

stone, crystals and agates and onyx, and petrified wood as

red as blood.  Dried toads and lizards were to be found

there, too.  Birds, decomposing more rapidly, left only

feathered skeletons.



     After a little reconnoitering, Mrs. Tellamantez declared

that it was time for lunch, and Ray took his hatchet and

began to cut greasewood, which burns fiercely in its green

state.  The little boys dragged the bushes to the spot that

Mrs. Tellamantez had chosen for her fire.  Mexican women

like to cook out of doors.



     After lunch Thea sent Gunner and Axel to hunt for

agates.  "If you see a rattlesnake, run.  Don't try to kill

it," she enjoined.



     Gunner hesitated.  "If Ray would let me take the

hatchet, I could kill one all right."



     Mrs. Tellamantez smiled and said something to Johnny

in Spanish.



     "Yes," her husband replied, translating, "they say in

Mexico, kill a snake but never hurt his feelings.  Down in

the hot country, MUCHACHA," turning to Thea, "people

keep a pet snake in the house to kill rats and mice.  They



<p 49>



call him the house snake.  They keep a little mat for him

by the fire, and at night he curl up there and sit with the

family, just as friendly!"



     Gunner sniffed with disgust.  "Well, I think that's a

dirty Mexican way to keep house; so there!"



     Johnny shrugged his shoulders.  "Perhaps," he muttered.

A Mexican learns to dive below insults or soar above them,

after he crosses the border.



     By this time the south wall of the amphitheater cast a

narrow shelf of shadow, and the party withdrew to this

refuge.  Ray and Johnny began to talk about the Grand

Canyon and Death Valley, two places much shrouded in

mystery in those days, and Thea listened intently.  Mrs.

Tellamantez took out her drawn-work and pinned it to her

knee.  Ray could talk well about the large part of the conti-

nent over which he had been knocked about, and Johnny

was appreciative.



     "You been all over, pretty near.  Like a Spanish boy,"

he commented respectfully.



     Ray, who had taken off his coat, whetted his pocket-

knife thoughtfully on the sole of his shoe.  "I began to

browse around early.  I had a mind to see something of this

world, and I ran away from home before I was twelve.

Rustled for myself ever since."



     "Ran away?"  Johnny looked hopeful.  "What for?"



     "Couldn't make it go with my old man, and didn't take

to farming.  There were plenty of boys at home.  I wasn't

missed."



     Thea wriggled down in the hot sand and rested her chin

on her arm.  "Tell Johnny about the melons, Ray, please

do!"



     Ray's solid, sunburned cheeks grew a shade redder, and

he looked reproachfully at Thea.  "You're stuck on that

story, kid.  You like to get the laugh on me, don't you?

That was the finishing split I had with my old man, John.

He had a claim along the creek, not far from Denver, and



<p 50>



raised a little garden stuff for market.  One day he had a

load of melons and he decided to take 'em to town and sell

'em along the street, and he made me go along and drive

for him.  Denver wasn't the queen city it is now, by any

means, but it seemed a terrible big place to me; and when

we got there, if he didn't make me drive right up Capitol

Hill!  Pap got out and stopped at folkses houses to ask if

they didn't want to buy any melons, and I was to drive

along slow.  The farther I went the madder I got, but I was

trying to look unconscious, when the end-gate came loose

and one of the melons fell out and squashed.  Just then a

swell girl, all dressed up, comes out of one of the big houses

and calls out, `Hello, boy, you're losing your melons!'

Some dudes on the other side of the street took their hats

off to her and began to laugh.  I couldn't stand it any

longer.  I grabbed the whip and lit into that team, and they

tore up the hill like jack-rabbits, them damned melons

bouncing out the back every jump, the old man cussin' an'

yellin' behind and everybody laughin'.  I never looked be-

hind, but the whole of Capitol Hill must have been a mess

with them squashed melons.  I didn't stop the team till I

got out of sight of town.  Then I pulled up an' left 'em with

a rancher I was acquainted with, and I never went home to

get the lickin' that was waitin' for me.  I expect it's waitin'

for me yet."



     Thea rolled over in the sand.  "Oh, I wish I could have

seen those melons fly, Ray!  I'll never see anything as

funny as that.  Now, tell Johnny about your first job."



     Ray had a collection of good stories.  He was observant,

truthful, and kindly--perhaps the chief requisites in a

good story-teller. Occasionally he used newspaper phrases,

conscientiously learned in his efforts at self-instruction, but

when he talked naturally he was always worth listening to.

Never having had any schooling to speak of, he had, almost

from the time he first ran away, tried to make good his loss.

As a sheep-herder he had worried an old grammar to tatters,



<p 51>



and read instructive books with the help of a pocket dic-

tionary.  By the light of many camp-fires he had pondered

upon Prescott's histories, and the works of Washington

Irving, which he bought at a high price from a book-agent.

Mathematics and physics were easy for him, but general

culture came hard, and he was determined to get it.  Ray

was a freethinker, and inconsistently believed himself

damned for being one.  When he was braking, down on the

Santa Fe, at the end of his run he used to climb into the

upper bunk of the caboose, while a noisy gang played poker

about the stove below him, and by the roof-lamp read

Robert Ingersoll's speeches and "The Age of Reason."



     Ray was a loyal-hearted fellow, and it had cost him a

great deal to give up his God.  He was one of the step-

children of Fortune, and he had very little to show for all

his hard work; the other fellow always got the best of it.

He had come in too late, or too early, on several schemes

that had made money.  He brought with him from all his

wanderings a good deal of information (more or less correct

in itself, but unrelated, and therefore misleading), a high

standard of personal honor, a sentimental veneration for

all women, bad as well as good, and a bitter hatred of

Englishmen.  Thea often thought that the nicest thing

about Ray was his love for Mexico and the Mexicans, who

had been kind to him when he drifted, a homeless boy, over

the border.  In Mexico, Ray was Senor Ken-ay-dy, and

when he answered to that name he was somehow a different

fellow.  He spoke Spanish fluently, and the sunny warmth

of that tongue kept him from being quite as hard as his

chin, or as narrow as his popular science.



     While Ray was smoking his cigar, he and Johnny fell to

talking about the great fortunes that had been made in

the Southwest, and about fellows they knew who had

"struck it rich."



     "I guess you been in on some big deals down there?"

Johnny asked trustfully.



<p 52>





     Ray smiled and shook his head.  "I've been out on some,

John.  I've never been exactly in on any.  So far, I've either

held on too long or let go too soon.  But mine's coming to

me, all right."  Ray looked reflective.  He leaned back in

the shadow and dug out a rest for his elbow in the sand.

"The narrowest escape I ever had, was in the Bridal Cham-

ber.  If I hadn't let go there, it would have made me rich.

That was a close call."



     Johnny looked delighted.  "You don' say!  She was silver

mine, I guess?"



     "I guess she was!  Down at Lake Valley.  I put up a few

hundred for the prospector, and he gave me a bunch of

stock.  Before we'd got anything out of it, my brother-in-

law died of the fever in Cuba.  My sister was beside herself

to get his body back to Colorado to bury him.  Seemed

foolish to me, but she's the only sister I got.  It's expensive

for dead folks to travel, and I had to sell my stock in the

mine to raise the money to get Elmer on the move.  Two

months afterward, the boys struck that big pocket in the

rock, full of virgin silver.  They named her the Bridal

Chamber.  It wasn't ore, you remember.  It was pure, soft

metal you could have melted right down into dollars.  The

boys cut it out with chisels.  If old Elmer hadn't played

that trick on me, I'd have been in for about fifty thousand.

That was a close call, Spanish."



     "I recollec'.  When the pocket gone, the town go bust."



     "You bet.  Higher'n a kite.  There was no vein, just a

pocket in the rock that had sometime or another got filled

up with molten silver.  You'd think there would be more

somewhere about, but NADA.  There's fools digging holes in

that mountain yet."



     When Ray had finished his cigar, Johnny took his man-

dolin and began Kennedy's favorite, "Ultimo Amor."  It

was now three o'clock in the afternoon, the hottest hour

in the day.  The narrow shelf of shadow had widened until

the floor of the amphitheater was marked off in two halves,



<p 53>



one glittering yellow, and one purple.  The little boys had

come back and were making a robbers' cave to enact the

bold deeds of Pedro the bandit.  Johnny, stretched grace-

fully on the sand, passed from "Ultimo Amor" to "Fluvia

de Oro," and then to "Noches de Algeria," playing lan-

guidly.



     Every one was busy with his own thoughts.  Mrs.

Tellamantez was thinking of the square in the little town

in which she was born; of the white churchsteps, with

people genuflecting as they passed, and the round-topped

acacia trees, and the band playing in the plaza.  Ray Ken-

nedy was thinking of the future, dreaming the large Western

dream of easy money, of a fortune kicked up somewhere in

the hills,--an oil well, a gold mine, a ledge of copper.  He

always told himself, when he accepted a cigar from a newly

married railroad man, that he knew enough not to marry

until he had found his ideal, and could keep her like a queen.

He believed that in the yellow head over there in the sand

he had found his ideal, and that by the time she was old

enough to marry, he would be able to keep her like a queen.

He would kick it up from somewhere, when he got loose

from the railroad.



     Thea, stirred by tales of adventure, of the Grand Canyon

and Death Valley, was recalling a great adventure of her

own.  Early in the summer her father had been invited to

conduct a reunion of old frontiersmen, up in Wyoming,

near Laramie, and he took Thea along with him to play

the organ and sing patriotic songs.  There they stayed

at the house of an old ranchman who told them about

a ridge up in the hills called Laramie Plain, where the

wagon-trails of the Forty-niners and the Mormons were

still visible.  The old man even volunteered to take Mr.

Kronborg up into the hills to see this place, though it was

a very long drive to make in one day.  Thea had begged

frantically to go along, and the old rancher, flattered by

her rapt attention to his stories, had interceded for her.



<p 54>





     They set out from Laramie before daylight, behind a strong

team of mules.  All the way there was much talk of the

Forty-niners.  The old rancher had been a teamster in a

freight train that used to crawl back and forth across the

plains between Omaha and Cherry Creek, as Denver was

then called, and he had met many a wagon train bound for

California.  He told of Indians and buffalo, thirst and

slaughter, wanderings in snowstorms, and lonely graves

in the desert.



     The road they followed was a wild and beautiful one.  It

led up and up, by granite rocks and stunted pines, around

deep ravines and echoing gorges.  The top of the ridge, when

they reached it, was a great flat plain, strewn with white

boulders, with the wind howling over it.  There was not one

trail, as Thea had expected; there were a score; deep fur-

rows, cut in the earth by heavy wagon wheels, and now

grown over with dry, whitish grass.  The furrows ran side

by side; when one trail had been worn too deep, the next

party had abandoned it and made a new trail to the right

or left.  They were, indeed, only old wagon ruts, running

east and west, and grown over with grass.  But as Thea ran

about among the white stones, her skirts blowing this way

and that, the wind brought to her eyes tears that might

have come anyway.  The old rancher picked up an iron

ox-shoe from one of the furrows and gave it to her for a

keepsake.  To the west one could see range after range of

blue mountains, and at last the snowy range, with its white,

windy peaks, the clouds caught here and there on their

spurs.  Again and again Thea had to hide her face from the

cold for a moment.  The wind never slept on this plain, the

old man said.  Every little while eagles flew over.



     Coming up from Laramie, the old man had told them

that he was in Brownsville, Nebraska, when the first tele-

graph wires were put across the Missouri River, and that

the first message that ever crossed the river was "West-

ward the course of Empire takes its way."  He had been



<p 55>



in the room when the instrument began to click, and all

the men there had, without thinking what they were doing,

taken off their hats, waiting bareheaded to hear the mes-

sage translated.  Thea remembered that message when she

sighted down the wagon tracks toward the blue moun-

tains.  She told herself she would never, never forget it.

The spirit of human courage seemed to live up there with

the eagles.  For long after, when she was moved by a

Fourth-of-July oration, or a band, or a circus parade, she

was apt to remember that windy ridge.



     To-day she went to sleep while she was thinking about

it.  When Ray wakened her, the horses were hitched to the

wagon and Gunner and Axel were begging for a place on

the front seat.  The air had cooled, the sun was setting, and

the desert was on fire.  Thea contentedly took the back seat

with Mrs. Tellamantez.  As they drove homeward the stars

began to come out, pale yellow in a yellow sky, and Ray

and Johnny began to sing one of those railroad ditties that

are usually born on the Southern Pacific and run the length

of the Santa Fe and the "Q" system before they die to give

place to a new one.  This was a song about a Greaser dance,

the refrain being something like this:--





     "Pedro, Pedro, swing high, swing low,



     And it's allamand left again;



     For there's boys that's bold and there's some that's cold,



     But the gold boys come from Spain,



     Oh, the gold boys come from Spain!"













<p 56>





                               VIII





     Winter was long in coming that year.  Throughout

October the days were bathed in sunlight and the

air was clear as crystal.  The town kept its cheerful sum-

mer aspect, the desert glistened with light, the sand hills

every day went through magical changes of color.  The

scarlet sage bloomed late in the front yards, the cottonwood

leaves were bright gold long before they fell, and it was not

until November that the green on the tamarisks began to

cloud and fade.  There was a flurry of snow about Thanks-

giving, and then December came on warm and clear.



     Thea had three music pupils now, little girls whose

mothers declared that Professor Wunsch was "much too

severe."  They took their lessons on Saturday, and this, of

course, cut down her time for play.  She did not really mind

this because she was allowed to use the money--her pupils

paid her twenty-five cents a lesson--to fit up a little room

for herself upstairs in the half-story.  It was the end room

of the wing, and was not plastered, but was snugly lined

with soft pine.  The ceiling was so low that a grown person

could reach it with the palm of the hand, and it sloped down

on either side.  There was only one window, but it was a

double one and went to the floor.  In October, while the

days were still warm, Thea and Tillie papered the room,

walls and ceiling in the same paper, small red and brown

roses on a yellowish ground.  Thea bought a brown cotton

carpet, and her big brother, Gus, put it down for her one

Sunday.  She made white cheesecloth curtains and hung

them on a tape.  Her mother gave her an old walnut dresser

with a broken mirror, and she had her own dumpy walnut

single bed, and a blue washbowl and pitcher which she had

drawn at a church fair lottery.  At the head of her bed she



<p 57>



had a tall round wooden hat-crate, from the clothing store.

This, standing on end and draped with cretonne, made a

fairly steady table for her lantern.  She was not allowed to

take a lamp upstairs, so Ray Kennedy gave her a railroad

lantern by which she could read at night.



     In winter this loft room of Thea's was bitterly cold, but

against her mother's advice--and Tillie's--she always

left her window open a little way.  Mrs. Kronborg declared

that she "had no patience with American physiology,"

though the lessons about the injurious effects of alcohol

and tobacco were well enough for the boys.  Thea asked

Dr. Archie about the window, and he told her that a girl

who sang must always have plenty of fresh air, or her voice

would get husky, and that the cold would harden her

throat.  The important thing, he said, was to keep your

feet warm.  On very cold nights Thea always put a brick

in the oven after supper, and when she went upstairs she

wrapped it in an old flannel petticoat and put it in her

bed.  The boys, who would never heat bricks for them-

selves, sometimes carried off Thea's, and thought it a good

joke to get ahead of her.



     When Thea first plunged in between her red blankets,

the cold sometimes kept her awake for a good while, and

she comforted herself by remembering all she could of

"Polar Explorations," a fat, calf-bound volume her father

had bought from a book-agent, and by thinking about the

members of Greely's party: how they lay in their frozen

sleeping-bags, each man hoarding the warmth of his own

body and trying to make it last as long as possible against

the on-coming cold that would be everlasting.  After half

an hour or so, a warm wave crept over her body and round,

sturdy legs; she glowed like a little stove with the warmth

of her own blood, and the heavy quilts and red blankets

grew warm wherever they touched her, though her breath

sometimes froze on the coverlid.  Before daylight, her inter-

nal fires went down a little, and she often wakened to find



<p 58>



herself drawn up into a tight ball, somewhat stiff in the legs.

But that made it all the easier to get up.



     The acquisition of this room was the beginning of a new

era in Thea's life.  It was one of the most important things

that ever happened to her.  Hitherto, except in summer,

when she could be out of doors, she had lived in constant

turmoil; the family, the day school, the Sunday-School.

The clamor about her drowned the voice within herself.  In

the end of the wing, separated from the other upstairs

sleeping-rooms by a long, cold, unfinished lumber room,

her mind worked better.  She thought things out more

clearly.  Pleasant plans and ideas occurred to her which had

never come before.  She had certain thoughts which were

like companions, ideas which were like older and wiser

friends.  She left them there in the morning, when she fin-

ished dressing in the cold, and at night, when she came up

with her lantern and shut the door after a busy day, she

found them awaiting her.  There was no possible way of

heating the room, but that was fortunate, for otherwise it

would have been occupied by one of her older brothers.



     From the time when she moved up into the wing, Thea

began to live a double life.  During the day, when the hours

were full of tasks, she was one of the Kronborg children, but

at night she was a different person.  On Friday and Satur-

day nights she always read for a long while after she was in

bed.  She had no clock, and there was no one to nag her.



     Ray Kennedy, on his way from the depot to his boarding-

house, often looked up and saw Thea's light burning when

the rest of the house was dark, and felt cheered as by a

friendly greeting.  He was a faithful soul, and many dis-

appointments had not changed his nature.  He was still,

at heart, the same boy who, when he was sixteen, had set-

tled down to freeze with his sheep in a Wyoming blizzard,

and had been rescued only to play the losing game of fidel-

ity to other charges.



     Ray had no very clear idea of what might be going on



<p 59>



in Thea's head, but he knew that something was.  He used

to remark to Spanish Johnny, "That girl is developing

something fine."  Thea was patient with Ray, even in

regard to the liberties he took with her name.  Outside the

family, every one in Moonstone, except Wunsch and Dr.

Archie, called her "Thee-a," but this seemed cold and dis-

tant to Ray, so he called her "Thee."  Once, in a moment

of exasperation, Thea asked him why he did this, and he

explained that he once had a chum, Theodore, whose

name was always abbreviated thus, and that since he was

killed down on the Santa Fe, it seemed natural to call

somebody "Thee."  Thea sighed and submitted.  She was

always helpless before homely sentiment and usually

changed the subject.



     It was the custom for each of the different Sunday-

Schools in Moonstone to give a concert on Christmas Eve.

But this year all the churches were to unite and give, as

was announced from the pulpits, "a semi-sacred concert

of picked talent" at the opera house.  The Moonstone

Orchestra, under the direction of Professor Wunsch, was

to play, and the most talented members of each Sunday-

School were to take part in the programme.  Thea was put

down by the committee "for instrumental."  This made

her indignant, for the vocal numbers were always more

popular.  Thea went to the president of the committee and

demanded hotly if her rival, Lily Fisher, were going to sing.

The president was a big, florid, powdered woman, a fierce

W.C.T.U. worker, one of Thea's natural enemies.  Her

name was Johnson; her husband kept the livery stable, and

she was called Mrs. Livery Johnson, to distinguish her

from other families of the same surname.  Mrs. Johnson

was a prominent Baptist, and Lily Fisher was the Baptist

prodigy.  There was a not very Christian rivalry between

the Baptist Church and Mr. Kronborg's church.



     When Thea asked Mrs. Johnson whether her rival was

to be allowed to sing, Mrs. Johnson, with an eagerness



<p 60>



which told how she had waited for this moment, replied

that "Lily was going to recite to be obliging, and to give

other children a chance to sing."  As she delivered this

thrust, her eyes glittered more than the Ancient Mariner's,

Thea thought.  Mrs. Johnson disapproved of the way in

which Thea was being brought up, of a child whose chosen

associates were Mexicans and sinners, and who was, as she

pointedly put it, "bold with men."  She so enjoyed an op-

portunity to rebuke Thea, that, tightly corseted as she was,

she could scarcely control her breathing, and her lace and

her gold watch chain rose and fell "with short, uneasy

motion."  Frowning, Thea turned away and walked slowly

homeward.  She suspected guile.  Lily Fisher was the most

stuck-up doll in the world, and it was certainly not like her

to recite to be obliging.  Nobody who could sing ever recited,

because the warmest applause always went to the singers.



     However, when the programme was printed in the Moon-

stone GLEAM, there it was: "Instrumental solo, Thea

Kronborg.  Recitation, Lily Fisher."



     Because his orchestra was to play for the concert, Mr.

Wunsch imagined that he had been put in charge of the

music, and he became arrogant.  He insisted that Thea

should play a "Ballade" by Reinecke.  When Thea con-

sulted her mother, Mrs. Kronborg agreed with her that the

"Ballade" would "never take" with a Moonstone audi-

ence.  She advised Thea to play "something with varia-

tions," or, at least, "The Invitation to the Dance."



     "It makes no matter what they like," Wunsch replied

to Thea's entreaties.  "It is time already that they learn

something."



     Thea's fighting powers had been impaired by an ulcer-

ated tooth and consequent loss of sleep, so she gave in.  She

finally had the molar pulled, though it was a second tooth

and should have been saved.  The dentist was a clumsy,

ignorant country boy, and Mr. Kronborg would not hear

of Dr. Archie's taking Thea to a dentist in Denver, though



<p 61>



Ray Kennedy said he could get a pass for her.  What with

the pain of the tooth, and family discussions about it, with

trying to make Christmas presents and to keep up her

school work and practicing, and giving lessons on Satur-

days, Thea was fairly worn out.



     On Christmas Eve she was nervous and excited.  It

was the first time she had ever played in the opera house,

and she had never before had to face so many people.

Wunsch would not let her play with her notes, and she was

afraid of forgetting.  Before the concert began, all the par-

ticipants had to assemble on the stage and sit there to be

looked at.  Thea wore her white summer dress and a blue

sash, but Lily Fisher had a new pink silk, trimmed with

white swansdown.



     The hall was packed.  It seemed as if every one in Moon-

stone was there, even Mrs. Kohler, in her hood, and old

Fritz.  The seats were wooden kitchen chairs, numbered,

and nailed to long planks which held them together in

rows.  As the floor was not raised, the chairs were all on the

same level.  The more interested persons in the audience

peered over the heads of the people in front of them to get

a good view of the stage.  From the platform Thea picked

out many friendly faces.  There was Dr. Archie, who never

went to church entertainments; there was the friendly

jeweler who ordered her music for her,--he sold accor-

dions and guitars as well as watches,--and the druggist

who often lent her books, and her favorite teacher from the

school.  There was Ray Kennedy, with a party of freshly

barbered railroad men he had brought along with him.

There was Mrs. Kronborg with all the children, even Thor,

who had been brought out in a new white plush coat.  At

the back of the hall sat a little group of Mexicans, and

among them Thea caught the gleam of Spanish Johnny's

white teeth, and of Mrs. Tellamantez's lustrous, smoothly

coiled black hair.



     After the orchestra played "Selections from Erminie,"



<p 62>



and the Baptist preacher made a long prayer, Tillie Kron-

borg came on with a highly colored recitation, "The Polish

Boy."  When it was over every one breathed more freely.

No committee had the courage to leave Tillie off a pro-

gramme.  She was accepted as a trying feature of every

entertainment.  The Progressive Euchre Club was the only

social organization in the town that entirely escaped Tillie.

After Tillie sat down, the Ladies' Quartette sang, "Beloved,

it is Night," and then it was Thea's turn.



     The "Ballade" took ten minutes, which was five minutes

too long.  The audience grew restive and fell to whispering.

Thea could hear Mrs. Livery Johnson's bracelets jangling

as she fanned herself, and she could hear her father's nerv-

ous, ministerial cough.  Thor behaved better than any

one else.  When Thea bowed and returned to her seat at the

back of the stage there was the usual applause, but it was

vigorous only from the back of the house where the Mexi-

cans sat, and from Ray Kennedy's CLAQUEURS.  Any one could

see that a good-natured audience had been bored.



     Because Mr. Kronborg's sister was on the programme,

it had also been necessary to ask the Baptist preacher's

wife's cousin to sing.  She was a "deep alto" from McCook,

and she sang, "Thy Sentinel Am I."  After her came Lily

Fisher.  Thea's rival was also a blonde, but her hair was

much heavier than Thea's, and fell in long round curls over

her shoulders.  She was the angel-child of the Baptists, and

looked exactly like the beautiful children on soap calen-

dars.  Her pink-and-white face, her set smile of innocence,

were surely born of a color-press.  She had long, drooping

eyelashes, a little pursed-up mouth, and narrow, pointed

teeth, like a squirrel's.



     Lily began:--



          "ROCK OF AGES, CLEFT FOR ME, carelessly the maiden

sang."



     Thea drew a long breath.  That was the game; it was a

recitation and a song in one.  Lily trailed the hymn



<p 63>



through half a dozen verses with great effect.  The Baptist

preacher had announced at the beginning of the concert

that "owing to the length of the programme, there would

be no encores."  But the applause which followed Lily to

her seat was such an unmistakable expression of enthusi-

asm that Thea had to admit Lily was justified in going

back.  She was attended this time by Mrs. Livery Johnson

herself, crimson with triumph and gleaming-eyed, nerv-

ously rolling and unrolling a sheet of music.  She took off

her bracelets and played Lily's accompaniment.  Lily had

the effrontery to come out with, "She sang the song of

Home, Sweet Home, the song that touched my heart."  But

this did not surprise Thea; as Ray said later in the evening,

"the cards had been stacked against her from the begin-

ning."  The next issue of the GLEAM correctly stated that

"unquestionably the honors of the evening must be ac-

corded to Miss Lily Fisher."  The Baptists had everything

their own way.



     After the concert Ray Kennedy joined the Kronborgs'

party and walked home with them.  Thea was grateful for

his silent sympathy, even while it irritated her.  She in-

wardly vowed that she would never take another lesson

from old Wunsch.  She wished that her father would not

keep cheerfully singing, "When Shepherds Watched," as

he marched ahead, carrying Thor.  She felt that silence

would become the Kronborgs for a while.  As a family,

they somehow seemed a little ridiculous, trooping along in

the starlight.  There were so many of them, for one thing.

Then Tillie was so absurd.  She was giggling and talking

to Anna just as if she had not made, as even Mrs. Kronborg

admitted, an exhibition of herself.



     When they got home, Ray took a box from his overcoat

pocket and slipped it into Thea's hand as he said good-

night.  They all hurried in to the glowing stove in the

parlor.  The sleepy children were sent to bed.  Mrs. Kron-

borg and Anna stayed up to fill the stockings.



<p 64>





     "I guess you're tired, Thea.  You needn't stay up."

Mrs. Kronborg's clear and seemingly indifferent eye usu-

ally measured Thea pretty accurately.



     Thea hesitated.  She glanced at the presents laid out on

the dining-room table, but they looked unattractive.  Even

the brown plush monkey she had bought for Thor with such

enthusiasm seemed to have lost his wise and humorous

expression.  She murmured, "All right," to her mother, lit

her lantern, and went upstairs.



     Ray's box contained a hand-painted white satin fan,

with pond lilies--an unfortunate reminder.  Thea smiled

grimly and tossed it into her upper drawer.  She was not

to be consoled by toys.  She undressed quickly and stood

for some time in the cold, frowning in the broken looking-

glass at her flaxen pig-tails, at her white neck and arms.

Her own broad, resolute face set its chin at her, her eyes

flashed into her own defiantly.  Lily Fisher was pretty, and

she was willing to be just as big a fool as people wanted her

to be.  Very well; Thea Kronborg wasn't.  She would rather

be hated than be stupid, any day.  She popped into bed and

read stubbornly at a queer paper book the drug-store man

had given her because he couldn't sell it.  She had trained

herself to put her mind on what she was doing, otherwise

she would have come to grief with her complicated daily

schedule.  She read, as intently as if she had not been

flushed with anger, the strange "Musical Memories" of

the Reverend H. R. Haweis.  At last she blew out the lan-

tern and went to sleep.  She had many curious dreams that

night.  In one of them Mrs. Tellamantez held her shell to

Thea's ear, and she heard the roaring, as before, and dis-

tant voices calling, "Lily Fisher!  Lily Fisher!"





<p 65>





                                IX





     Mr. Kronborg considered Thea a remarkable child;

but so were all his children remarkable.  If one of the

business men downtown remarked to him that he "had

a mighty bright little girl, there," he admitted it, and

at once began to explain what a "long head for business"

his son Gus had, or that Charley was "a natural electri-

cian," and had put in a telephone from the house to the

preacher's study behind the church.



     Mrs. Kronborg watched her daughter thoughtfully.  She

found her more interesting than her other children, and

she took her more seriously, without thinking much about

why she did so.  The other children had to be guided, di-

rected, kept from conflicting with one another.  Charley

and Gus were likely to want the same thing, and to quarrel

about it.  Anna often demanded unreasonable service from

her older brothers; that they should sit up until after mid-

night to bring her home from parties when she did not like

the youth who had offered himself as her escort; or that

they should drive twelve miles into the country, on a winter

night, to take her to a ranch dance, after they had been

working hard all day.  Gunner often got bored with his own

clothes or stilts or sled, and wanted Axel's.  But Thea, from

the time she was a little thing, had her own routine.  She

kept out of every one's way, and was hard to manage only

when the other children interfered with her.  Then there

was trouble indeed: bursts of temper which used to alarm

Mrs. Kronborg.  "You ought to know enough to let Thea

alone.  She lets you alone," she often said to the other

children.



     One may have staunch friends in one's own family, but

one seldom has admirers.  Thea, however, had one in the



<p 66>



person of her addle-pated aunt, Tillie Kronborg.  In older

countries, where dress and opinions and manners are not

so thoroughly standardized as in our own West, there is a

belief that people who are foolish about the more obvious

things of life are apt to have peculiar insight into what lies

beyond the obvious.  The old woman who can never learn

not to put the kerosene can on the stove, may yet be able

to tell fortunes, to persuade a backward child to grow, to

cure warts, or to tell people what to do with a young girl

who has gone melancholy.  Tillie's mind was a curious

machine; when she was awake it went round like a wheel

when the belt has slipped off, and when she was asleep

she dreamed follies.  But she had intuitions.  She knew,

for instance, that Thea was different from the other Kron-

borgs, worthy though they all were.  Her romantic im-

agination found possibilities in her niece.  When she was

sweeping or ironing, or turning the ice-cream freezer at a

furious rate, she often built up brilliant futures for Thea,

adapting freely the latest novel she had read.



     Tillie made enemies for her niece among the church

people because, at sewing societies and church suppers, she

sometimes spoke vauntingly, with a toss of her head, just

as if Thea's "wonderfulness" were an accepted fact in

Moonstone, like Mrs. Archie's stinginess, or Mrs. Livery

Johnson's duplicity.  People declared that, on this subject,

Tillie made them tired.



     Tillie belonged to a dramatic club that once a year per-

formed in the Moonstone Opera House such plays as

"Among the Breakers," and "The Veteran of 1812."  Tillie

played character parts, the flirtatious old maid or the

spiteful INTRIGANTE.  She used to study her parts up in the

attic at home.  While she was committing the lines, she

got Gunner or Anna to hold the book for her, but when

she began "to bring out the expression," as she said,

she used, very timorously, to ask Thea to hold the book.

Thea was usually--not always--agreeable about it.  Her



<p 67>



mother had told her that, since she had some influence

with Tillie, it would be a good thing for them all if she could

tone her down a shade and "keep her from taking on any

worse than need be."  Thea would sit on the foot of Tillie's

bed, her feet tucked under her, and stare at the silly text.

"I wouldn't make so much fuss, there, Tillie," she would

remark occasionally; "I don't see the point in it"; or,

"What do you pitch your voice so high for?  It don't carry

half as well."



     "I don't see how it comes Thea is so patient with Til-

lie," Mrs. Kronborg more than once remarked to her hus-

band.  "She ain't patient with most people, but it seems

like she's got a peculiar patience for Tillie."



     Tillie always coaxed Thea to go "behind the scenes"

with her when the club presented a play, and help her with

her make-up.  Thea hated it, but she always went.  She

felt as if she had to do it.  There was something in Tillie's

adoration of her that compelled her.  There was no family

impropriety that Thea was so much ashamed of as Tillie's

"acting" and yet she was always being dragged in to assist

her.  Tillie simply had her, there.  She didn't know why,

but it was so.  There was a string in her somewhere that

Tillie could pull; a sense of obligation to Tillie's misguided

aspirations.  The saloon-keepers had some such feeling of

responsibility toward Spanish Johnny.



     The dramatic club was the pride of Tillie's heart, and her

enthusiasm was the principal factor in keeping it together.

Sick or well, Tillie always attended rehearsals, and was

always urging the young people, who took rehearsals

lightly, to "stop fooling and begin now."  The young men

--bank clerks, grocery clerks, insurance agents--played

tricks, laughed at Tillie, and "put it up on each other"

about seeing her home; but they often went to tiresome

rehearsals just to oblige her.  They were good-natured

young fellows.  Their trainer and stage-manager was young

Upping, the jeweler who ordered Thea's music for her.



<p 68>



Though barely thirty, he had followed half a dozen pro-

fessions, and had once been a violinist in the orchestra of

the Andrews Opera Company, then well known in little

towns throughout Colorado and Nebraska.



     By one amazing indiscretion Tillie very nearly lost her

hold upon the Moonstone Drama Club.  The club had de-

cided to put on "The Drummer Boy of Shiloh," a very

ambitious undertaking because of the many supers needed

and the scenic difficulties of the act which took place in

Andersonville Prison.  The members of the club consulted

together in Tillie's absence as to who should play the part

of the drummer boy.  It must be taken by a very young

person, and village boys of that age are self-conscious and

are not apt at memorizing.  The part was a long one, and

clearly it must be given to a girl.  Some members of the

club suggested Thea Kronborg, others advocated Lily

Fisher.  Lily's partisans urged that she was much prettier

than Thea, and had a much "sweeter disposition."  No-

body denied these facts.  But there was nothing in the

least boyish about Lily, and she sang all songs and played

all parts alike.  Lily's simper was popular, but it seemed

not quite the right thing for the heroic drummer boy.



     Upping, the trainer, talked to one and another: "Lily's

all right for girl parts," he insisted, "but you've got to

get a girl with some ginger in her for this.  Thea's got

the voice, too.  When she sings, `Just Before the Battle,

Mother,' she'll bring down the house."



     When all the members of the club had been privately

consulted, they announced their decision to Tillie at the

first regular meeting that was called to cast the parts.

They expected Tillie to be overcome with joy, but, on the

contrary, she seemed embarrassed.  "I'm afraid Thea

hasn't got time for that," she said jerkily.  "She is always

so busy with her music.  Guess you'll have to get somebody

else."



     The club lifted its eyebrows.  Several of Lily Fisher's



<p 69>



friends coughed.  Mr. Upping flushed.  The stout woman

who always played the injured wife called Tillie's attention

to the fact that this would be a fine opportunity for her

niece to show what she could do.  Her tone was conde-

scending.



     Tillie threw up her head and laughed; there was some-

thing sharp and wild about Tillie's laugh--when it was

not a giggle.  "Oh, I guess Thea hasn't got time to do any

showing off.  Her time to show off ain't come yet.  I expect

she'll make us all sit up when it does.  No use asking her to

take the part.  She'd turn her nose up at it.  I guess they'd

be glad to get her in the Denver Dramatics, if they could."



     The company broke up into groups and expressed their

amazement.  Of course all Swedes were conceited, but they

would never have believed that all the conceit of all the

Swedes put together would reach such a pitch as this.

They confided to each other that Tillie was "just a little

off, on the subject of her niece," and agreed that it would be

as well not to excite her further.  Tillie got a cold reception

at rehearsals for a long while afterward, and Thea had a

crop of new enemies without even knowing it.









<p 70>





                                 X





     Wunsch and old Fritz and Spanish Johnny cele-

brated Christmas together, so riotously that

Wunsch was unable to give Thea her lesson the next day.

In the middle of the vacation week Thea went to the Kohl-

ers' through a soft, beautiful snowstorm.  The air was a

tender blue-gray, like the color on the doves that flew in

and out of the white dove-house on the post in the Kohl-

ers' garden.  The sand hills looked dim and sleepy.  The

tamarisk hedge was full of snow, like a foam of blossoms

drifted over it.  When Thea opened the gate, old Mrs.

Kohler was just coming in from the chicken yard, with five

fresh eggs in her apron and a pair of old top-boots on her

feet.  She called Thea to come and look at a bantam egg,

which she held up proudly.  Her bantam hens were remiss

in zeal, and she was always delighted when they accom-

plished anything.  She took Thea into the sitting-room,

very warm and smelling of food, and brought her a plateful

of little Christmas cakes, made according to old and hal-

lowed formulae, and put them before her while she warmed

her feet.  Then she went to the door of the kitchen stairs

and called: "Herr Wunsch, Herr Wunsch!"



     Wunsch came down wearing an old wadded jacket, with

a velvet collar.  The brown silk was so worn that the wad-

ding stuck out almost everywhere.  He avoided Thea's

eyes when he came in, nodded without speaking, and

pointed directly to the piano stool.  He was not so insistent

upon the scales as usual, and throughout the little sonata

of Mozart's she was studying, he remained languid and

absent-minded.  His eyes looked very heavy, and he kept

wiping them with one of the new silk handkerchiefs Mrs.

Kohler had given him for Christmas.  When the lesson was



<p 71>



over he did not seem inclined to talk.  Thea, loitering on

the stool, reached for a tattered book she had taken off the

music-rest when she sat down.  It was a very old Leipsic

edition of the piano score of Gluck's "Orpheus."  She turned

over the pages curiously.



     "Is it nice?" she asked.



     "It is the most beautiful opera ever made," Wunsch de-

clared solemnly.  "You know the story, eh?  How, when she

die, Orpheus went down below for his wife?"



     "Oh, yes, I know.  I didn't know there was an opera

about it, though.  Do people sing this now?"



     "ABER JA!  What else?  You like to try?  See."  He drew

her from the stool and sat down at the piano.  Turning over

the leaves to the third act, he handed the score to Thea.

"Listen, I play it through and you get the RHYTHMUS.  EINS,

ZWEI, DREI, VIER."  He played through Orpheus' lament, then

pushed back his cuffs with awakening interest and nodded

at Thea.  "Now, VOM BLATT, MIT MIR."



          "ACH, ICH HABE SIE VERLOREN,



             ALL' MEIN GLUCK IST NUN DAHIN."

Wunsch sang the aria with much feeling.  It was evidently

one that was very dear to him.



     "NOCH EINMAL, alone, yourself."  He played the intro-

ductory measures, then nodded at her vehemently, and she

began:--



          "ACH, ICH HABE SIE VERLOREN."



     When she finished, Wunsch nodded again.  "SCHON," he

muttered as he finished the accompaniment softly.  He

dropped his hands on his knees and looked up at Thea.

"That is very fine, eh?  There is no such beautiful melody

in the world.  You can take the book for one week and learn

something, to pass the time.  It is good to know--always.

EURIDICE, EU--RI--DI--CE, WEH DASS ICH AUF ERDEN BIN!" he

sang softly, playing the melody with his right hand.



     Thea, who was turning over the pages of the third act,



<p 72>



stopped and scowled at a passage.  The old German's

blurred eyes watched her curiously.



     "For what do you look so, IMMER?" puckering up his

own face.  "You see something a little difficult, may-be,

and you make such a face like it was an enemy."



     Thea laughed, disconcerted.  "Well, difficult things are

enemies, aren't they?  When you have to get them?"



     Wunsch lowered his head and threw it up as if he were

butting something.  "Not at all!  By no means."  He took

the book from her and looked at it.  "Yes, that is not so

easy, there.  This is an old book.  They do not print it so

now any more, I think.  They leave it out, may-be.  Only

one woman could sing that good."



     Thea looked at him in perplexity.



     Wunsch went on.  "It is written for alto, you see.  A

woman sings the part, and there was only one to sing that

good in there.  You understand?  Only one!"  He glanced

at her quickly and lifted his red forefinger upright before

her eyes.



     Thea looked at the finger as if she were hypnotized.

"Only one?" she asked breathlessly; her hands, hanging

at her sides, were opening and shutting rapidly.



     Wunsch nodded and still held up that compelling finger.

When he dropped his hands, there was a look of satisfac-

tion in his face.



     "Was she very great?"



     Wunsch nodded.



     "Was she beautiful?"



     "ABER GAR NICHT!  Not at all.  She was ugly; big mouth,

big teeth, no figure, nothing at all," indicating a luxuriant

bosom by sweeping his hands over his chest.  "A pole, a

post!  But for the voice--ACH!  She have something in

there, behind the eyes," tapping his temples.



     Thea followed all his gesticulations intently.  "Was she

German?"



     "No, SPANISCH."  He looked down and frowned for a



<p 73>



moment.  "ACH, I tell you, she look like the Frau Tella-

mantez, some-thing.  Long face, long chin, and ugly al-so."



     "Did she die a long while ago?"



     "Die?  I think not.  I never hear, anyhow.  I guess she is

alive somewhere in the world; Paris, may-be.  But old, of

course.  I hear her when I was a youth.  She is too old to

sing now any more."



     "Was she the greatest singer you ever heard?"



     Wunsch nodded gravely.  "Quite so.  She was the

most--" he hunted for an English word, lifted his hand

over his head and snapped his fingers noiselessly in the air,

enunciating fiercely, "KUNST-LER-ISCH!"  The word seemed to

glitter in his uplifted hand, his voice was so full of emotion.



     Wunsch rose from the stool and began to button his

wadded jacket, preparing to return to his half-heated room

in the loft.  Thea regretfully put on her cloak and hood and

set out for home.



     When Wunsch looked for his score late that afternoon,

he found that Thea had not forgotten to take it with her.

He smiled his loose, sarcastic smile, and thoughtfully

rubbed his stubbly chin with his red fingers.  When Fritz

came home in the early blue twilight the snow was flying

faster, Mrs. Kohler was cooking HASENPFEFFER in the kitchen,

and the professor was seated at the piano, playing the

Gluck, which he knew by heart.  Old Fritz took off his shoes

quietly behind the stove and lay down on the lounge before

his masterpiece, where the firelight was playing over the

walls of Moscow.  He listened, while the room grew darker

and the windows duller.  Wunsch always came back to the

same thing:--



          "ACH, ICH HABE SIE VERLOREN,



            .    .    .    .    .



             EURIDICE, EURIDICE!"



     From time to time Fritz sighed softly.  He, too, had lost

a Euridice.



<p 74>







                                XI





     One Saturday, late in June, Thea arrived early for her

lesson.  As she perched herself upon the piano stool,

--a wobbly, old-fashioned thing that worked on a creaky

screw,--she gave Wunsch a side glance, smiling.  "You

must not be cross to me to-day.  This is my birthday."



     "So?" he pointed to the keyboard.



     After the lesson they went out to join Mrs. Kohler, who

had asked Thea to come early, so that she could stay and

smell the linden bloom.  It was one of those still days of

intense light, when every particle of mica in the soil flashed

like a little mirror, and the glare from the plain below

seemed more intense than the rays from above.  The sand

ridges ran glittering gold out to where the mirage licked

them up, shining and steaming like a lake in the tropics.

The sky looked like blue lava, forever incapable of clouds,

--a turquoise bowl that was the lid of the desert.  And yet

within Mrs. Kohler's green patch the water dripped, the

beds had all been hosed, and the air was fresh with rapidly

evaporating moisture.



     The two symmetrical linden trees were the proudest

things in the garden.  Their sweetness embalmed all the

air.  At every turn of the paths,--whether one went to see

the hollyhocks or the bleeding heart, or to look at the pur-

ple morning-glories that ran over the bean-poles,--wher-

ever one went, the sweetness of the lindens struck one

afresh and one always came back to them.  Under the round

leaves, where the waxen yellow blossoms hung, bevies of

wild bees were buzzing.  The tamarisks were still pink, and

the flower-beds were doing their best in honor of the linden

festival.  The white dove-house was shining with a fresh

coat of paint, and the pigeons were crooning contentedly,



<p 75>



flying down often to drink at the drip from the water tank.

Mrs. Kohler, who was transplanting pansies, came up with

her trowel and told Thea it was lucky to have your birthday

when the lindens were in bloom, and that she must go and

look at the sweet peas.  Wunsch accompanied her, and as

they walked between the flower-beds he took Thea's hand.



          "ES FLUSTERN UND SPRECHEN DIE BLUMEN,"--

he muttered.  "You know that von Heine?  IM LEUCHTENDEN

SOMMERMORGEN?"  He looked down at Thea and softly

pressed her hand.



     "No, I don't know it.  What does FLUSTERN mean?"



     "FLUSTERN?--to whisper.  You must begin now to know

such things.  That is necessary.  How many birthdays?"



     "Thirteen.  I'm in my 'teens now.  But how can I know

words like that?  I only know what you say at my lessons.

They don't teach German at school.  How can I learn?"



     "It is always possible to learn when one likes," said

Wunsch.  His words were peremptory, as usual, but his

tone was mild, even confidential.  "There is always a way.

And if some day you are going to sing, it is necessary to

know well the German language."



     Thea stooped over to pick a leaf of rosemary.  How did

Wunsch know that, when the very roses on her wall-paper

had never heard it?  "But am I going to?" she asked, still

stooping.



     "That is for you to say," returned Wunsch coldly.  "You

would better marry some JACOB here and keep the house for

him, may-be?  That is as one desires."



     Thea flashed up at him a clear, laughing look.  "No, I

don't want to do that.  You know," she brushed his coat-

sleeve quickly with her yellow head.  "Only how can I

learn anything here?  It's so far from Denver."



     Wunsch's loose lower lip curled in amusement.  Then, as

if he suddenly remembered something, he spoke seriously.

"Nothing is far and nothing is near, if one desires.  The



<p 76>



world is little, people are little, human life is little.  There is

only one big thing--desire.  And before it, when it is big,

all is little.  It brought Columbus across the sea in a little

boat, UND SO WEITER."  Wunsch made a grimace, took his

pupil's hand and drew her toward the grape arbor.  "Here-

after I will more speak to you in German.  Now, sit down

and I will teach you for your birthday that little song.  Ask

me the words you do not know already.  Now: IM LEUCH-

TENDEN SOMMERMORGEN."



     Thea memorized quickly because she had the power of

listening intently.  In a few moments she could repeat the

eight lines for him.  Wunsch nodded encouragingly and

they went out of the arbor into the sunlight again.  As they

went up and down the gravel paths between the flower-

beds, the white and yellow butterflies kept darting before

them, and the pigeons were washing their pink feet at the

drip and crooning in their husky bass.  Over and over again

Wunsch made her say the lines to him.  "You see it is

nothing.  If you learn a great many of the LIEDER, you will

know the German language already.  WEITER, NUN."  He

would incline his head gravely and listen.





          "IM LEUCHTENDEN SOMMERMORGEN

             GEH' ICH IM GARTEN HERUM;

             ES FLUSTERN UND SPRECHEN DIE BLUMEN,

             ICH ABER, ICH WANDTE STUMM.



             "ES FLUSTERN UND SPRECHEN DIE BLUMEN

             UND SCHAU'N MITLEIDIG MICH AN:

             `SEI UNSERER SCHWESTER NICHT BOSE,

             DU TRAURIGER, BLASSER MANN!'"





          (In the soft-shining summer morning

          I wandered the garden within.

          The flowers they whispered and murmured,

          But I, I wandered dumb.



          The flowers they whisper and murmur,

          And me with compassion they scan:

          "Oh, be not harsh to our sister,

          Thou sorrowful, death-pale man!")



<p 77>





     Wunsch had noticed before that when his pupil read

anything in verse the character of her voice changed alto-

gether; it was no longer the voice which spoke the speech

of Moonstone.  It was a soft, rich contralto, and she read

quietly; the feeling was in the voice itself, not indicated by

emphasis or change of pitch.  She repeated the little verses

musically, like a song, and the entreaty of the flowers was

even softer than the rest, as the shy speech of flowers might

be, and she ended with the voice suspended, almost with a

rising inflection.  It was a nature-voice, Wunsch told him-

self, breathed from the creature and apart from language,

like the sound of the wind in the trees, or the murmur of

water.



     "What is it the flowers mean when they ask him not to

be harsh to their sister, eh?" he asked, looking down at her

curiously and wrinkling his dull red forehead.



     Thea glanced at him in surprise.  "I suppose he thinks

they are asking him not to be harsh to his sweetheart--or

some girl they remind him of."



     "And why TRAURIGER, BLASSER MANN?"



     They had come back to the grape arbor, and Thea picked

out a sunny place on the bench, where a tortoise-shell cat

was stretched at full length.  She sat down, bending over

the cat and teasing his whiskers.  "Because he had been

awake all night, thinking about her, wasn't it?  Maybe

that was why he was up so early."



     Wunsch shrugged his shoulders.  "If he think about her

all night already, why do you say the flowers remind him?"



     Thea looked up at him in perplexity.  A flash of compre-

hension lit her face and she smiled eagerly.  "Oh, I didn't

mean `remind' in that way!  I didn't mean they brought

her to his mind!  I meant it was only when he came out in

the morning, that she seemed to him like that,--like one

of the flowers."



     "And before he came out, how did she seem?"



     This time it was Thea who shrugged her shoulders.  The



<p 78>



warm smile left her face.  She lifted her eyebrows in annoy-

ance and looked off at the sand hills.



     Wunsch persisted.  "Why you not answer me?"



     "Because it would be silly.  You are just trying to make

me say things.  It spoils things to ask questions."



     Wunsch bowed mockingly; his smile was disagreeable.

Suddenly his face grew grave, grew fierce, indeed.  He pulled

himself up from his clumsy stoop and folded his arms.  "But

it is necessary to know if you know somethings.  Some-

things cannot be taught.  If you not know in the beginning,

you not know in the end.  For a singer there must be some-

thing in the inside from the beginning.  I shall not be long

in this place, may-be, and I like to know.  Yes,"--he

ground his heel in the gravel,--"yes, when you are barely

six, you must know that already.  That is the beginning of

all things; DER GEIST, DIE PHANTASIE.  It must be in the baby,

when it makes its first cry, like DER RHYTHMUS, or it is not to

be.  You have some voice already, and if in the beginning,

when you are with things-to-play, you know that what you

will not tell me, then you can learn to sing, may-be."



     Wunsch began to pace the arbor, rubbing his hands to-

gether.  The dark flush of his face had spread up under the

iron-gray bristles on his head.  He was talking to himself,

not to Thea.  Insidious power of the linden bloom!  "Oh,

much you can learn!  ABER NICHT DIE AMERICANISCHEN FRAU-

LEIN.  They have nothing inside them," striking his chest

with both fists.  "They are like the ones in the MAR-

CHEN, a grinning face and hollow in the insides.  Some-

thing they can learn, oh, yes, may-be!  But the secret--

what make the rose to red, the sky to blue, the man to love

--IN DER BRUST, IN DER BRUST it is, UND OHNE DIESES GIEBT ES

KEINE KUNST, GIEBT ES KEINE KUNST!"  He threw up his square

hand and shook it, all the fingers apart and wagging.  Purple

and breathless he went out of the arbor and into the house,

without saying good-bye.  These outbursts frightened

Wunsch.  They were always harbingers of ill.



<p 79>





     Thea got her music-book and stole quietly out of the

garden.  She did not go home, but wandered off into the

sand dunes, where the prickly pear was in blossom and the

green lizards were racing each other in the glittering light.

She was shaken by a passionate excitement.  She did not

altogether understand what Wunsch was talking about;

and yet, in a way she knew.  She knew, of course, that there

was something about her that was different.  But it was

more like a friendly spirit than like anything that was a

part of herself.  She thought everything to it, and it an-

swered her; happiness consisted of that backward and for-

ward movement of herself.  The something came and went,

she never knew how.  Sometimes she hunted for it and could

not find it; again, she lifted her eyes from a book, or stepped

out of doors, or wakened in the morning, and it was there,--

under her cheek, it usually seemed to be, or over her

breast,--a kind of warm sureness.  And when it was there,

everything was more interesting and beautiful, even people.

When this companion was with her, she could get the most

wonderful things out of Spanish Johnny, or Wunsch, or

Dr. Archie.



     On her thirteenth birthday she wandered for a long while

about the sand ridges, picking up crystals and looking into

the yellow prickly-pear blossoms with their thousand sta-

mens.  She looked at the sand hills until she wished she

WERE a sand hill.  And yet she knew that she was going to

leave them all behind some day.  They would be changing

all day long, yellow and purple and lavender, and she would

not be there.  From that day on, she felt there was a secret

between her and Wunsch.  Together they had lifted a lid,

pulled out a drawer, and looked at something.  They hid it

away and never spoke of what they had seen; but neither

of them forgot it.



<p 80>









                                XII





     One July night, when the moon was full, Dr. Archie

was coming up from the depot, restless and discon-

tented, wishing there were something to do.  He carried

his straw hat in his hand, and kept brushing his hair back

from his forehead with a purposeless, unsatisfied gesture.

After he passed Uncle Billy Beemer's cottonwood grove,

the sidewalk ran out of the shadow into the white moon-

light and crossed the sand gully on high posts, like a bridge.

As the doctor approached this trestle, he saw a white figure,

and recognized Thea Kronborg.  He quickened his pace and

she came to meet him.



     "What are you doing out so late, my girl?" he asked as

he took her hand.



     "Oh, I don't know.  What do people go to bed so early

for?  I'd like to run along before the houses and screech at

them.  Isn't it glorious out here?"



     The young doctor gave a melancholy laugh and pressed

her hand.



     "Think of it," Thea snorted impatiently.  "Nobody up

but us and the rabbits!  I've started up half a dozen of 'em.

Look at that little one down there now,"--she stooped

and pointed.  In the gully below them there was, indeed, a

little rabbit with a white spot of a tail, crouching down on

the sand, quite motionless.  It seemed to be lapping up the

moonlight like cream.  On the other side of the walk, down

in the ditch, there was a patch of tall, rank sunflowers,

their shaggy leaves white with dust.  The moon stood over

the cottonwood grove.  There was no wind, and no sound

but the wheezing of an engine down on the tracks.



     "Well, we may as well watch the rabbits."  Dr. Archie

sat down on the sidewalk and let his feet hang over the



<p 81>



edge.  He pulled out a smooth linen handkerchief that

smelled of German cologne water.  "Well, how goes it?

Working hard?  You must know about all Wunsch can

teach you by this time."



     Thea shook her head.  "Oh, no, I don't, Dr. Archie.

He's hard to get at, but he's been a real musician in his

time.  Mother says she believes he's forgotten more than

the music-teachers down in Denver ever knew."



     "I'm afraid he won't be around here much longer," said

Dr. Archie.  "He's been making a tank of himself lately.

He'll be pulling his freight one of these days.  That's the

way they do, you know.  I'll be sorry on your account."

He paused and ran his fresh handkerchief over his face.

"What the deuce are we all here for anyway, Thea?" he

said abruptly.



     "On earth, you mean?" Thea asked in a low voice.



     "Well, primarily, yes.  But secondarily, why are we in

Moonstone?  It isn't as if we'd been born here.  You were,

but Wunsch wasn't, and I wasn't.  I suppose I'm here

because I married as soon as I got out of medical school and

had to get a practice quick.  If you hurry things, you always

get left in the end.  I don't learn anything here, and as for

the people--  In my own town in Michigan, now, there

were people who liked me on my father's account, who had

even known my grandfather.  That meant something.  But

here it's all like the sand: blows north one day and south

the next.  We're all a lot of gamblers without much nerve,

playing for small stakes.  The railroad is the one real fact

in this country.  That has to be; the world has to be got

back and forth.  But the rest of us are here just because

it's the end of a run and the engine has to have a drink.

Some day I'll get up and find my hair turning gray, and

I'll have nothing to show for it."



     Thea slid closer to him and caught his arm.  "No, no.

I won't let you get gray.  You've got to stay young for me.

I'm getting young now, too."



<p 82>





     Archie laughed.  "Getting?"



     "Yes.  People aren't young when they're children.  Look

at Thor, now; he's just a little old man.  But Gus has a

sweetheart, and he's young!"



     "Something in that!"  Dr. Archie patted her head, and

then felt the shape of her skull gently, with the tips of his

fingers.  "When you were little, Thea, I used always to be

curious about the shape of your head.  You seemed to have

more inside it than most youngsters.  I haven't examined

it for a long time.  Seems to be the usual shape, but uncom-

monly hard, some how.  What are you going to do with

yourself, anyway?"



     "I don't know."



     "Honest, now?"  He lifted her chin and looked into her

eyes.



     Thea laughed and edged away from him.



     "You've got something up your sleeve, haven't you?

Anything you like; only don't marry and settle down here

without giving yourself a chance, will you?"



     "Not much.  See, there's another rabbit!"



     "That's all right about the rabbits, but I don't want

you to get tied up.  Remember that."



     Thea nodded.  "Be nice to Wunsch, then.  I don't know

what I'd do if he went away."



     "You've got older friends than Wunsch here, Thea."



     "I know."  Thea spoke seriously and looked up at the

moon, propping her chin on her hand.  "But Wunsch is the

only one that can teach me what I want to know.  I've got

to learn to do something well, and that's the thing I can

do best."



     "Do you want to be a music-teacher?"



     "Maybe, but I want to be a good one.  I'd like to go to

Germany to study, some day.  Wunsch says that's the best

place,--the only place you can really learn."  Thea hesi-

tated and then went on nervously, "I've got a book that

says so, too.  It's called `My Musical Memories.'  It made me



<p 83>



want to go to Germany even before Wunsch said anything.

Of course it's a secret.  You're the first one I've told."



     Dr. Archie smiled indulgently.  "That's a long way off.

Is that what you've got in your hard noddle?"  He put his

hand on her hair, but this time she shook him off.



     "No, I don't think much about it.  But you talk about

going, and a body has to have something to go TO!"



     "That's so."  Dr. Archie sighed.  "You're lucky if you

have.  Poor Wunsch, now, he hasn't.  What do such fellows

come out here for?  He's been asking me about my mining

stock, and about mining towns.  What would he do in a

mining town?  He wouldn't know a piece of ore if he saw

one.  He's got nothing to sell that a mining town wants to

buy.  Why don't those old fellows stay at home?  We won't

need them for another hundred years.  An engine wiper

can get a job, but a piano player!  Such people can't make

good."



     "My grandfather Alstrom was a musician, and he made

good."



     Dr. Archie chuckled.  "Oh, a Swede can make good any-

where, at anything!  You've got that in your favor, miss.

Come, you must be getting home."



     Thea rose.  "Yes, I used to be ashamed of being a Swede,

but I'm not any more.  Swedes are kind of common, but I

think it's better to be SOMETHING."



     "It surely is!  How tall you are getting.  You come above

my shoulder now."



     "I'll keep on growing, don't you think?  I particularly

want to be tall.  Yes, I guess I must go home.  I wish

there'd be a fire."



     "A fire?"



     "Yes, so the fire-bell would ring and the roundhouse

whistle would blow, and everybody would come running

out.  Sometime I'm going to ring the fire-bell myself and

stir them all up."



     "You'd be arrested."



<p 84>





     "Well, that would be better than going to bed."



     "I'll have to lend you some more books."



     Thea shook herself impatiently.  "I can't read every

night."



     Dr. Archie gave one of his low, sympathetic chuckles as

he opened the gate for her.  "You're beginning to grow up,

that's what's the matter with you.  I'll have to keep an eye

on you.  Now you'll have to say good-night to the moon."



     "No, I won't.  I sleep on the floor now, right in the moon-

light.  My window comes down to the floor, and I can look

at the sky all night."



     She shot round the house to the kitchen door, and Dr.

Archie watched her disappear with a sigh.  He thought of

the hard, mean, frizzy little woman who kept his house

for him; once the belle of a Michigan town, now dry and

withered up at thirty.  "If I had a daughter like Thea to

watch," he reflected, "I wouldn't mind anything.  I won-

der if all of my life's going to be a mistake just because I

made a big one then?  Hardly seems fair."



     Howard Archie was "respected" rather than popular in

Moonstone.  Everyone recognized that he was a good

physician, and a progressive Western town likes to be able

to point to a handsome, well-set-up, well-dressed man

among its citizens.  But a great many people thought

Archie "distant," and they were right.  He had the uneasy

manner of a man who is not among his own kind, and who

has not seen enough of the world to feel that all people are

in some sense his own kind.  He knew that every one was

curious about his wife, that she played a sort of character

part in Moonstone, and that people made fun of her, not

very delicately.  Her own friends--most of them women

who were distasteful to Archie--liked to ask her to con-

tribute to church charities, just to see how mean she could

be.  The little, lop-sided cake at the church supper, the

cheapest pincushion, the skimpiest apron at the bazaar,

were always Mrs. Archie's contribution.



<p 85>





     All this hurt the doctor's pride.  But if there was one

thing he had learned, it was that there was no changing

Belle's nature.  He had married a mean woman; and he

must accept the consequences.  Even in Colorado he

would have had no pretext for divorce, and, to do him jus-

tice, he had never thought of such a thing.  The tenets of

the Presbyterian Church in which he had grown up, though

he had long ceased to believe in them, still influenced his

conduct and his conception of propriety.  To him there was

something vulgar about divorce.  A divorced man was a

disgraced man; at least, he had exhibited his hurt, and made

it a matter for common gossip.  Respectability was so

necessary to Archie that he was willing to pay a high price

for it.  As long as he could keep up a decent exterior, he

could manage to get on; and if he could have concealed

his wife's littleness from all his friends, he would scarcely

have complained.  He was more afraid of pity than he was

of any unhappiness.  Had there been another woman for

whom he cared greatly, he might have had plenty of cour-

age; but he was not likely to meet such a woman in Moon-

stone.



     There was a puzzling timidity in Archie's make-up.  The

thing that held his shoulders stiff, that made him resort to a

mirthless little laugh when he was talking to dull people,

that made him sometimes stumble over rugs and carpets,

had its counterpart in his mind.  He had not the courage

to be an honest thinker.  He could comfort himself by eva-

sions and compromises.  He consoled himself for his own

marriage by telling himself that other people's were not

much better.  In his work he saw pretty deeply into marital

relations in Moonstone, and he could honestly say that

there were not many of his friends whom he envied.  Their

wives seemed to suit them well enough, but they would

never have suited him.



     Although Dr. Archie could not bring himself to regard

marriage merely as a social contract, but looked upon it as



<p 86>



somehow made sacred by a church in which he did not be-

lieve,--as a physician he knew that a young man whose

marriage is merely nominal must yet go on living his life.

When he went to Denver or to Chicago, he drifted about in

careless company where gayety and good-humor can be

bought, not because he had any taste for such society, but

because he honestly believed that anything was better

than divorce.  He often told himself that "hanging and

wiving go by destiny."  If wiving went badly with a man,

--and it did oftener than not,--then he must do the best

he could to keep up appearances and help the tradition

of domestic happiness along.  The Moonstone gossips, as-

sembled in Mrs. Smiley's millinery and notion store, often

discussed Dr. Archie's politeness to his wife, and his pleas-

ant manner of speaking about her.  "Nobody has ever got

a thing out of him yet," they agreed.  And it was certainly

not because no one had ever tried.



     When he was down in Denver, feeling a little jolly,

Archie could forget how unhappy he was at home, and could

even make himself believe that he missed his wife.  He

always bought her presents, and would have liked to send

her flowers if she had not repeatedly told him never to send

her anything but bulbs,--which did not appeal to him in

his expansive moments.  At the Denver Athletic Club ban-

quets, or at dinner with his colleagues at the Brown Palace

Hotel, he sometimes spoke sentimentally about "little

Mrs. Archie," and he always drank the toast "to our wives,

God bless them!" with gusto.



     The determining factor about Dr. Archie was that he

was romantic.  He had married Belle White because he was

romantic--too romantic to know anything about women,

except what he wished them to be, or to repulse a pretty

girl who had set her cap for him.  At medical school, though

he was a rather wild boy in behavior, he had always dis-

liked coarse jokes and vulgar stories.  In his old Flint's

Physiology there was still a poem he had pasted there when



<p 87>



he was a student; some verses by Dr. Oliver Wendell

Holmes about the ideals of the medical profession.  After

so much and such disillusioning experience with it, he still

had a romantic feeling about the human body; a sense that

finer things dwelt in it than could be explained by anatomy.

He never jested about birth or death or marriage, and did

not like to hear other doctors do it.  He was a good nurse,

and had a reverence for the bodies of women and children.

When he was tending them, one saw him at his best.  Then

his constraint and self-consciousness fell away from him.

He was easy, gentle, competent, master of himself and of

other people.  Then the idealist in him was not afraid of

being discovered and ridiculed.



     In his tastes, too, the doctor was romantic.  Though he

read Balzac all the year through, he still enjoyed the

Waverley Novels as much as when he had first come upon

them, in thick leather-bound volumes, in his grandfather's

library.  He nearly always read Scott on Christmas and

holidays, because it brought back the pleasures of his boy-

hood so vividly.  He liked Scott's women.  Constance de

Beverley and the minstrel girl in "The Fair Maid of

Perth," not the Duchesse de Langeais, were his heroines.

But better than anything that ever got from the heart of

a man into printer's ink, he loved the poetry of Robert

Burns.  "Death and Dr. Hornbook" and "The Jolly Beg-

gars," Burns's "Reply to his Tailor," he often read aloud to

himself in his office, late at night, after a glass of hot toddy.

He used to read "Tam o'Shanter" to Thea Kronborg, and

he got her some of the songs, set to the old airs for which

they were written.  He loved to hear her sing them.  Some-

times when she sang, "Oh, wert thou in the cauld blast,"

the doctor and even Mr. Kronborg joined in.  Thea never

minded if people could not sing; she directed them with

her head and somehow carried them along.  When her

father got off the pitch she let her own voice out and

covered him.



<p 88>











                               XIII





     At the beginning of June, when school closed, Thea had

told Wunsch that she didn't know how much prac-

ticing she could get in this summer because Thor had his

worst teeth still to cut.



     "My God! all last summer he was doing that!" Wunsch

exclaimed furiously.



     "I know, but it takes them two years, and Thor is slow,"

Thea answered reprovingly.



     The summer went well beyond her hopes, however.  She

told herself that it was the best summer of her life, so far.

Nobody was sick at home, and her lessons were uninter-

rupted.  Now that she had four pupils of her own and made

a dollar a week, her practicing was regarded more seriously

by the household.  Her mother had always arranged things

so that she could have the parlor four hours a day in sum-

mer.  Thor proved a friendly ally.  He behaved handsomely

about his molars, and never objected to being pulled off

into remote places in his cart.  When Thea dragged him

over the hill and made a camp under the shade of a bush

or a bank, he would waddle about and play with his blocks,

or bury his monkey in the sand and dig him up again.

Sometimes he got into the cactus and set up a howl, but

usually he let his sister read peacefully, while he coated

his hands and face, first with an all-day sucker and then

with gravel.



     Life was pleasant and uneventful until the first of Sep-

tember, when Wunsch began to drink so hard that he was

unable to appear when Thea went to take her mid-week

lesson, and Mrs. Kohler had to send her home after a tear-

ful apology.  On Saturday morning she set out for the

Kohlers' again, but on her way, when she was crossing the



<p 89>



ravine, she noticed a woman sitting at the bottom of the

gulch, under the railroad trestle.  She turned from her path

and saw that it was Mrs. Tellamantez, and she seemed to

be doing drawn-work.  Then Thea noticed that there was

something beside her, covered up with a purple and yellow

Mexican blanket.  She ran up the gulch and called to Mrs.

Tellamantez.  The Mexican woman held up a warning finger.

Thea glanced at the blanket and recognized a square red hand

which protruded.  The middle finger twitched slightly.



     "Is he hurt?" she gasped.



     Mrs. Tellamantez shook her head.  "No; very sick.  He

knows nothing," she said quietly, folding her hands over

her drawn-work.



     Thea learned that Wunsch had been out all night, that

this morning Mrs. Kohler had gone to look for him and

found him under the trestle covered with dirt and cinders.

Probably he had been trying to get home and had lost his

way.  Mrs. Tellamantez was watching beside the uncon-

scious man while Mrs. Kohler and Johnny went to get help.



     "You better go home now, I think," said Mrs. Tella-

mantez, in closing her narration.



     Thea hung her head and looked wistfully toward the

blanket.



     "Couldn't I just stay till they come?" she asked.  "I'd

like to know if he's very bad."



     "Bad enough," sighed Mrs. Tellamantez, taking up her

work again.



     Thea sat down under the narrow shade of one of the

trestle posts and listened to the locusts rasping in the hot

sand while she watched Mrs. Tellamantez evenly draw

her threads.  The blanket looked as if it were over a

heap of bricks.



     "I don't see him breathing any," she said anxiously.



     "Yes, he breathes," said Mrs. Tellamantez, not lifting

her eyes.



     It seemed to Thea that they waited for hours.  At last



<p 90>



they heard voices, and a party of men came down the

hill and up the gulch.  Dr. Archie and Fritz Kohler came

first; behind were Johnny and Ray, and several men from

the roundhouse.  Ray had the canvas litter that was kept at

the depot for accidents on the road.  Behind them trailed

half a dozen boys who had been hanging round the depot.



     When Ray saw Thea, he dropped his canvas roll and

hurried forward.  "Better run along home, Thee.  This is

ugly business."  Ray was indignant that anybody who

gave Thea music lessons should behave in such a manner.



     Thea resented both his proprietary tone and his superior

virtue.  "I won't.  I want to know how bad he is.  I'm not

a baby!" she exclaimed indignantly, stamping her foot into

the sand.



     Dr. Archie, who had been kneeling by the blanket, got

up and came toward Thea, dusting his knees.  He smiled

and nodded confidentially.  "He'll be all right when we

get him home.  But he wouldn't want you to see him like

this, poor old chap!  Understand?  Now, skip!"



     Thea ran down the gulch and looked back only once, to

see them lifting the canvas litter with Wunsch upon it,

still covered with the blanket.



     The men carried Wunsch up the hill and down the road

to the Kohlers'.  Mrs. Kohler had gone home and made up

a bed in the sitting-room, as she knew the litter could not

be got round the turn in the narrow stairway.  Wunsch was

like a dead man.  He lay unconscious all day.  Ray Ken-

nedy stayed with him till two o'clock in the afternoon,

when he had to go out on his run.  It was the first time he

had ever been inside the Kohlers' house, and he was so

much impressed by Napoleon that the piece-picture formed

a new bond between him and Thea.



     Dr. Archie went back at six o'clock, and found Mrs.

Kohler and Spanish Johnny with Wunsch, who was in a

high fever, muttering and groaning.



     "There ought to be some one here to look after him



<p 91>



to-night, Mrs. Kohler," he said.  "I'm on a confinement

case, and I can't be here, but there ought to be somebody.

He may get violent."



     Mrs. Kohler insisted that she could always do anything

with Wunsch, but the doctor shook his head and Spanish

Johnny grinned.  He said he would stay.  The doctor

laughed at him.  "Ten fellows like you couldn't hold him,

Spanish, if he got obstreperous; an Irishman would have

his hands full.  Guess I'd better put the soft pedal on him."

He pulled out his hypodermic.



     Spanish Johnny stayed, however, and the Kohlers went

to bed.  At about two o'clock in the morning Wunsch rose

from his ignominious cot.  Johnny, who was dozing on the

lounge, awoke to find the German standing in the middle of

the room in his undershirt and drawers, his arms bare, his

heavy body seeming twice its natural girth.  His face was

snarling and savage, and his eyes were crazy.  He had risen

to avenge himself, to wipe out his shame, to destroy his

enemy.  One look was enough for Johnny.  Wunsch raised

a chair threateningly, and Johnny, with the lightness of a

PICADOR, darted under the missile and out of the open win-

dow.  He shot across the gully to get help, meanwhile leav-

ing the Kohlers to their fate.



     Fritz, upstairs, heard the chair crash upon the stove.

Then he heard doors opening and shutting, and some one

stumbling about in the shrubbery of the garden.  He and

Paulina sat up in bed and held a consultation.  Fritz slipped

from under the covers, and going cautiously over to the

window, poked out his head.  Then he rushed to the door

and bolted it.



     "MEIN GOTT, Paulina," he gasped, "he has the axe, he

will kill us!"



     "The dresser," cried Mrs. Kohler; "push the dresser

before the door.  ACH, if you had your rabbit gun, now!"



     "It is in the barn," said Fritz sadly.  "It would do no

good; he would not be afraid of anything now.  Stay you in



<p 92>



the bed, Paulina."  The dresser had lost its casters years

ago, but he managed to drag it in front of the door.  "He

is in the garden.  He makes nothing.  He will get sick again,

may-be."



     Fritz went back to bed and his wife pulled the quilt

over him and made him lie down.  They heard stumbling

in the garden again, then a smash of glass.



     "ACH, DAS MISTBEET!" gasped Paulina, hearing her hot-

bed shivered.  "The poor soul, Fritz, he will cut himself.

ACH! what is that?"  They both sat up in bed.  "WIEDER!

ACH, What is he doing?"



     The noise came steadily, a sound of chopping.  Paulina

tore off her night-cap.  DIE BAUME, DIE BAUME!  He is cut-

ting our trees, Fritz!"  Before her husband could prevent

her, she had sprung from the bed and rushed to the win-

dow.  "DER TAUBENSCHLAG!  GERECHTER HIMMEL, he is chopping

the dove-house down!"



     Fritz reached her side before she had got her breath

again, and poked his head out beside hers.  There, in the

faint starlight, they saw a bulky man, barefoot, half

dressed, chopping away at the white post that formed the

pedestal of the dove-house.  The startled pigeons were

croaking and flying about his head, even beating their

wings in his face, so that he struck at them furiously with

the axe.  In a few seconds there was a crash, and Wunsch

had actually felled the dove-house.



     "Oh, if only it is not the trees next!" prayed Paulina.

"The dove-house you can make new again, but not DIE

BAUME."



     They watched breathlessly.  In the garden below Wunsch

stood in the attitude of a woodman, contemplating the

fallen cote.  Suddenly he threw the axe over his shoulder

and went out of the front gate toward the town.



     "The poor soul, he will meet his death!" Mrs. Kohler

wailed.  She ran back to her feather bed and hid her face

in the pillow.



<p 93>





     Fritz kept watch at the window.  "No, no, Paulina," he

called presently; "I see lanterns coming.  Johnny must

have gone for somebody.  Yes, four lanterns, coming along

the gulch.  They stop; they must have seen him already.

Now they are under the hill and I cannot see them, but I

think they have him.  They will bring him back.  I must

dress and go down."  He caught his trousers and began

pulling them on by the window.  "Yes, here they come,

half a dozen men.  And they have tied him with a rope,

Paulina!"



     "ACH, the poor man!  To be led like a cow," groaned

Mrs. Kohler.  "Oh, it is good that he has no wife!"  She

was reproaching herself for nagging Fritz when he drank

himself into foolish pleasantry or mild sulks, and felt that

she had never before appreciated her blessings.





     Wunsch was in bed for ten days, during which time he

was gossiped about and even preached about in Moonstone.

The Baptist preacher took a shot at the fallen man from

his pulpit, Mrs. Livery Johnson nodding approvingly

from her pew.  The mothers of Wunsch's pupils sent him

notes informing him that their daughters would discontinue

their music-lessons.  The old maid who had rented him her

piano sent the town dray for her contaminated instrument,

and ever afterward declared that Wunsch had ruined its

tone and scarred its glossy finish.  The Kohlers were unre-

mitting in their kindness to their friend.  Mrs. Kohler made

him soups and broths without stint, and Fritz repaired the

dove-house and mounted it on a new post, lest it might be

a sad reminder.



     As soon as Wunsch was strong enough to sit about in his

slippers and wadded jacket, he told Fritz to bring him

some stout thread from the shop.  When Fritz asked what

he was going to sew, he produced the tattered score

of "Orpheus" and said he would like to fix it up for a little

present.  Fritz carried it over to the shop and stitched it



<p 94>



into pasteboards, covered with dark suiting-cloth.  Over

the stitches he glued a strip of thin red leather which he got

from his friend, the harness-maker.  After Paulina had

cleaned the pages with fresh bread, Wunsch was amazed to

see what a fine book he had.  It opened stiffly, but that was

no matter.



     Sitting in the arbor one morning, under the ripe grapes

and the brown, curling leaves, with a pen and ink on the

bench beside him and the Gluck score on his knee, Wunsch

pondered for a long while.  Several times he dipped the pen

in the ink, and then put it back again in the cigar box in

which Mrs. Kohler kept her writing utensils.  His thoughts

wandered over a wide territory; over many countries and

many years.  There was no order or logical sequence in his

ideas.  Pictures came and went without reason.  Faces,

mountains, rivers, autumn days in other vineyards far

away.  He thought of a FUSZREISE he had made through the

Hartz Mountains in his student days; of the innkeeper's

pretty daughter who had lighted his pipe for him in the

garden one summer evening, of the woods above Wiesba-

den, haymakers on an island in the river.  The round-

house whistle woke him from his reveries. Ah, yes, he was

in Moonstone, Colorado.  He frowned for a moment and

looked at the book on his knee.  He had thought of a great

many appropriate things to write in it, but suddenly he

rejected all of them, opened the book, and at the top of

the much-engraved title-page he wrote rapidly in purple

ink:--





               EINST, O WUNDER!--



                         A. WUNSCH.

MOONSTONE, COLO.

  SEPTEMBER 30, 18--





     Nobody in Moonstone ever found what Wunsch's first

name was.  That "A" may have stood for Adam, or August,

or even Amadeus; he got very angry if any one asked him.



<p 95>



He remained A. Wunsch to the end of his chapter there.

When he presented this score to Thea, he told her that in

ten years she would either know what the inscription

meant, or she would not have the least idea, in which case

it would not matter.



     When Wunsch began to pack his trunk, both the Kohlers

were very unhappy.  He said he was coming back some

day, but that for the present, since he had lost all his

pupils, it would be better for him to try some "new town."

Mrs. Kohler darned and mended all his clothes, and gave

him two new shirts she had made for Fritz.  Fritz made

him a new pair of trousers and would have made him an

overcoat but for the fact that overcoats were so easy to

pawn.



     Wunsch would not go across the ravine to the town until

he went to take the morning train for Denver.  He said that

after he got to Denver he would "look around."  He left

Moonstone one bright October morning, without telling

any one good-bye.  He bought his ticket and went directly

into the smoking-car.  When the train was beginning to

pull out, he heard his name called frantically, and looking

out of the window he saw Thea Kronborg standing on the

siding, bareheaded and panting.  Some boys had brought

word to school that they saw Wunsch's trunk going over

to the station, and Thea had run away from school.  She

was at the end of the station platform, her hair in two

braids, her blue gingham dress wet to the knees because she

had run across lots through the weeds.  It had rained dur-

ing the night, and the tall sunflowers behind her were fresh

and shining.



     "Good-bye, Herr Wunsch, good-bye!" she called waving

to him.



     He thrust his head out at the car window and called

back, "LEBEN SIE WOHL, LEBEN SIE WOHL, MEIN KIND!"  He

watched her until the train swept around the curve be-

yond the roundhouse, and then sank back into his seat,



<p 96>



muttering, "She had been running.  Ah, she will run a

long way; they cannot stop her!"



     What was it about the child that one believed in?  Was

it her dogged industry, so unusual in this free-and-easy

country?  Was it her imagination?  More likely it was be-

cause she had both imagination and a stubborn will, curi-

ously balancing and interpenetrating each other.  There

was something unconscious and unawakened about her,

that tempted curiosity.  She had a kind of seriousness

that he had not met with in a pupil before.  She hated

difficult things, and yet she could never pass one by.

They seemed to challenge her; she had no peace until she

mastered them.  She had the power to make a great effort,

to lift a weight heavier than herself.  Wunsch hoped he

would always remember her as she stood by the track,

looking up at him; her broad eager face, so fair in color,

with its high cheek-bones, yellow eyebrows and greenish-

hazel eyes.  It was a face full of light and energy, of the

unquestioning hopefulness of first youth.  Yes, she was

like a flower full of sun, but not the soft German flowers of

his childhood.  He had it now, the comparison he had ab-

sently reached for before: she was like the yellow prickly-

pear blossoms that open there in the desert; thornier and

sturdier than the maiden flowers he remembered; not so

sweet, but wonderful.





     That night Mrs. Kohler brushed away many a tear as

she got supper and set the table for two.  When they sat

down, Fritz was more silent than usual.  People who have

lived long together need a third at table: they know each

other's thoughts so well that they have nothing left to say.

Mrs. Kohler stirred and stirred her coffee and clattered the

spoon, but she had no heart for her supper.  She felt, for

the first time in years, that she was tired of her own cook-

ing.  She looked across the glass lamp at her husband and

asked him if the butcher liked his new overcoat, and



<p 97>



whether he had got the shoulders right in a ready-made

suit he was patching over for Ray Kennedy.  After sup-

per Fritz offered to wipe the dishes for her, but she told

him to go about his business, and not to act as if she were

sick or getting helpless.



     When her work in the kitchen was all done, she went out

to cover the oleanders against frost, and to take a last look

at her chickens.  As she came back from the hen-house she

stopped by one of the linden trees and stood resting her

hand on the trunk.  He would never come back, the poor

man; she knew that.  He would drift on from new town

to new town, from catastrophe to catastrophe.  He would

hardly find a good home for himself again.  He would die

at last in some rough place, and be buried in the desert or

on the wild prairie, far enough from any linden tree!



     Fritz, smoking his pipe on the kitchen doorstep, watched

his Paulina and guessed her thoughts.  He, too, was sorry

to lose his friend.  But Fritz was getting old; he had lived a

long while and had learned to lose without struggle.



<p 98>









                                XIV





     "Mother," said Peter Kronborg to his wife one morn-

ing about two weeks after Wunsch's departure,

"how would you like to drive out to Copper Hole with me

to-day?"



     Mrs. Kronborg said she thought she would enjoy the

drive.  She put on her gray cashmere dress and gold

watch and chain, as befitted a minister's wife, and while

her husband was dressing she packed a black oilcloth

satchel with such clothing as she and Thor would need

overnight.



     Copper Hole was a settlement fifteen miles northwest of

Moonstone where Mr. Kronborg preached every Friday

evening.  There was a big spring there and a creek and a

few irrigating ditches.  It was a community of discour-

aged agriculturists who had disastrously experimented

with dry farming.  Mr. Kronborg always drove out one

day and back the next, spending the night with one of

his parishioners.  Often, when the weather was fine, his

wife accompanied him.  To-day they set out from home

after the midday meal, leaving Tillie in charge of the

house.  Mrs. Kronborg's maternal feeling was always gar-

nered up in the baby, whoever the baby happened to be.

If she had the baby with her, the others could look out for

themselves.  Thor, of course, was not, accurately speaking,

a baby any longer.  In the matter of nourishment he was

quite independent of his mother, though this independence

had not been won without a struggle.  Thor was conserva-

tive in all things, and the whole family had anguished with

him when he was being weaned.  Being the youngest, he

was still the baby for Mrs. Kronborg, though he was nearly

four years old and sat up boldly on her lap this afternoon,



<p 99>



holding on to the ends of the lines and shouting "`mup,

'mup, horsey."  His father watched him affectionately and

hummed hymn tunes in the jovial way that was sometimes

such a trial to Thea.



     Mrs. Kronborg was enjoying the sunshine and the bril-

liant sky and all the faintly marked features of the dazzling,

monotonous landscape.  She had a rather unusual capacity

for getting the flavor of places and of people.  Although

she was so enmeshed in family cares most of the time, she

could emerge serene when she was away from them.  For

a mother of seven, she had a singularly unprejudiced

point of view.  She was, moreover, a fatalist, and as she

did not attempt to direct things beyond her control, she

found a good deal of time to enjoy the ways of man and

nature.



     When they were well upon their road, out where the first

lean pasture lands began and the sand grass made a faint

showing between the sagebushes, Mr. Kronborg dropped

his tune and turned to his wife.  "Mother, I've been think-

ing about something."



     "I guessed you had.  What is it?"  She shifted Thor to

her left knee, where he would be more out of the way.



     "Well, it's about Thea.  Mr. Follansbee came to my

study at the church the other day and said they would like

to have their two girls take lessons of Thea.  Then I sounded

Miss Meyers" (Miss Meyers was the organist in Mr.

Kronborg's church) "and she said there was a good deal of

talk about whether Thea wouldn't take over Wunsch's

pupils.  She said if Thea stopped school she wouldn't

wonder if she could get pretty much all Wunsch's class.

People think Thea knows about all Wunsch could teach."



     Mrs. Kronborg looked thoughtful.  "Do you think we

ought to take her out of school so young?"



     "She is young, but next year would be her last year any-

way.  She's far along for her age.  And she can't learn much

under the principal we've got now, can she?"



<p 100>





     "No, I'm afraid she can't," his wife admitted.  "She

frets a good deal and says that man always has to look in

the back of the book for the answers.  She hates all that

diagramming they have to do, and I think myself it's a

waste of time."



     Mr. Kronborg settled himself back into the seat and

slowed the mare to a walk.  "You see, it occurs to me that

we might raise Thea's prices, so it would be worth her

while.  Seventy-five cents for hour lessons, fifty cents for

half-hour lessons.  If she got, say two thirds of Wunsch's

class, that would bring her in upwards of ten dollars a

week.  Better pay than teaching a country school, and

there would be more work in vacation than in winter.

Steady work twelve months in the year; that's an advan-

tage.  And she'd be living at home, with no expenses."



     "There'd be talk if you raised her prices," said Mrs.

Kronborg dubiously.



     "At first there would.  But Thea is so much the best

musician in town that they'd all come into line after a

while.  A good many people in Moonstone have been

making money lately, and have bought new pianos.  There

were ten new pianos shipped in here from Denver in the

last year.  People ain't going to let them stand idle; too

much money invested.  I believe Thea can have as many

scholars as she can handle, if we set her up a little."



     "How set her up, do you mean?"  Mrs. Kronborg felt a

certain reluctance about accepting this plan, though she

had not yet had time to think out her reasons.



     "Well, I've been thinking for some time we could make

good use of another room.  We couldn't give up the parlor

to her all the time.  If we built another room on the ell and

put the piano in there, she could give lessons all day long

and it wouldn't bother us.  We could build a clothes-press

in it, and put in a bed-lounge and a dresser and let Anna

have it for her sleeping-room.  She needs a place of her

own, now that she's beginning to be dressy."



<p 101>





     "Seems like Thea ought to have the choice of the room,

herself," said Mrs. Kronborg.



     "But, my dear, she don't want it.  Won't have it.  I

sounded her coming home from church on Sunday; asked

her if she would like to sleep in a new room, if we built on.

She fired up like a little wild-cat and said she'd made her

own room all herself, and she didn't think anybody ought

to take it away from her."



     "She don't mean to be impertinent, father.  She's made

decided that way, like my father."  Mrs. Kronborg spoke

warmly.  "I never have any trouble with the child.  I

remember my father's ways and go at her carefully.  Thea's

all right."



     Mr. Kronborg laughed indulgently and pinched Thor's

full cheek.  "Oh, I didn't mean anything against your girl,

mother!  She's all right, but she's a little wild-cat, just the

same.  I think Ray Kennedy's planning to spoil a born old

maid."



     "Huh!  She'll get something a good sight better than

Ray Kennedy, you see!  Thea's an awful smart girl.  I've

seen a good many girls take music lessons in my time, but

I ain't seen one that took to it so.  Wunsch said so, too.

She's got the making of something in her."



     "I don't deny that, and the sooner she gets at it in a

businesslike way, the better.  She's the kind that takes

responsibility, and it'll be good for her."



     Mrs. Kronborg was thoughtful.  "In some ways it will,

maybe.  But there's a good deal of strain about teaching

youngsters, and she's always worked so hard with the

scholars she has.  I've often listened to her pounding it

into 'em.  I don't want to work her too hard.  She's so

serious that she's never had what you might call any real

childhood.  Seems like she ought to have the next few

years sort of free and easy.  She'll be tied down with re-

sponsibilities soon enough."



     Mr. Kronborg patted his wife's arm.  "Don't you believe



<p 102>



it, mother.  Thea is not the marrying kind.  I've watched

'em.  Anna will marry before long and make a good wife,

but I don't see Thea bringing up a family.  She's got a

good deal of her mother in her, but she hasn't got all.  She's

too peppery and too fond of having her own way.  Then

she's always got to be ahead in everything.  That kind

make good church-workers and missionaries and school

teachers, but they don't make good wives.  They fret all

their energy away, like colts, and get cut on the wire."



     Mrs. Kronborg laughed.  "Give me the graham crackers

I put in your pocket for Thor.  He's hungry.  You're a

funny man, Peter.  A body wouldn't think, to hear you,

you was talking about your own daughters.  I guess you see

through 'em.  Still, even if Thea ain't apt to have children

of her own, I don't know as that's a good reason why she

should wear herself out on other people's."



     "That's just the point, mother.  A girl with all that

energy has got to do something, same as a boy, to keep her

out of mischief.  If you don't want her to marry Ray, let

her do something to make herself independent."



     "Well, I'm not against it.  It might be the best thing for

her.  I wish I felt sure she wouldn't worry.  She takes things

hard.  She nearly cried herself sick about Wunsch's going

away.  She's the smartest child of 'em all, Peter, by a long

ways."



     Peter Kronborg smiled.  "There you go, Anna.  That's

you all over again.  Now, I have no favorites; they all have

their good points.  But you," with a twinkle, "always did

go in for brains."



     Mrs. Kronborg chuckled as she wiped the cracker crumbs

from Thor's chin and fists.  "Well, you're mighty conceited,

Peter!  But I don't know as I ever regretted it.  I prefer

having a family of my own to fussing with other folks'

children, that's the truth."



     Before the Kronborgs reached Copper Hole, Thea's des-

tiny was pretty well mapped out for her.  Mr. Kronborg



<p 103>



was always delighted to have an excuse for enlarging the

house.



     Mrs. Kronborg was quite right in her conjecture that

there would be unfriendly comment in Moonstone when

Thea raised her prices for music-lessons.  People said she

was getting too conceited for anything.  Mrs. Livery John-

son put on a new bonnet and paid up all her back calls to

have the pleasure of announcing in each parlor she entered

that her daughters, at least, would "never pay professional

prices to Thea Kronborg."



     Thea raised no objection to quitting school.  She was

now in the "high room," as it was called, in next to the

highest class, and was studying geometry and beginning

Caesar.  She no longer recited her lessons to the teacher she

liked, but to the Principal, a man who belonged, like Mrs.

Livery Johnson, to the camp of Thea's natural enemies.

He taught school because he was too lazy to work among

grown-up people, and he made an easy job of it.  He got

out of real work by inventing useless activities for his

pupils, such as the "tree-diagramming system."  Thea had

spent hours making trees out of "Thanatopsis," Hamlet's

soliloquy, Cato on "Immortality."  She agonized under

this waste of time, and was only too glad to accept her

father's offer of liberty.



     So Thea left school the first of November.  By the

first of January she had eight one-hour pupils and ten

half-hour pupils, and there would be more in the sum-

mer.  She spent her earnings generously.  She bought a

new Brussels carpet for the parlor, and a rifle for Gunner

and Axel, and an imitation tiger-skin coat and cap for

Thor.  She enjoyed being able to add to the family posses-

sions, and thought Thor looked quite as handsome in his

spots as the rich children she had seen in Denver.  Thor

was most complacent in his conspicuous apparel.  He could

walk anywhere by this time--though he always preferred

to sit, or to be pulled in his cart.  He was a blissfully lazy



<p 104>



child, and had a number of long, dull plays, such as mak-

ing nests for his china duck and waiting for her to lay

him an egg.  Thea thought him very intelligent, and she

was proud that he was so big and burly.  She found him

restful, loved to hear him call her "sitter," and really liked

his companionship, especially when she was tired.  On Sat-

urday, for instance, when she taught from nine in the

morning until five in the afternoon, she liked to get off in a

corner with Thor after supper, away from all the bathing

and dressing and joking and talking that went on in the

house, and ask him about his duck, or hear him tell one of

his rambling stories.



<p 105>









                                XV





     By the time Thea's fifteenth birthday came round, she

was established as a music teacher in Moonstone.

The new room had been added to the house early in the

spring, and Thea had been giving her lessons there since

the middle of May.  She liked the personal independence

which was accorded her as a wage-earner.  The family ques-

tioned her comings and goings very little.  She could go

buggy-riding with Ray Kennedy, for instance, without tak-

ing Gunner or Axel.  She could go to Spanish Johnny's and

sing part songs with the Mexicans, and nobody objected.



     Thea was still under the first excitement of teaching, and

was terribly in earnest about it.  If a pupil did not get on

well, she fumed and fretted.  She counted until she was

hoarse.  She listened to scales in her sleep.  Wunsch had

taught only one pupil seriously, but Thea taught twenty.

The duller they were, the more furiously she poked and

prodded them.  With the little girls she was nearly always

patient, but with pupils older than herself, she sometimes

lost her temper.  One of her mistakes was to let herself in

for a calling-down from Mrs. Livery Johnson.  That lady

appeared at the Kronborgs' one morning and announced

that she would allow no girl to stamp her foot at her daugh-

ter Grace.  She added that Thea's bad manners with the

older girls were being talked about all over town, and that

if her temper did not speedily improve she would lose all

her advanced pupils.  Thea was frightened.  She felt she

could never bear the disgrace, if such a thing happened.

Besides, what would her father say, after he had gone to

the expense of building an addition to the house?  Mrs.

Johnson demanded an apology to Grace.  Thea said she

was willing to make it.  Mrs. Johnson said that hereafter,



<p 106>



since she had taken lessons of the best piano teacher in

Grinnell, Iowa, she herself would decide what pieces

Grace should study.  Thea readily consented to that, and

Mrs. Johnson rustled away to tell a neighbor woman that

Thea Kronborg could be meek enough when you went at

her right.



     Thea was telling Ray about this unpleasant encounter as

they were driving out to the sand hills the next Sunday.



     "She was stuffing you, all right, Thee," Ray reassured

her.  "There's no general dissatisfaction among your schol-

ars.  She just wanted to get in a knock.  I talked to the

piano tuner the last time he was here, and he said all the

people he tuned for expressed themselves very favorably

about your teaching.  I wish you didn't take so much pains

with them, myself."



     "But I have to, Ray.  They're all so dumb.  They've

got no ambition," Thea exclaimed irritably.  "Jenny

Smiley is the only one who isn't stupid.  She can read

pretty well, and she has such good hands.  But she don't

care a rap about it.  She has no pride."



     Ray's face was full of complacent satisfaction as he

glanced sidewise at Thea, but she was looking off intently

into the mirage, at one of those mammoth cattle that are

nearly always reflected there.  "Do you find it easier to

teach in your new room?" he asked.



     "Yes; I'm not interrupted so much.  Of course, if I ever

happen to want to practice at night, that's always the

night Anna chooses to go to bed early."



     "It's a darned shame, Thee, you didn't cop that room

for yourself.  I'm sore at the PADRE about that.  He ought

to give you that room.  You could fix it up so pretty."



     "I didn't want it, honest I didn't.  Father would have

let me have it.  I like my own room better.  Somehow I

can think better in a little room.  Besides, up there I am

away from everybody, and I can read as late as I please

and nobody nags me."



<p 107>





     "A growing girl needs lots of sleep," Ray providently

remarked.



     Thea moved restlessly on the buggy cushions.  "They

need other things more," she muttered.  "Oh, I forgot.

I brought something to show you.  Look here, it came on

my birthday.  Wasn't it nice of him to remember?"  She

took from her pocket a postcard, bent in the middle and

folded, and handed it to Ray.  On it was a white dove,

perched on a wreath of very blue forget-me-nots, and

"Birthday Greetings" in gold letters.  Under this was

written, "From A. Wunsch."



     Ray turned the card over, examined the postmark, and

then began to laugh.



     "Concord, Kansas.  He has my sympathy!"



     "Why, is that a poor town?"



     "It's the jumping-off place, no town at all.  Some houses

dumped down in the middle of a cornfield.  You get lost in

the corn.  Not even a saloon to keep things going; sell whis-

key without a license at the butcher shop, beer on ice with

the liver and beefsteak.  I wouldn't stay there over Sunday

for a ten-dollar bill."



     "Oh, dear!  What do you suppose he's doing there?

Maybe he just stopped off there a few days to tune pianos,"

Thea suggested hopefully.



     Ray gave her back the card.  "He's headed in the wrong

direction.  What does he want to get back into a grass

country for?  Now, there are lots of good live towns down

on the Santa Fe, and everybody down there is musical.

He could always get a job playing in saloons if he was dead-

broke.  I've figured out that I've got no years of my life to

waste in a Methodist country where they raise pork."



     "We must stop on our way back and show this card to

Mrs. Kohler.  She misses him so."



     "By the way, Thee, I hear the old woman goes to church

every Sunday to hear you sing.  Fritz tells me he has to

wait till two o'clock for his Sunday dinner these days.  The



<p 108>



church people ought to give you credit for that, when they

go for you."



     Thea shook her head and spoke in a tone of resignation.

"They'll always go for me, just as they did for Wunsch.

It wasn't because he drank they went for him; not really.

It was something else."



     "You want to salt your money down, Thee, and go to

Chicago and take some lessons.  Then you come back, and

wear a long feather and high heels and put on a few airs,

and that'll fix 'em.  That's what they like."



     "I'll never have money enough to go to Chicago.  Mother

meant to lend me some, I think, but now they've got hard

times back in Nebraska, and her farm don't bring her in

anything.  Takes all the tenant can raise to pay the taxes.

Don't let's talk about that.  You promised to tell me about

the play you went to see in Denver."



     Any one would have liked to hear Ray's simple and clear

account of the performance he had seen at the Tabor Grand

Opera House--Maggie Mitchell in LITTLE BAREFOOT--and

any one would have liked to watch his kind face.  Ray

looked his best out of doors, when his thick red hands were

covered by gloves, and the dull red of his sunburned face

somehow seemed right in the light and wind.  He looked

better, too, with his hat on; his hair was thin and dry, with

no particular color or character, "regular Willy-boy hair,"

as he himself described it.  His eyes were pale beside the

reddish bronze of his skin.  They had the faded look often

seen in the eyes of men who have lived much in the sun

and wind and who have been accustomed to train their

vision upon distant objects.



     Ray realized that Thea's life was dull and exacting, and

that she missed Wunsch.  He knew she worked hard, that

she put up with a great many little annoyances, and that

her duties as a teacher separated her more than ever from

the boys and girls of her own age.  He did everything he

could to provide recreation for her.  He brought her candy



<p 109>



and magazines and pineapples--of which she was very fond

--from Denver, and kept his eyes and ears open for any-

thing that might interest her.  He was, of course, living for

Thea.  He had thought it all out carefully and had made

up his mind just when he would speak to her.  When she

was seventeen, then he would tell her his plan and ask her

to marry him.  He would be willing to wait two, or even

three years, until she was twenty, if she thought best.  By

that time he would surely have got in on something: cop-

per, oil, gold, silver, sheep,--something.



     Meanwhile, it was pleasure enough to feel that she de-

pended on him more and more, that she leaned upon his

steady kindness.  He never broke faith with himself about

her; he never hinted to her of his hopes for the future,

never suggested that she might be more intimately con-

fidential with him, or talked to her of the thing he thought

about so constantly.  He had the chivalry which is per-

haps the proudest possession of his race.  He had never

embarrassed her by so much as a glance.  Sometimes,

when they drove out to the sand hills, he let his left arm

lie along the back of the buggy seat, but it never came any

nearer to Thea than that, never touched her.  He often

turned to her a face full of pride, and frank admiration,

but his glance was never so intimate or so penetrating

as Dr. Archie's.  His blue eyes were clear and shallow,

friendly, uninquiring.  He rested Thea because he was so

different; because, though he often told her interesting

things, he never set lively fancies going in her head; because

he never misunderstood her, and because he never, by any

chance, for a single instant, understood her!  Yes, with

Ray she was safe; by him she would never be discovered!











<p 110>





                                XVI





     The pleasantest experience Thea had that summer was

a trip that she and her mother made to Denver in

Ray Kennedy's caboose.  Mrs. Kronborg had been look-

ing forward to this excursion for a long while, but as Ray

never knew at what hour his freight would leave Moon-

stone, it was difficult to arrange.  The call-boy was as likely

to summon him to start on his run at twelve o'clock mid-

night as at twelve o'clock noon.  The first week in June

started out with all the scheduled trains running on time,

and a light freight business.  Tuesday evening Ray, after

consulting with the dispatcher, stopped at the Kronborgs'

front gate to tell Mrs. Kronborg--who was helping Tillie

water the flowers--that if she and Thea could be at the

depot at eight o'clock the next morning, he thought he

could promise them a pleasant ride and get them into

Denver before nine o'clock in the evening.  Mrs. Kronborg

told him cheerfully, across the fence, that she would "take

him up on it," and Ray hurried back to the yards to scrub

out his car.



     The one complaint Ray's brakemen had to make of him

was that he was too fussy about his caboose.  His former

brakeman had asked to be transferred because, he said,

"Kennedy was as fussy about his car as an old maid about

her bird-cage."  Joe Giddy, who was braking with Ray

now, called him "the bride," because he kept the caboose

and bunks so clean.



     It was properly the brakeman's business to keep the car

clean, but when Ray got back to the depot, Giddy was

nowhere to be found.  Muttering that all his brakemen

seemed to consider him "easy," Ray went down to his car

alone.  He built a fire in the stove and put water on to heat



<p 111>



while he got into his overalls and jumper.  Then he set to

work with a scrubbing-brush and plenty of soap and

"cleaner."  He scrubbed the floor and seats, blacked the

stove, put clean sheets on the bunks, and then began to

demolish Giddy's picture gallery.  Ray found that his

brakemen were likely to have what he termed "a taste for

the nude in art," and Giddy was no exception.  Ray took

down half a dozen girls in tights and ballet skirts,--pre-

miums for cigarette coupons,--and some racy calendars

advertising saloons and sporting clubs, which had cost

Giddy both time and trouble; he even removed Giddy's

particular pet, a naked girl lying on a couch with her knee

carelessly poised in the air.  Underneath the picture was

printed the title, "The Odalisque."  Giddy was under the

happy delusion that this title meant something wicked,--

there was a wicked look about the consonants,--but Ray,

of course, had looked it up, and Giddy was indebted to the

dictionary for the privilege of keeping his lady.  If "oda-

lisque" had been what Ray called an objectionable word,

he would have thrown the picture out in the first place.

Ray even took down a picture of Mrs. Langtry in evening

dress, because it was entitled the "Jersey Lily," and be-

cause there was a small head of Edward VII, then Prince

of Wales, in one corner.  Albert Edward's conduct was a

popular subject of discussion among railroad men in those

days, and as Ray pulled the tacks out of this lithograph he

felt more indignant with the English than ever.  He de-

posited all these pictures under the mattress of Giddy's

bunk, and stood admiring his clean car in the lamplight;

the walls now exhibited only a wheatfield, advertising agri-

cultural implements, a map of Colorado, and some pictures

of race-horses and hunting-dogs.  At this moment Giddy,

freshly shaved and shampooed, his shirt shining with the

highest polish known to Chinese laundrymen, his straw

hat tipped over his right eye, thrust his head in at the door.



     "What in hell--" he brought out furiously.  His good-



<p 112>



humored, sunburned face seemed fairly to swell with

amazement and anger.



     "That's all right, Giddy," Ray called in a conciliatory

tone.  "Nothing injured.  I'll put 'em all up again as I

found 'em.  Going to take some ladies down in the car

to-morrow."



     Giddy scowled.  He did not dispute the propriety of Ray's

measures, if there were to be ladies on board, but he felt

injured.  "I suppose you'll expect me to behave like a

Y.M.C.A. secretary," he growled.  "I can't do my work

and serve tea at the same time."



     "No need to have a tea-party," said Ray with deter-

mined cheerfulness.  "Mrs. Kronborg will bring the lunch,

and it will be a darned good one."



     Giddy lounged against the car, holding his cigar between

two thick fingers.  "Then I guess she'll get it," he observed

knowingly.  "I don't think your musical friend is much on

the grub-box.  Has to keep her hands white to tickle the

ivories."  Giddy had nothing against Thea, but he felt

cantankerous and wanted to get a rise out of Kennedy.



     "Every man to his own job," Ray replied agreeably,

pulling his white shirt on over his head.



     Giddy emitted smoke disdainfully.  "I suppose so.  The

man that gets her will have to wear an apron and bake the

pancakes.  Well, some men like to mess about the kitchen."

He paused, but Ray was intent on getting into his clothes

as quickly as possible.  Giddy thought he could go a little

further.  "Of course, I don't dispute your right to haul

women in this car if you want to; but personally, so far as

I'm concerned, I'd a good deal rather drink a can of toma-

toes and do without the women AND their lunch.  I was never

much enslaved to hard-boiled eggs, anyhow."



     "You'll eat 'em to-morrow, all the same."  Ray's tone

had a steely glitter as he jumped out of the car, and Giddy

stood aside to let him pass.  He knew that Kennedy's next

reply would be delivered by hand.  He had once seen Ray



<p 113>



beat up a nasty fellow for insulting a Mexican woman who

helped about the grub-car in the work train, and his fists

had worked like two steel hammers.  Giddy wasn't looking

for trouble.





     At eight o'clock the next morning Ray greeted his ladies

and helped them into the car.  Giddy had put on a clean

shirt and yellow pig-skin gloves and was whistling his

best.  He considered Kennedy a fluke as a ladies' man,

and if there was to be a party, the honors had to be done

by some one who wasn't a blacksmith at small-talk.

Giddy had, as Ray sarcastically admitted, "a local repu-

tation as a jollier," and he was fluent in gallant speeches

of a not too-veiled nature.  He insisted that Thea should

take his seat in the cupola, opposite Ray's, where she

could look out over the country.  Thea told him, as she

clambered up, that she cared a good deal more about

riding in that seat than about going to Denver.  Ray was

never so companionable and easy as when he sat chatting

in the lookout of his little house on wheels.  Good stories

came to him, and interesting recollections.  Thea had a

great respect for the reports he had to write out, and for

the telegrams that were handed to him at stations; for

all the knowledge and experience it must take to run a

freight train.



     Giddy, down in the car, in the pauses of his work, made

himself agreeable to Mrs. Kronborg.



     "It's a great rest to be where my family can't get at me,

Mr. Giddy," she told him.  "I thought you and Ray might

have some housework here for me to look after, but I

couldn't improve any on this car."



     "Oh, we like to keep her neat," returned Giddy glibly,

winking up at Ray's expressive back.  "If you want to see

a clean ice-box, look at this one.  Yes, Kennedy always

carries fresh cream to eat on his oatmeal.  I'm not particu-

lar.  The tin cow's good enough for me."



<p 114>





     "Most of you boys smoke so much that all victuals taste

alike to you," said Mrs. Kronborg.  "I've got no religious

scruples against smoking, but I couldn't take as much

interest cooking for a man that used tobacco.  I guess it's

all right for bachelors who have to eat round."



     Mrs. Kronborg took off her hat and veil and made her-

self comfortable.  She seldom had an opportunity to be

idle, and she enjoyed it.  She could sit for hours and watch

the sage-hens fly up and the jack-rabbits dart away from

the track, without being bored.  She wore a tan bombazine

dress, made very plainly, and carried a roomy, worn,

mother-of-the-family handbag.



     Ray Kennedy always insisted that Mrs. Kronborg was

"a fine-looking lady," but this was not the common opin-

ion in Moonstone.  Ray had lived long enough among the

Mexicans to dislike fussiness, to feel that there was some-

thing more attractive in ease of manner than in absent-

minded concern about hairpins and dabs of lace.  He had

learned to think that the way a woman stood, moved, sat

in her chair, looked at you, was more important than the

absence of wrinkles from her skirt.  Ray had, indeed, such

unusual perceptions in some directions, that one could

not help wondering what he would have been if he had

ever, as he said, had "half a chance."



     He was right; Mrs. Kronborg was a fine-looking woman.

She was short and square, but her head was a real head,

not a mere jerky termination of the body.  It had some

individuality apart from hats and hairpins.  Her hair,

Moonstone women admitted, would have been very pretty

"on anybody else."  Frizzy bangs were worn then, but

Mrs. Kronborg always dressed her hair in the same way,

parted in the middle, brushed smoothly back from her

low, white forehead, pinned loosely on the back of her

head in two thick braids.  It was growing gray about the

temples, but after the manner of yellow hair it seemed

only to have grown paler there, and had taken on a color



<p 115>



like that of English primroses.  Her eyes were clear and

untroubled; her face smooth and calm, and, as Ray said,

"strong."



     Thea and Ray, up in the sunny cupola, were laughing

and talking.  Ray got great pleasure out of seeing her face

there in the little box where he so often imagined it.  They

were crossing a plateau where great red sandstone boulders

lay about, most of them much wider at the top than at the

base, so that they looked like great toadstools.



     "The sand has been blowing against them for a good

many hundred years," Ray explained, directing Thea's

eyes with his gloved hand.  "You see the sand blows low,

being so heavy, and cuts them out underneath.  Wind and

sand are pretty high-class architects.  That's the principle

of most of the Cliff-Dweller remains down at Canyon de

Chelly.  The sandstorms had dug out big depressions in the

face of a cliff, and the Indians built their houses back in

that depression."



     "You told me that before, Ray, and of course you know.

But the geography says their houses were cut out of the

face of the living rock, and I like that better."



     Ray sniffed.  "What nonsense does get printed!  It's

enough to give a man disrespect for learning.  How could

them Indians cut houses out of the living rock, when they

knew nothing about the art of forging metals?"  Ray

leaned back in his chair, swung his foot, and looked thought-

ful and happy.  He was in one of his favorite fields of specu-

lation, and nothing gave him more pleasure than talking

these things over with Thea Kronborg.  "I'll tell you,

Thee, if those old fellows had learned to work metals once,

your ancient Egyptians and Assyrians wouldn't have beat

them very much.  Whatever they did do, they did well.

Their masonry's standing there to-day, the corners as true

as the Denver Capitol.  They were clever at most every-

thing but metals; and that one failure kept them from

getting across.  It was the quicksand that swallowed 'em



<p 116>



up, as a race.  I guess civilization proper began when men

mastered metals."



     Ray was not vain about his bookish phrases.  He did not

use them to show off, but because they seemed to him more

adequate than colloquial speech.  He felt strongly about

these things, and groped for words, as he said, "to express

himself."  He had the lamentable American belief that

"expression" is obligatory.  He still carried in his trunk,

among the unrelated possessions of a railroad man, a note-

book on the title-page of which was written "Impressions

on First Viewing the Grand Canyon, Ray H. Kennedy."

The pages of that book were like a battlefield; the laboring

author had fallen back from metaphor after metaphor,

abandoned position after position.  He would have admit-

ted that the art of forging metals was nothing to this treach-

erous business of recording impressions, in which the

material you were so full of vanished mysteriously under

your striving hand.  "Escaping steam!" he had said to him-

self, the last time he tried to read that notebook.



     Thea didn't mind Ray's travel-lecture expressions.  She

dodged them, unconsciously, as she did her father's pro-

fessional palaver.  The light in Ray's pale-blue eyes and

the feeling in his voice more than made up for the stiff-

ness of his language.



     "Were the Cliff-Dwellers really clever with their hands,

Ray, or do you always have to make allowance and say,

'That was pretty good for an Indian'?" she asked.



     Ray went down into the car to give some instructions to

Giddy.  "Well," he said when he returned, "about the

aborigines: once or twice I've been with some fellows who

were cracking burial mounds.  Always felt a little ashamed

of it, but we did pull out some remarkable things.  We got

some pottery out whole; seemed pretty fine to me.  I guess

their women were their artists.  We found lots of old shoes

and sandals made out of yucca fiber, neat and strong; and

feather blankets, too."



<p 117>





     "Feather blankets?  You never told me about them."



     "Didn't I?  The old fellows--or the squaws--wove

a close netting of yucca fiber, and then tied on little bunches

of down feathers, overlapping, just the way feathers grow

on a bird.  Some of them were feathered on both sides.

You can't get anything warmer than that, now, can you?

--or prettier.  What I like about those old aborigines is,

that they got all their ideas from nature."



     Thea laughed.  "That means you're going to say some-

thing about girls' wearing corsets.  But some of your In-

dians flattened their babies' heads, and that's worse than

wearing corsets."



     "Give me an Indian girl's figure for beauty," Ray in-

sisted.  "And a girl with a voice like yours ought to have

plenty of lung-action.  But you know my sentiments on

that subject.  I was going to tell you about the handsomest

thing we ever looted out of those burial mounds.  It was on

a woman, too, I regret to say.  She was preserved as perfect

as any mummy that ever came out of the pyramids.  She

had a big string of turquoises around her neck, and she was

wrapped in a fox-fur cloak, lined with little yellow feathers

that must have come off wild canaries.  Can you beat that,

now?  The fellow that claimed it sold it to a Boston man

for a hundred and fifty dollars."



     Thea looked at him admiringly.  "Oh, Ray, and didn't

you get anything off her, to remember her by, even?  She

must have been a princess."



     Ray took a wallet from the pocket of the coat that was

hanging beside him, and drew from it a little lump wrapped

in worn tissue paper.  In a moment a stone, soft and blue

as a robin's egg, lay in the hard palm of his hand.  It was a

turquoise, rubbed smooth in the Indian finish, which is so

much more beautiful than the incongruous high polish the

white man gives that tender stone.  "I got this from her

necklace.  See the hole where the string went through?

You know how the Indians drill them?  Work the drill with



<p 118>



their teeth.  You like it, don't you?  They're just right for

you.  Blue and yellow are the Swedish colors."  Ray looked

intently at her head, bent over his hand, and then gave his

whole attention to the track.



     "I'll tell you, Thee," he began after a pause, "I'm going

to form a camping party one of these days and persuade

your PADRE to take you and your mother down to that coun-

try, and we'll live in the rock houses--they're as comfort-

able as can be--and start the cook fires up in 'em once

again.  I'll go into the burial mounds and get you more

keepsakes than any girl ever had before."  Ray had planned

such an expedition for his wedding journey, and it made

his heart thump to see how Thea's eyes kindled when he

talked about it.  "I've learned more down there about

what makes history," he went on, "than in all the books

I've ever read.  When you sit in the sun and let your heels

hang out of a doorway that drops a thousand feet, ideas

come to you.  You begin to feel what the human race has

been up against from the beginning.  There's something

mighty elevating about those old habitations.  You feel like

it's up to you to do your best, on account of those fellows

having it so hard.  You feel like you owed them something."



     At Wassiwappa, Ray got instructions to sidetrack until

Thirty-six went by.  After reading the message, he turned

to his guests.  "I'm afraid this will hold us up about two

hours, Mrs. Kronborg, and we won't get into Denver till

near midnight."



     "That won't trouble me," said Mrs. Kronborg content-

edly.  "They know me at the Y.W.C.A., and they'll let

me in any time of night.  I came to see the country, not to

make time.  I've always wanted to get out at this white

place and look around, and now I'll have a chance.  What

makes it so white?"



     "Some kind of chalky rock."  Ray sprang to the ground

and gave Mrs. Kronborg his hand.  "You can get soil of

any color in Colorado; match most any ribbon."



<p 119>





     While Ray was getting his train on to a side track, Mrs.

Kronborg strolled off to examine the post-office and sta-

tion house; these, with the water tank, made up the town.

The station agent "batched" and raised chickens.  He ran

out to meet Mrs. Kronborg, clutched at her feverishly,

and began telling her at once how lonely he was and what

bad luck he was having with his poultry.  She went to his

chicken yard with him, and prescribed for gapes.



     Wassiwappa seemed a dreary place enough to people who

looked for verdure, a brilliant place to people who liked

color.  Beside the station house there was a blue-grass plot,

protected by a red plank fence, and six fly-bitten box-elder

trees, not much larger than bushes, were kept alive by

frequent hosings from the water plug.  Over the windows

some dusty morning-glory vines were trained on strings.

All the country about was broken up into low chalky hills,

which were so intensely white, and spotted so evenly with

sage, that they looked like white leopards crouching.  White

dust powdered everything, and the light was so intense

that the station agent usually wore blue glasses.  Behind

the station there was a water course, which roared in flood

time, and a basin in the soft white rock where a pool of

alkali water flashed in the sun like a mirror.  The agent

looked almost as sick as his chickens, and Mrs. Kronborg

at once invited him to lunch with her party.  He had, he

confessed, a distaste for his own cooking, and lived mainly

on soda crackers and canned beef.  He laughed apologetic-

ally when Mrs. Kronborg said she guessed she'd look about

for a shady place to eat lunch.



     She walked up the track to the water tank, and there, in

the narrow shadows cast by the uprights on which the

tank stood, she found two tramps.  They sat up and

stared at her, heavy with sleep.  When she asked them

where they were going, they told her "to the coast."  They

rested by day and traveled by night; walked the ties unless

they could steal a ride, they said; adding that "these



<p 120>



Western roads were getting strict."  Their faces were

blistered, their eyes blood-shot, and their shoes looked fit

only for the trash pile.



     "I suppose you're hungry?" Mrs. Kronborg asked.  "I

suppose you both drink?" she went on thoughtfully, not

censoriously.



     The huskier of the two hoboes, a bushy, bearded fellow,

rolled his eyes and said, "I wonder?"  But the other, who

was old and spare, with a sharp nose and watery eyes,

sighed.  "Some has one affliction, some another," he said.



     Mrs. Kronborg reflected.  "Well," she said at last, "you

can't get liquor here, anyway.  I am going to ask you to

vacate, because I want to have a little picnic under this

tank for the freight crew that brought me along.  I wish I

had lunch enough to provide you, but I ain't.  The station

agent says he gets his provisions over there at the post-

office store, and if you are hungry you can get some canned

stuff there."  She opened her handbag and gave each of

the tramps a half-dollar.



     The old man wiped his eyes with his forefinger.  "Thank

'ee, ma'am.  A can of tomatters will taste pretty good to me.

I wasn't always walkin' ties; I had a good job in Cleve-

land before--"



     The hairy tramp turned on him fiercely.  "Aw, shut up

on that, grandpaw!  Ain't you got no gratitude?  What do

you want to hand the lady that fur?"



     The old man hung his head and turned away.  As he

went off, his comrade looked after him and said to Mrs.

Kronborg: "It's true, what he says.  He had a job in the

car shops; but he had bad luck."  They both limped away

toward the store, and Mrs. Kronborg sighed.  She was not

afraid of tramps.  She always talked to them, and never

turned one away.  She hated to think how many of them

there were, crawling along the tracks over that vast coun-

try.



     Her reflections were cut short by Ray and Giddy and



<p 121>



Thea, who came bringing the lunch box and water bottles.

Although there was not shadow enough to accommodate

all the party at once, the air under the tank was distinctly

cooler than the surrounding air, and the drip made a pleas-

ant sound in that breathless noon.  The station agent ate

as if he had never been fed before, apologizing every time

he took another piece of fried chicken.  Giddy was una-

bashed before the devilled eggs of which he had spoken so

scornfully last night.  After lunch the men lit their pipes

and lay back against the uprights that supported the tank.



     "This is the sunny side of railroading, all right," Giddy

drawled luxuriously.



     "You fellows grumble too much," said Mrs. Kronborg

as she corked the pickle jar.  "Your job has its drawbacks,

but it don't tie you down.  Of course there's the risk; but

I believe a man's watched over, and he can't be hurt on

the railroad or anywhere else if it's intended he shouldn't

be."



     Giddy laughed.  "Then the trains must be operated by

fellows the Lord has it in for, Mrs. Kronborg.  They figure

it out that a railroad man's only due to last eleven years;

then it's his turn to be smashed."



     "That's a dark Providence, I don't deny," Mrs. Kron-

borg admitted.  "But there's lots of things in life that's

hard to understand."



     "I guess!" murmured Giddy, looking off at the spotted

white hills.



     Ray smoked in silence, watching Thea and her mother

clear away the lunch.  He was thinking that Mrs. Kron-

borg had in her face the same serious look that Thea had;

only hers was calm and satisfied, and Thea's was intense

and questioning.  But in both it was a large kind of look,

that was not all the time being broken up and convulsed

by trivial things.  They both carried their heads like Indian

women, with a kind of noble unconsciousness.  He got so

tired of women who were always nodding and jerking;



<p 122>



apologizing, deprecating, coaxing, insinuating with their

heads.



     When Ray's party set off again that afternoon the sun

beat fiercely into the cupola, and Thea curled up in one of

the seats at the back of the car and had a nap.



     As the short twilight came on, Giddy took a turn in the

cupola, and Ray came down and sat with Thea on the rear

platform of the caboose and watched the darkness come

in soft waves over the plain.  They were now about thirty

miles from Denver, and the mountains looked very near.

The great toothed wall behind which the sun had gone

down now separated into four distinct ranges, one behind

the other.  They were a very pale blue, a color scarcely

stronger than wood smoke, and the sunset had left bright

streaks in the snow-filled gorges.  In the clear, yellow-

streaked sky the stars were coming out, flickering like

newly lighted lamps, growing steadier and more golden as

the sky darkened and the land beneath them fell into com-

plete shadow.  It was a cool, restful darkness that was

not black or forbidding, but somehow open and free; the

night of high plains where there is no moistness or misti-

ness in the atmosphere.



     Ray lit his pipe.  "I never get tired of them old stars,

Thee.  I miss 'em up in Washington and Oregon where it's

misty.  Like 'em best down in Mother Mexico, where they

have everything their own way.  I'm not for any country

where the stars are dim."  Ray paused and drew on his

pipe.  "I don't know as I ever really noticed 'em much till

that first year I herded sheep up in Wyoming.  That was

the year the blizzard caught me."



     "And you lost all your sheep, didn't you, Ray?"  Thea

spoke sympathetically.  "Was the man who owned them

nice about it?"



     "Yes, he was a good loser.  But I didn't get over it for

a long while.  Sheep are so damned resigned.  Sometimes,

to this day, when I'm dog-tired, I try to save them sheep



<p 123>



all night long.  It comes kind of hard on a boy when he first

finds out how little he is, and how big everything else is."



     Thea moved restlessly toward him and dropped her chin

on her hand, looking at a low star that seemed to rest just

on the rim of the earth.  "I don't see how you stood it.  I

don't believe I could.  I don't see how people can stand it

to get knocked out, anyhow!"  She spoke with such fierce-

ness that Ray glanced at her in surprise.  She was sitting

on the floor of the car, crouching like a little animal about

to spring.



     "No occasion for you to see," he said warmly.  "There'll

always be plenty of other people to take the knocks for

you."



     "That's nonsense, Ray."  Thea spoke impatiently and

leaned lower still, frowning at the red star.  "Everybody's

up against it for himself, succeeds or fails--himself."



     "In one way, yes," Ray admitted, knocking the sparks

from his pipe out into the soft darkness that seemed to

flow like a river beside the car.  "But when you look at

it another way, there are a lot of halfway people in this

world who help the winners win, and the failers fail.  If a

man stumbles, there's plenty of people to push him down.

But if he's like `the youth who bore,' those same people

are foreordained to help him along.  They may hate to,

worse than blazes, and they may do a lot of cussin' about

it, but they have to help the winners and they can't dodge

it.  It's a natural law, like what keeps the big clock up

there going, little wheels and big, and no mix-up."  Ray's

hand and his pipe were suddenly outlined against the sky.

"Ever occur to you, Thee, that they have to be on time

close enough to MAKE TIME?  The Dispatcher up there must

have a long head."  Pleased with his similitude, Ray went

back to the lookout.  Going into Denver, he had to keep a

sharp watch.



     Giddy came down, cheerful at the prospect of getting

into port, and singing a new topical ditty that had come up



<p 124>



from the Santa Fe by way of La Junta.  Nobody knows

who makes these songs; they seem to follow events auto-

matically.  Mrs. Kronborg made Giddy sing the whole

twelve verses of this one, and laughed until she wiped her

eyes.  The story was that of Katie Casey, head dining-

room girl at Winslow, Arizona, who was unjustly dis-

charged by the Harvey House manager.  Her suitor, the

yardmaster, took the switchmen out on a strike until she

was reinstated.  Freight trains from the east and the west

piled up at Winslow until the yards looked like a log-jam.

The division superintendent, who was in California, had to

wire instructions for Katie Casey's restoration before he

could get his trains running.  Giddy's song told all this with

much detail, both tender and technical, and after each of

the dozen verses came the refrain:--





          "Oh, who would think that Katie Casey owned the Santa Fe?



          But it really looks that way,



          The dispatcher's turnin' gray,



          All the crews is off their pay;



          She can hold the freight from Albuquerq' to Needles any

day;



          The division superintendent, he come home from Monterey,



          Just to see if things was pleasin' Katie Ca--a--a--sey."





     Thea laughed with her mother and applauded Giddy.

Everything was so kindly and comfortable; Giddy and

Ray, and their hospitable little house, and the easy-going

country, and the stars.  She curled up on the seat again

with that warm, sleepy feeling of the friendliness of the

world--which nobody keeps very long, and which she

was to lose early and irrevocably.







<p 125>





                               XVII





     The summer flew by.  Thea was glad when Ray

Kennedy had a Sunday in town and could take her

driving.  Out among the sand hills she could forget the

"new room" which was the scene of wearing and fruitless

labor.  Dr. Archie was away from home a good deal that

year.  He had put all his money into mines above Colo-

rado Springs, and he hoped for great returns from them.



     In the fall of that year, Mr. Kronborg decided that Thea

ought to show more interest in church work.  He put it to

her frankly, one night at supper, before the whole family.

"How can I insist on the other girls in the congregation

being active in the work, when one of my own daughters

manifests so little interest?"



     "But I sing every Sunday morning, and I have to give

up one night a week to choir practice," Thea declared

rebelliously, pushing back her plate with an angry deter-

mination to eat nothing more.



     "One night a week is not enough for the pastor's daugh-

ter," her father replied.  "You won't do anything in the

sewing society, and you won't take part in the Christian

Endeavor or the Band of Hope.  Very well, you must make

it up in other ways.  I want some one to play the organ

and lead the singing at prayer-meeting this winter.  Deacon

Potter told me some time ago that he thought there would

be more interest in our prayer-meetings if we had the organ.

Miss Meyers don't feel that she can play on Wednesday

nights.  And there ought to be somebody to start the hymns.

Mrs. Potter is getting old, and she always starts them too

high.  It won't take much of your time, and it will keep

people from talking."



     This argument conquered Thea, though she left the



<p 126>



table sullenly.  The fear of the tongue, that terror of little

towns, is usually felt more keenly by the minister's family

than by other households.  Whenever the Kronborgs

wanted to do anything, even to buy a new carpet, they had

to take counsel together as to whether people would talk.

Mrs. Kronborg had her own conviction that people talked

when they felt like it, and said what they chose, no matter

how the minister's family conducted themselves.  But she

did not impart these dangerous ideas to her children.  Thea

was still under the belief that public opinion could be

placated; that if you clucked often enough, the hens would

mistake you for one of themselves.



     Mrs. Kronborg did not have any particular zest for

prayer-meetings, and she stayed at home whenever she had

a valid excuse.  Thor was too old to furnish such an excuse

now, so every Wednesday night, unless one of the children

was sick, she trudged off with Thea, behind Mr. Kronborg.

At first Thea was terribly bored.  But she got used to prayer-

meeting, got even to feel a mournful interest in it.



     The exercises were always pretty much the same.  After

the first hymn her father read a passage from the Bible,

usually a Psalm.  Then there was another hymn, and then

her father commented upon the passage he had read and,

as he said, "applied the Word to our necessities."  After

a third hymn, the meeting was declared open, and the old

men and women took turns at praying and talking.  Mrs.

Kronborg never spoke in meeting.  She told people firmly

that she had been brought up to keep silent and let the

men talk, but she gave respectful attention to the others,

sitting with her hands folded in her lap.



     The prayer-meeting audience was always small.  The

young and energetic members of the congregation came

only once or twice a year, "to keep people from talking."

The usual Wednesday night gathering was made up of old

women, with perhaps six or eight old men, and a few sickly

girls who had not much interest in life; two of them, in-



<p 127>



deed, were already preparing to die.  Thea accepted the

mournfulness of the prayer-meetings as a kind of spiritual

discipline, like funerals.  She always read late after she

went home and felt a stronger wish than usual to live and

to be happy.



     The meetings were conducted in the Sunday-School

room, where there were wooden chairs instead of pews;

an old map of Palestine hung on the wall, and the bracket

lamps gave out only a dim light.  The old women sat

motionless as Indians in their shawls and bonnets; some of

them wore long black mourning veils.  The old men drooped

in their chairs.  Every back, every face, every head said

"resignation."  Often there were long silences, when you

could hear nothing but the crackling of the soft coal in the

stove and the muffled cough of one of the sick girls.



     There was one nice old lady,--tall, erect, self-respect-

ing, with a delicate white face and a soft voice.  She never

whined, and what she said was always cheerful, though she

spoke so nervously that Thea knew she dreaded getting

up, and that she made a real sacrifice to, as she said, "tes-

tify to the goodness of her Saviour."  She was the mother of

the girl who coughed, and Thea used to wonder how she

explained things to herself.  There was, indeed, only one

woman who talked because she was, as Mr. Kronborg said,

"tonguey."  The others were somehow impressive.  They

told about the sweet thoughts that came to them while

they were at their work; how, amid their household tasks,

they were suddenly lifted by the sense of a divine Presence.

Sometimes they told of their first conversion, of how in

their youth that higher Power had made itself known to

them.  Old Mr. Carsen, the carpenter, who gave his ser-

vices as janitor to the church, used often to tell how, when

he was a young man and a scoffer, bent on the destruction

of both body and soul, his Saviour had come to him in the

Michigan woods and had stood, it seemed to him, beside

the tree he was felling; and how he dropped his axe and



<p 128>



knelt in prayer "to Him who died for us upon the tree."

Thea always wanted to ask him more about it; about his

mysterious wickedness, and about the vision.



     Sometimes the old people would ask for prayers for their

absent children.  Sometimes they asked their brothers and

sisters in Christ to pray that they might be stronger

against temptations.  One of the sick girls used to ask

them to pray that she might have more faith in the times

of depression that came to her, "when all the way before

seemed dark."  She repeated that husky phrase so often,

that Thea always remembered it.



     One old woman, who never missed a Wednesday night,

and who nearly always took part in the meeting, came all

the way up from the depot settlement.  She always wore a

black crocheted "fascinator" over her thin white hair, and

she made long, tremulous prayers, full of railroad termin-

ology.  She had six sons in the service of different railroads,

and she always prayed "for the boys on the road, who know

not at what moment they may be cut off.  When, in Thy

divine wisdom, their hour is upon them, may they, O our

Heavenly Father, see only white lights along the road to

Eternity."  She used to speak, too, of "the engines that

race with death"; and though she looked so old and little

when she was on her knees, and her voice was so shaky, her

prayers had a thrill of speed and danger in them; they made

one think of the deep black canyons, the slender trestles,

the pounding trains.  Thea liked to look at her sunken eyes

that seemed full of wisdom, at her black thread gloves,

much too long in the fingers and so meekly folded one over

the other.  Her face was brown, and worn away as rocks

are worn by water.  There are many ways of describing

that color of age, but in reality it is not like parchment, or

like any of the things it is said to be like.  That brownness

and that texture of skin are found only in the faces of old

human creatures, who have worked hard and who have

always been poor.



<p 129>





     One bitterly cold night in December the prayer-meeting

seemed to Thea longer than usual.  The prayers and the

talks went on and on.  It was as if the old people were

afraid to go out into the cold, or were stupefied by the hot

air of the room.  She had left a book at home that she was

impatient to get back to.  At last the Doxology was sung,

but the old people lingered about the stove to greet each

other, and Thea took her mother's arm and hurried out to

the frozen sidewalk, before her father could get away.  The

wind was whistling up the street and whipping the naked

cottonwood trees against the telegraph poles and the sides

of the houses.  Thin snow clouds were flying overhead, so

that the sky looked gray, with a dull phosphorescence.

The icy streets and the shingle roofs of the houses were

gray, too.  All along the street, shutters banged or windows

rattled, or gates wobbled, held by their latch but shaking

on loose hinges.  There was not a cat or a dog in Moonstone

that night that was not given a warm shelter; the cats

under the kitchen stove, the dogs in barns or coal-sheds.

When Thea and her mother reached home, their mufflers

were covered with ice, where their breath had frozen.  They

hurried into the house and made a dash for the parlor and

the hard-coal burner, behind which Gunner was sitting on

a stool, reading his Jules Verne book.  The door stood open

into the dining-room, which was heated from the parlor.

Mr. Kronborg always had a lunch when he came home

from prayer-meeting, and his pumpkin pie and milk were

set out on the dining-table.  Mrs. Kronborg said she

thought she felt hungry, too, and asked Thea if she didn't

want something to eat.



     "No, I'm not hungry, mother.  I guess I'll go upstairs."



     "I expect you've got some book up there," said Mrs.

Kronborg, bringing out another pie.  "You'd better bring

it down here and read.  Nobody'll disturb you, and it's

terrible cold up in that loft."



     Thea was always assured that no one would disturb her



<p 130>



if she read downstairs, but the boys talked when they came

in, and her father fairly delivered discourses after he had

been renewed by half a pie and a pitcher of milk.



     "I don't mind the cold.  I'll take a hot brick up for my

feet.  I put one in the stove before I left, if one of the boys

hasn't stolen it.  Good-night, mother."  Thea got her brick

and lantern, and dashed upstairs through the windy loft.

She undressed at top speed and got into bed with her brick.

She put a pair of white knitted gloves on her hands, and

pinned over her head a piece of soft flannel that had been

one of Thor's long petticoats when he was a baby.  Thus

equipped, she was ready for business.  She took from her

table a thick paper-backed volume, one of the "line" of

paper novels the druggist kept to sell to traveling men.

She had bought it, only yesterday, because the first sen-

tence interested her very much, and because she saw, as

she glanced over the pages, the magical names of two

Russian cities.  The book was a poor translation of "Anna

Karenina."  Thea opened it at a mark, and fixed her eyes

intently upon the small print.  The hymns, the sick girl,

the resigned black figures were forgotten.  It was the night

of the ball in Moscow.



     Thea would have been astonished if she could have

known how, years afterward, when she had need of them,

those old faces were to come back to her, long after they

were hidden away under the earth; that they would seem

to her then as full of meaning, as mysteriously marked by

Destiny, as the people who danced the mazurka under the

elegant Korsunsky.







<p 131>





                               XVIII





     Mr. Kronborg was too fond of his ease and too

sensible to worry his children much about religion.

He was more sincere than many preachers, but when he

spoke to his family about matters of conduct it was usually

with a regard for keeping up appearances.  The church and

church work were discussed in the family like the routine

of any other business.  Sunday was the hard day of the

week with them, just as Saturday was the busy day with

the merchants on Main Street.  Revivals were seasons of

extra work and pressure, just as threshing-time was on the

farms.  Visiting elders had to be lodged and cooked for,

the folding-bed in the parlor was let down, and Mrs.

Kronborg had to work in the kitchen all day long and

attend the night meetings.



     During one of these revivals Thea's sister Anna professed

religion with, as Mrs. Kronborg said, "a good deal of

fluster."  While Anna was going up to the mourners' bench

nightly and asking for the prayers of the congregation, she

disseminated general gloom throughout the household, and

after she joined the church she took on an air of "set-apart-

ness" that was extremely trying to her brothers and her

sister, though they realized that Anna's sanctimoniousness

was perhaps a good thing for their father.  A preacher ought

to have one child who did more than merely acquiesce in

religious observances, and Thea and the boys were glad

enough that it was Anna and not one of themselves who

assumed this obligation.



     "Anna, she's American," Mrs. Kronborg used to say.

The Scandinavian mould of countenance, more or less

marked in each of the other children, was scarcely dis-

cernible in her, and she looked enough like other Moon-



<p 132>



stone girls to be thought pretty.  Anna's nature was con-

ventional, like her face.  Her position as the minister's

eldest daughter was important to her, and she tried to

live up to it.  She read sentimental religious story-books

and emulated the spiritual struggles and magnanimous

behavior of their persecuted heroines.  Everything had to

be interpreted for Anna.  Her opinions about the small-

est and most commonplace things were gleaned from the

Denver papers, the church weeklies, from sermons and

Sunday-School addresses.  Scarcely anything was attrac-

tive to her in its natural state--indeed, scarcely anything

was decent until it was clothed by the opinion of some

authority.  Her ideas about habit, character, duty, love,

marriage, were grouped under heads, like a book of popular

quotations, and were totally unrelated to the emergencies

of human living.  She discussed all these subjects with other

Methodist girls of her age.  They would spend hours, for

instance, in deciding what they would or would not toler-

ate in a suitor or a husband, and the frailties of masculine

nature were too often a subject of discussion among them.

In her behavior Anna was a harmless girl, mild except

where her prejudices were concerned, neat and industrious,

with no graver fault than priggishness; but her mind had

really shocking habits of classification.  The wickedness of

Denver and of Chicago, and even of Moonstone, occupied

her thoughts too much.  She had none of the delicacy that

goes with a nature of warm impulses, but the kind of fishy

curiosity which justifies itself by an expression of horror.



     Thea, and all Thea's ways and friends, seemed indecor-

ous to Anna.  She not only felt a grave social discrimination

against the Mexicans; she could not forget that Spanish

Johnny was a drunkard and that "nobody knew what he

did when he ran away from home."  Thea pretended, of

course, that she liked the Mexicans because they were

fond of music; but every one knew that music was no-

thing very real, and that it did not matter in a girl's re-



<p 133>



lations with people.  What was real, then, and what did

matter?  Poor Anna!



     Anna approved of Ray Kennedy as a young man of

steady habits and blameless life, but she regretted that he

was an atheist, and that he was not a passenger conductor

with brass buttons on his coat.  On the whole, she won-

dered what such an exemplary young man found to like in

Thea.  Dr. Archie she treated respectfully because of his

position in Moonstone, but she KNEW he had kissed the

Mexican barytone's pretty daughter, and she had a whole

DOSSIER of evidence about his behavior in his hours of relax-

ation in Denver.  He was "fast," and it was because he was

"fast" that Thea liked him.  Thea always liked that kind

of people.  Dr. Archie's whole manner with Thea, Anna

often told her mother, was too free.  He was always putting

his hand on Thea's head, or holding her hand while he

laughed and looked down at her.  The kindlier manifesta-

tion of human nature (about which Anna sang and talked,

in the interests of which she went to conventions and wore

white ribbons) were never realities to her after all.  She did

not believe in them.  It was only in attitudes of protest or

reproof, clinging to the cross, that human beings could be

even temporarily decent.



     Preacher Kronborg's secret convictions were very much

like Anna's.  He believed that his wife was absolutely good,

but there was not a man or woman in his congregation

whom he trusted all the way.



     Mrs. Kronborg, on the other hand, was likely to find

something to admire in almost any human conduct that

was positive and energetic.  She could always be taken

in by the stories of tramps and runaway boys.  She went

to the circus and admired the bareback riders, who were

"likely good enough women in their way."  She admired

Dr. Archie's fine physique and well-cut clothes as much

as Thea did, and said she "felt it was a privilege to be

handled by such a gentleman when she was sick."



<p 134>





     Soon after Anna became a church member she began to

remonstrate with Thea about practicing--playing "secu-

lar music"--on Sunday.  One Sunday the dispute in the

parlor grew warm and was carried to Mrs. Kronborg in

the kitchen.  She listened judicially and told Anna to read

the chapter about how Naaman the leper was permitted

to bow down in the house of Rimmon.  Thea went back to

the piano, and Anna lingered to say that, since she was in

the right, her mother should have supported her.



     "No," said Mrs. Kronborg, rather indifferently, "I can't

see it that way, Anna.  I never forced you to practice, and

I don't see as I should keep Thea from it.  I like to hear her,

and I guess your father does.  You and Thea will likely fol-

low different lines, and I don't see as I'm called upon to

bring you up alike."



     Anna looked meek and abused.  "Of course all the church

people must hear her.  Ours is the only noisy house on this

street.  You hear what she's playing now, don't you?"



     Mrs. Kronborg rose from browning her coffee.  "Yes;

it's the Blue Danube waltzes.  I'm familiar with 'em.  If

any of the church people come at you, you just send 'em

to me.  I ain't afraid to speak out on occasion, and I

wouldn't mind one bit telling the Ladies' Aid a few things

about standard composers."  Mrs. Kronborg smiled, and

added thoughtfully, "No, I wouldn't mind that one bit."



     Anna went about with a reserved and distant air for a

week, and Mrs. Kronborg suspected that she held a larger

place than usual in her daughter's prayers; but that was

another thing she didn't mind.





     Although revivals were merely a part of the year's work,

like examination week at school, and although Anna's

piety impressed her very little, a time came when Thea was

perplexed about religion.  A scourge of typhoid broke out

in Moonstone and several of Thea's schoolmates died of

it.  She went to their funerals, saw them put into the



<p 135>



ground, and wondered a good deal about them.  But a

certain grim incident, which caused the epidemic, troubled

her even more than the death of her friends.



     Early in July, soon after Thea's fifteenth birthday, a

particularly disgusting sort of tramp came into Moonstone

in an empty box car.  Thea was sitting in the hammock in

the front yard when he first crawled up to the town from

the depot, carrying a bundle wrapped in dirty ticking

under one arm, and under the other a wooden box with

rusty screening nailed over one end.  He had a thin, hungry

face covered with black hair.  It was just before supper-

time when he came along, and the street smelled of fried

potatoes and fried onions and coffee.  Thea saw him sniffing

the air greedily and walking slower and slower.  He looked

over the fence.  She hoped he would not stop at their gate,

for her mother never turned any one away, and this was

the dirtiest and most utterly wretched-looking tramp she

had ever seen.  There was a terrible odor about him, too.

She caught it even at that distance, and put her handker-

chief to her nose.  A moment later she was sorry, for she

knew that he had noticed it.  He looked away and shuffled

a little faster.



     A few days later Thea heard that the tramp had camped

in an empty shack over on the east edge of town, beside

the ravine, and was trying to give a miserable sort of show

there.  He told the boys who went to see what he was doing,

that he had traveled with a circus.  His bundle contained

a filthy clown's suit, and his box held half a dozen rattle-

snakes.



     Saturday night, when Thea went to the butcher shop to

get the chickens for Sunday, she heard the whine of an

accordion and saw a crowd before one of the saloons.  There

she found the tramp, his bony body grotesquely attired in

the clown's suit, his face shaved and painted white,--the

sweat trickling through the paint and washing it away,--

and his eyes wild and feverish.  Pulling the accordion in



<p 136>



and out seemed to be almost too great an effort for him,

and he panted to the tune of "Marching through Georgia."

After a considerable crowd had gathered, the tramp ex-

hibited his box of snakes, announced that he would now

pass the hat, and that when the onlookers had contributed

the sum of one dollar, he would eat "one of these living

reptiles."  The crowd began to cough and murmur, and the

saloon keeper rushed off for the marshal, who arrested the

wretch for giving a show without a license and hurried

him away to the calaboose.



     The calaboose stood in a sunflower patch,--an old hut

with a barred window and a padlock on the door.  The

tramp was utterly filthy and there was no way to give him

a bath.  The law made no provision to grub-stake vagrants,

so after the constable had detained the tramp for twenty-

four hours, he released him and told him to "get out of

town, and get quick."  The fellow's rattlesnakes had been

killed by the saloon keeper.  He hid in a box car in the

freight yard, probably hoping to get a ride to the next

station, but he was found and put out.  After that he was

seen no more.  He had disappeared and left no trace except

an ugly, stupid word, chalked on the black paint of the

seventy-five-foot standpipe which was the reservoir for the

Moonstone water-supply; the same word, in another

tongue, that the French soldier shouted at Waterloo to

the English officer who bade the Old Guard surrender; a

comment on life which the defeated, along the hard roads

of the world, sometimes bawl at the victorious.



     A week after the tramp excitement had passed over,

the city water began to smell and to taste.  The Kron-

borgs had a well in their back yard and did not use city

water, but they heard the complaints of their neighbors.

At first people said that the town well was full of rot-

ting cottonwood roots, but the engineer at the pumping-

station convinced the mayor that the water left the well

untainted.  Mayors reason slowly, but, the well being



<p 137>



eliminated, the official mind had to travel toward the

standpipe--there was no other track for it to go in.

The standpipe amply rewarded investigation.  The tramp

had got even with Moonstone.  He had climbed the

standpipe by the handholds and let himself down into

seventy-five feet of cold water, with his shoes and hat and

roll of ticking.  The city council had a mild panic and

passed a new ordinance about tramps.  But the fever had

already broken out, and several adults and half a dozen

children died of it.



     Thea had always found everything that happened in

Moonstone exciting, disasters particularly so.  It was grat-

ifying to read sensational Moonstone items in the Denver

paper.  But she wished she had not chanced to see the

tramp as he came into town that evening, sniffing the

supper-laden air.  His face remained unpleasantly clear in

her memory, and her mind struggled with the problem of

his behavior as if it were a hard page in arithmetic.  Even

when she was practicing, the drama of the tramp kept

going on in the back of her head, and she was constantly

trying to make herself realize what pitch of hatred or

despair could drive a man to do such a hideous thing.  She

kept seeing him in his bedraggled clown suit, the white

paint on his roughly shaven face, playing his accordion

before the saloon.  She had noticed his lean body, his

high, bald forehead that sloped back like a curved metal

lid.  How could people fall so far out of fortune?  She tried

to talk to Ray Kennedy about her perplexity, but Ray

would not discuss things of that sort with her.  It was in

his sentimental conception of women that they should be

deeply religious, though men were at liberty to doubt and

finally to deny.  A picture called "The Soul Awakened,"

popular in Moonstone parlors, pretty well interpreted

Ray's idea of woman's spiritual nature.



     One evening when she was haunted by the figure of the

tramp, Thea went up to Dr. Archie's office.  She found him



<p 138>



sewing up two bad gashes in the face of a little boy who

had been kicked by a mule.  After the boy had been ban-

daged and sent away with his father, Thea helped the doc-

tor wash and put away the surgical instruments.  Then

she dropped into her accustomed seat beside his desk

and began to talk about the tramp.  Her eyes were hard

and green with excitement, the doctor noticed.



     "It seems to me, Dr. Archie, that the whole town's to

blame.  I'm to blame, myself.  I know he saw me hold my

nose when he went by.  Father's to blame.  If he believes

the Bible, he ought to have gone to the calaboose and

cleaned that man up and taken care of him.  That's what

I can't understand; do people believe the Bible, or don't

they?  If the next life is all that matters, and we're put

here to get ready for it, then why do we try to make money,

or learn things, or have a good time?  There's not one

person in Moonstone that really lives the way the New

Testament says.  Does it matter, or don't it?"



     Dr. Archie swung round in his chair and looked at her,

honestly and leniently.  "Well, Thea, it seems to me like

this.  Every people has had its religion.  All religions are

good, and all are pretty much alike.  But I don't see how we

could live up to them in the sense you mean.  I've thought

about it a good deal, and I can't help feeling that while we

are in this world we have to live for the best things of this

world, and those things are material and positive.  Now,

most religions are passive, and they tell us chiefly what we

should not do."  The doctor moved restlessly, and his eyes

hunted for something along the opposite wall: "See here,

my girl, take out the years of early childhood and the time

we spend in sleep and dull old age, and we only have about

twenty able, waking years.  That's not long enough to get

acquainted with half the fine things that have been done

in the world, much less to do anything ourselves.  I think

we ought to keep the Commandments and help other

people all we can; but the main thing is to live those



<p 139>



twenty splendid years; to do all we can and enjoy all we

can."



     Dr. Archie met his little friend's searching gaze, the look

of acute inquiry which always touched him.



     "But poor fellows like that tramp--" she hesitated and

wrinkled her forehead.



     The doctor leaned forward and put his hand protect-

ingly over hers, which lay clenched on the green felt desk-

top.  "Ugly accidents happen, Thea; always have and

always will.  But the failures are swept back into the pile

and forgotten.  They don't leave any lasting scar in the

world, and they don't affect the future.  The things that

last are the good things.  The people who forge ahead and

do something, they really count."  He saw tears on her

cheeks, and he remembered that he had never seen her cry

before, not even when she crushed her finger when she was

little.  He rose and walked to the window, came back and

sat down on the edge of his chair.



     "Forget the tramp, Thea.  This is a great big world, and

I want you to get about and see it all.  You're going to

Chicago some day, and do something with that fine voice

of yours.  You're going to be a number one musician and

make us proud of you.  Take Mary Anderson, now; even the

tramps are proud of her.  There isn't a tramp along the `Q'

system who hasn't heard of her.  We all like people who

do things, even if we only see their faces on a cigar-box lid."



     They had a long talk.  Thea felt that Dr. Archie had

never let himself out to her so much before.  It was the

most grown-up conversation she had ever had with him.

She left his office happy, flattered and stimulated.  She ran

for a long while about the white, moonlit streets, looking

up at the stars and the bluish night, at the quiet houses

sunk in black shade, the glittering sand hills.  She loved

the familiar trees, and the people in those little houses, and

she loved the unknown world beyond Denver.  She felt as

if she were being pulled in two, between the desire to go



<p 140>



away forever and the desire to stay forever.  She had only

twenty years--no time to lose.



     Many a night that summer she left Dr. Archie's office

with a desire to run and run about those quiet streets until

she wore out her shoes, or wore out the streets themselves;

when her chest ached and it seemed as if her heart were

spreading all over the desert.  When she went home, it was

not to go to sleep.  She used to drag her mattress beside

her low window and lie awake for a long while, vibrating

with excitement, as a machine vibrates from speed.  Life

rushed in upon her through that window--or so it seemed.

In reality, of course, life rushes from within, not from with-

out.  There is no work of art so big or so beautiful that it was

not once all contained in some youthful body, like this one

which lay on the floor in the moonlight, pulsing with ardor

and anticipation.  It was on such nights that Thea Kronborg

learned the thing that old Dumas meant when he told the

Romanticists that to make a drama he needed but one

passion and four walls.







<p 141>





                                XIX





     It is well for its peace of mind that the traveling public

takes railroads so much for granted.  The only men who

are incurably nervous about railway travel are the railroad

operatives.  A railroad man never forgets that the next run

may be his turn.



     On a single-track road, like that upon which Ray Ken-

nedy worked, the freight trains make their way as best they

can between passenger trains.  Even when there is such a

thing as a freight time-schedule, it is merely a form.  Along

the one track dozens of fast and slow trains dash in both

directions, kept from collision only by the brains in the

dispatcher's office.  If one passenger train is late, the whole

schedule must be revised in an instant; the trains following

must be warned, and those moving toward the belated train

must be assigned new meeting-places.



     Between the shifts and modifications of the passenger

schedule, the freight trains play a game of their own.  They

have no right to the track at any given time, but are sup-

posed to be on it when it is free, and to make the best time

they can between passenger trains.  A freight train, on a

single-track road, gets anywhere at all only by stealing

bases.



     Ray Kennedy had stuck to the freight service, although

he had had opportunities to go into the passenger service

at higher pay.  He always regarded railroading as a tempo-

rary makeshift, until he "got into something," and he dis-

liked the passenger service.  No brass buttons for him, he

said; too much like a livery.  While he was railroading he

would wear a jumper, thank you!



     The wreck that "caught" Ray was a very commonplace

one; nothing thrilling about it, and it got only six lines in



<p 142>



the Denver papers.  It happened about daybreak one

morning, only thirty-two miles from home.



     At four o'clock in the morning Ray's train had stopped

to take water at Saxony, having just rounded the long

curve which lies south of that station.  It was Joe Giddy's

business to walk back along the curve about three hundred

yards and put out torpedoes to warn any train which might

be coming up from behind--a freight crew is not notified

of trains following, and the brakeman is supposed to protect

his train.  Ray was so fussy about the punctilious observ-

ance of orders that almost any brakeman would take a

chance once in a while, from natural perversity.



     When the train stopped for water that morning, Ray

was at the desk in his caboose, making out his report.

Giddy took his torpedoes, swung off the rear platform, and

glanced back at the curve.  He decided that he would not

go back to flag this time.  If anything was coming up be-

hind, he could hear it in plenty of time.  So he ran forward

to look after a hot journal that had been bothering him.

In a general way, Giddy's reasoning was sound.  If a freight

train, or even a passenger train, had been coming up behind

them, he could have heard it in time.  But as it happened, a

light engine, which made no noise at all, was coming,--

ordered out to help with the freight that was piling up at

the other end of the division.  This engine got no warning,

came round the curve, struck the caboose, went straight

through it, and crashed into the heavy lumber car ahead.





     The Kronborgs were just sitting down to breakfast, when

the night telegraph operator dashed into the yard at a run

and hammered on the front door.  Gunner answered the

knock, and the telegraph operator told him he wanted to

see his father a minute, quick.  Mr. Kronborg appeared at

the door, napkin in hand.  The operator was pale and

panting.



     "Fourteen was wrecked down at Saxony this morning,"



<p 143>



he shouted, "and Kennedy's all broke up.  We're sending

an engine down with the doctor, and the operator at Saxony

says Kennedy wants you to come along with us and bring

your girl."  He stopped for breath.



     Mr. Kronborg took off his glasses and began rubbing

them with his napkin.



     "Bring--I don't understand," he muttered.  "How did

this happen?"



     "No time for that, sir.  Getting the engine out now.

Your girl, Thea.  You'll surely do that for the poor chap.

Everybody knows he thinks the world of her."  Seeing that

Mr. Kronborg showed no indication of having made up his

mind, the operator turned to Gunner.  "Call your sister,

kid.  I'm going to ask the girl herself," he blurted out.



     "Yes, yes, certainly.  Daughter," Mr. Kronborg called.

He had somewhat recovered himself and reached to the

hall hatrack for his hat.



     Just as Thea came out on the front porch, before the

operator had had time to explain to her, Dr. Archie's ponies

came up to the gate at a brisk trot.  Archie jumped out

the moment his driver stopped the team and came up to

the bewildered girl without so much as saying good-morn-

ing to any one.  He took her hand with the sympathetic,

reassuring graveness which had helped her at more than

one hard time in her life.  "Get your hat, my girl.  Ken-

nedy's hurt down the road, and he wants you to run down

with me.  They'll have a car for us.  Get into my buggy,

Mr. Kronborg.  I'll drive you down, and Larry can come

for the team."



     The driver jumped out of the buggy and Mr. Kronborg

and the doctor got in.  Thea, still bewildered, sat on her fa-

ther's knee.  Dr. Archie gave his ponies a smart cut with the

whip.



     When they reached the depot, the engine, with one car

attached, was standing on the main track.  The engineer

had got his steam up, and was leaning out of the cab im-



<p 144>



patiently.  In a moment they were off.  The run to Saxony

took forty minutes.  Thea sat still in her seat while Dr.

Archie and her father talked about the wreck.  She took

no part in the conversation and asked no questions, but

occasionally she looked at Dr. Archie with a frightened,

inquiring glance, which he answered by an encouraging

nod.  Neither he nor her father said anything about how

badly Ray was hurt.  When the engine stopped near Saxony,

the main track was already cleared.  As they got out of the

car, Dr. Archie pointed to a pile of ties.



     "Thea, you'd better sit down here and watch the wreck

crew while your father and I go up and look Kennedy over.

I'll come back for you when I get him fixed up."



     The two men went off up the sand gulch, and Thea sat

down and looked at the pile of splintered wood and twisted

iron that had lately been Ray's caboose.  She was fright-

ened and absent-minded.  She felt that she ought to be

thinking about Ray, but her mind kept racing off to all sorts

of trivial and irrelevant things.  She wondered whether

Grace Johnson would be furious when she came to take her

music lesson and found nobody there to give it to her;

whether she had forgotten to close the piano last night and

whether Thor would get into the new room and mess the

keys all up with his sticky fingers; whether Tillie would go

upstairs and make her bed for her.  Her mind worked fast,

but she could fix it upon nothing.  The grasshoppers, the

lizards, distracted her attention and seemed more real to

her than poor Ray.



     On their way to the sand bank where Ray had been car-

ried, Dr. Archie and Mr. Kronborg met the Saxony doctor.

He shook hands with them.



     "Nothing you can do, doctor.  I couldn't count the

fractures.  His back's broken, too.  He wouldn't be alive

now if he weren't so confoundedly strong, poor chap.  No

use bothering him.  I've given him morphia, one and a

half, in eighths."



<p 145>





     Dr. Archie hurried on.  Ray was lying on a flat canvas

litter, under the shelter of a shelving bank, lightly shaded

by a slender cottonwood tree.  When the doctor and the

preacher approached, he looked at them intently.



     "Didn't--" he closed his eyes to hide his bitter disap-

pointment.



     Dr. Archie knew what was the matter.  "Thea's back

there, Ray.  I'll bring her as soon as I've had a look at you."



     Ray looked up.  "You might clean me up a trifle, doc.

Won't need you for anything else, thank you all the same."



     However little there was left of him, that little was cer-

tainly Ray Kennedy.  His personality was as positive as

ever, and the blood and dirt on his face seemed merely

accidental, to have nothing to do with the man himself.

Dr. Archie told Mr. Kronborg to bring a pail of water, and

he began to sponge Ray's face and neck.  Mr. Kronborg

stood by, nervously rubbing his hands together and trying

to think of something to say.  Serious situations always

embarrassed him and made him formal, even when he felt

real sympathy.




     "In times like this, Ray," he brought out at last, crum-

pling up his handkerchief in his long fingers,--"in times

like this, we don't want to forget the Friend that sticketh

closer than a brother."



     Ray looked up at him; a lonely, disconsolate smile played

over his mouth and his square cheeks.  "Never mind about

all that, PADRE," he said quietly.  "Christ and me fell out

long ago."



     There was a moment of silence.  Then Ray took pity on

Mr. Kronborg's embarrassment.  "You go back for the

little girl, PADRE.  I want a word with the doc in private."



     Ray talked to Dr. Archie for a few moments, then

stopped suddenly, with a broad smile.  Over the doctor's

shoulder he saw Thea coming up the gulch, in her pink

chambray dress, carrying her sun-hat by the strings.  Such

a yellow head!  He often told himself that he "was per-



<p 146>



fectly foolish about her hair."  The sight of her, coming,

went through him softly, like the morphia.  "There she

is," he whispered.  "Get the old preacher out of the way,

doc.  I want to have a little talk with her."



     Dr. Archie looked up.  Thea was hurrying and yet hang-

ing back.  She was more frightened than he had thought

she would be.  She had gone with him to see very sick

people and had always been steady and calm.  As she came

up, she looked at the ground, and he could see that she had

been crying.



     Ray Kennedy made an unsuccessful effort to put out his

hand.  "Hello, little kid, nothing to be afraid of.  Darned

if I don't believe they've gone and scared you!  Nothing

to cry about.  I'm the same old goods, only a little dented.

Sit down on my coat there, and keep me company.  I've

got to lay still a bit."



     Dr. Archie and Mr. Kronborg disappeared.  Thea cast a

timid glance after them, but she sat down resolutely and

took Ray's hand.



     "You ain't scared now, are you?" he asked affection-

ately.  "You were a regular brick to come, Thee.  Did you

get any breakfast?"



     "No, Ray, I'm not scared.  Only I'm dreadful sorry

you're hurt, and I can't help crying."



     His broad, earnest face, languid from the opium and

smiling with such simple happiness, reassured her.  She

drew nearer to him and lifted his hand to her knee.  He

looked at her with his clear, shallow blue eyes.  How he

loved everything about that face and head!  How many

nights in his cupola, looking up the track, he had seen that

face in the darkness; through the sleet and snow, or in the

soft blue air when the moonlight slept on the desert.



     "You needn't bother to talk, Thee.  The doctor's medi-

cine makes me sort of dopey.  But it's nice to have com-

pany.  Kind of cozy, don't you think?  Pull my coat under

you more.  It's a darned shame I can't wait on you."



<p 147>





     "No, no, Ray.  I'm all right.  Yes, I like it here.  And I

guess you ought not to talk much, ought you?  If you can

sleep, I'll stay right here, and be awful quiet.  I feel just

as much at home with you as ever, now."



     That simple, humble, faithful something in Ray's eyes

went straight to Thea's heart.  She did feel comfortable

with him, and happy to give him so much happiness.  It was

the first time she had ever been conscious of that power to

bestow intense happiness by simply being near any one.

She always remembered this day as the beginning of that

knowledge.  She bent over him and put her lips softly to

his cheek.



     Ray's eyes filled with light.  "Oh, do that again, kid!"

he said impulsively.  Thea kissed him on the forehead,

blushing faintly.  Ray held her hand fast and closed his eyes

with a deep sigh of happiness.  The morphia and the sense

of her nearness filled him with content.  The gold mine,

the oil well, the copper ledge--all pipe dreams, he mused,

and this was a dream, too.  He might have known it before.

It had always been like that; the things he admired had

always been away out of his reach: a college education, a

gentleman's manner, an Englishman's accent--things over

his head.  And Thea was farther out of his reach than all

the rest put together.  He had been a fool to imagine it, but

he was glad he had been a fool.  She had given him one grand

dream.  Every mile of his run, from Moonstone to Denver,

was painted with the colors of that hope.  Every cactus

knew about it.  But now that it was not to be, he knew the

truth.  Thea was never meant for any rough fellow like

him--hadn't he really known that all along, he asked

himself?  She wasn't meant for common men.  She was

like wedding cake, a thing to dream on.  He raised his eye-

lids a little.  She was stroking his hand and looking off into

the distance.  He felt in her face that look of unconscious

power that Wunsch had seen there.  Yes, she was bound for

the big terminals of the world; no way stations for her.  His



<p 148>



lids drooped.  In the dark he could see her as she would be

after a while; in a box at the Tabor Grand in Denver, with

diamonds on her neck and a tiara in her yellow hair, with

all the people looking at her through their opera-glasses,

and a United States Senator, maybe, talking to her.  "Then

you'll remember me!"  He opened his eyes, and they were

full of tears.



     Thea leaned closer.  "What did you say, Ray?  I couldn't

hear."



     "Then you'll remember me," he whispered.



     The spark in his eye, which is one's very self, caught the

spark in hers that was herself, and for a moment they

looked into each other's natures.  Thea realized how good

and how great-hearted he was, and he realized about her

many things.  When that elusive spark of personality re-

treated in each of them, Thea still saw in his wet eyes her

own face, very small, but much prettier than the cracked

glass at home had ever shown it.  It was the first time she

had seen her face in that kindest mirror a woman can ever

find.



     Ray had felt things in that moment when he seemed to

be looking into the very soul of Thea Kronborg.  Yes, the

gold mine, the oil well, the copper ledge, they'd all got

away from him, as things will; but he'd backed a winner

once in his life!  With all his might he gave his faith to the

broad little hand he held.  He wished he could leave her

the rugged strength of his body to help her through with it

all.  He would have liked to tell her a little about his old

dream,--there seemed long years between him and it al-

ready,--but to tell her now would somehow be unfair;

wouldn't be quite the straightest thing in the world.

Probably she knew, anyway.  He looked up quickly.  "You

know, don't you, Thee, that I think you are just the finest

thing I've struck in this world?"



     The tears ran down Thea's cheeks.  "You're too good

to me, Ray.  You're a lot too good to me," she faltered.



<p 149>





     "Why, kid," he murmured, "everybody in this world's

going to be good to you!"



     Dr. Archie came to the gulch and stood over his patient.

"How's it going?"



     "Can't you give me another punch with your pacifier,

doc?  The little girl had better run along now."  Ray re-

leased Thea's hand.  "See you later, Thee."



     She got up and moved away aimlessly, carrying her hat

by the strings.  Ray looked after her with the exaltation

born of bodily pain and said between his teeth, "Always

look after that girl, doc.  She's a queen!"



     Thea and her father went back to Moonstone on the

one-o'clock passenger.  Dr. Archie stayed with Ray Ken-

nedy until he died, late in the afternoon.







<p 150>





                                XX





     On Monday morning, the day after Ray Kennedy's

funeral, Dr. Archie called at Mr. Kronborg's study,

a little room behind the church.  Mr. Kronborg did not

write out his sermons, but spoke from notes jotted upon

small pieces of cardboard in a kind of shorthand of his own.

As sermons go, they were not worse than most.  His con-

ventional rhetoric pleased the majority of his congregation,

and Mr. Kronborg was generally regarded as a model

preacher.  He did not smoke, he never touched spirits.  His

indulgence in the pleasures of the table was an endearing

bond between him and the women of his congregation.

He ate enormously, with a zest which seemed incongruous

with his spare frame.



     This morning the doctor found him opening his mail and

reading a pile of advertising circulars with deep attention.



     "Good-morning, Mr. Kronborg," said Dr. Archie, sit-

ting down.  "I came to see you on business.  Poor Kennedy

asked me to look after his affairs for him.  Like most rail-

road men he spent his wages, except for a few invest-

ments in mines which don't look to me very promising.

But his life was insured for six hundred dollars in Thea's

favor."



     Mr. Kronborg wound his feet about the standard of his

desk-chair.  "I assure you, doctor, this is a complete sur-

prise to me."



     "Well, it's not very surprising to me," Dr. Archie went

on.  "He talked to me about it the day he was hurt.  He

said he wanted the money to be used in a particular way,

and in no other."  Dr. Archie paused meaningly.



     Mr. Kronborg fidgeted.  "I am sure Thea would observe

his wishes in every respect."



<p 151>





     "No doubt; but he wanted me to see that you agreed to

his plan.  It seems that for some time Thea has wanted to

go away to study music.  It was Kennedy's wish that she

should take this money and go to Chicago this winter.  He

felt that it would be an advantage to her in a business way:

that even if she came back here to teach, it would give her

more authority and make her position here more com-

fortable."



     Mr. Kronborg looked a little startled.  "She is very

young," he hesitated; "she is barely seventeen.  Chicago

is a long way from home.  We would have to consider.  I

think, Dr. Archie, we had better consult Mrs. Kronborg."



     "I think I can bring Mrs. Kronborg around, if I have

your consent.  I've always found her pretty level-headed.

I have several old classmates practicing in Chicago.  One

is a throat specialist.  He has a good deal to do with singers.

He probably knows the best piano teachers and could re-

commend a boarding-house where music students stay.  I

think Thea needs to get among a lot of young people who

are clever like herself.  Here she has no companions but old

fellows like me.  It's not a natural life for a young girl.

She'll either get warped, or wither up before her time.  If it

will make you and Mrs. Kronborg feel any easier, I'll be

glad to take Thea to Chicago and see that she gets started

right.  This throat man I speak of is a big fellow in his line,

and if I can get him interested, he may be able to put her

in the way of a good many things.  At any rate, he'll know

the right teachers.  Of course, six hundred dollars won't

take her very far, but even half the winter there would be

a great advantage.  I think Kennedy sized the situation

up exactly."



     "Perhaps; I don't doubt it.  You are very kind, Dr.

Archie."  Mr. Kronborg was ornamenting his desk-blotter

with hieroglyphics.  "I should think Denver might be

better.  There we could watch over her.  She is very young."



     Dr. Archie rose.  "Kennedy didn't mention Denver.



<p 152>



He said Chicago, repeatedly.  Under the circumstances, it

seems to me we ought to try to carry out his wishes ex-

actly, if Thea is willing."



     "Certainly, certainly.  Thea is conscientious.  She would

not waste her opportunities."  Mr. Kronborg paused.  "If

Thea were your own daughter, doctor, would you consent

to such a plan, at her present age?"



     "I most certainly should.  In fact, if she were my

daughter, I'd have sent her away before this.  She's a

most unusual child, and she's only wasting herself here.

At her age she ought to be learning, not teaching.  She'll

never learn so quickly and easily as she will right now."



     "Well, doctor, you had better talk it over with Mrs.

Kronborg.  I make it a point to defer to her wishes in such

matters.  She understands all her children perfectly.  I

may say that she has all a mother's insight, and more."



     Dr. Archie smiled.  "Yes, and then some.  I feel quite

confident about Mrs. Kronborg.  We usually agree.  Good-

morning."



     Dr. Archie stepped out into the hot sunshine and walked

rapidly toward his office, with a determined look on his face.

He found his waiting-room full of patients, and it was one

o'clock before he had dismissed the last one.  Then he shut

his door and took a drink before going over to the hotel for

his lunch.  He smiled as he locked his cupboard.  "I feel

almost as gay as if I were going to get away for a winter

myself," he thought.





     Afterward Thea could never remember much about

that summer, or how she lived through her impatience.

She was to set off with Dr. Archie on the fifteenth of Octo-

ber, and she gave lessons until the first of September.  Then

she began to get her clothes ready, and spent whole after-

noons in the village dressmaker's stuffy, littered little sew-

ing-room.  Thea and her mother made a trip to Denver to

buy the materials for her dresses.  Ready-made clothes for



<p 153>



girls were not to be had in those days.  Miss Spencer, the

dressmaker, declared that she could do handsomely by Thea

if they would only let her carry out her own ideas.  But Mrs.

Kronborg and Thea felt that Miss Spencer's most daring

productions might seem out of place in Chicago, so they

restrained her with a firm hand.  Tillie, who always helped

Mrs. Kronborg with the family sewing, was for letting

Miss Spencer challenge Chicago on Thea's person.  Since

Ray Kennedy's death, Thea had become more than ever

one of Tillie's heroines.  Tillie swore each of her friends to

secrecy, and, coming home from church or leaning over the

fence, told them the most touching stories about Ray's

devotion, and how Thea would "never get over it."



     Tillie's confidences stimulated the general discussion of

Thea's venture.  This discussion went on, upon front

porches and in back yards, pretty much all summer.  Some

people approved of Thea's going to Chicago, but most peo-

ple did not.  There were others who changed their minds

about it every day.



     Tillie said she wanted Thea to have a ball dress "above

all things."  She bought a fashion book especially devoted

to evening clothes and looked hungrily over the colored

plates, picking out costumes that would be becoming to

"a blonde."  She wanted Thea to have all the gay clothes

she herself had always longed for; clothes she often told

herself she needed "to recite in."



     "Tillie," Thea used to cry impatiently, "can't you see

that if Miss Spencer tried to make one of those things,

she'd make me look like a circus girl?  Anyhow, I don't

know anybody in Chicago.  I won't be going to parties."



     Tillie always replied with a knowing toss of her head,

"You see!  You'll be in society before you know it.  There

ain't many girls as accomplished as you."



     On the morning of the fifteenth of October the Kronborg

family, all of them but Gus, who couldn't leave the store,

started for the station an hour before train time.  Charley



<p 154>



had taken Thea's trunk and telescope to the depot in his

delivery wagon early that morning.  Thea wore her new

blue serge traveling-dress, chosen for its serviceable quali-

ties.  She had done her hair up carefully, and had put a

pale-blue ribbon around her throat, under a little lace col-

lar that Mrs. Kohler had crocheted for her.  As they went

out of the gate, Mrs. Kronborg looked her over thought-

fully.  Yes, that blue ribbon went very well with the dress,

and with Thea's eyes.  Thea had a rather unusual touch

about such things, she reflected comfortably.  Tillie al-

ways said that Thea was "so indifferent to dress," but her

mother noticed that she usually put her clothes on well.

She felt the more at ease about letting Thea go away from

home, because she had good sense about her clothes and

never tried to dress up too much.  Her coloring was so

individual, she was so unusually fair, that in the wrong

clothes she might easily have been "conspicuous."



     It was a fine morning, and the family set out from the

house in good spirits.  Thea was quiet and calm.  She had

forgotten nothing, and she clung tightly to her handbag,

which held her trunk-key and all of her money that was

not in an envelope pinned to her chemise.  Thea walked

behind the others, holding Thor by the hand, and this time

she did not feel that the procession was too long.  Thor

was uncommunicative that morning, and would only talk

about how he would rather get a sand bur in his toe every

day than wear shoes and stockings.  As they passed the

cottonwood grove where Thea often used to bring him in

his cart, she asked him who would take him for nice long

walks after sister went away.



     "Oh, I can walk in our yard," he replied unapprecia-

tively.  "I guess I can make a pond for my duck."



     Thea leaned down and looked into his face.  "But you

won't forget about sister, will you?"  Thor shook his head.

"And won't you be glad when sister comes back and can

take you over to Mrs. Kohler's to see the pigeons?"



<p 155>





     "Yes, I'll be glad.  But I'm going to have a pigeon my

own self."



     "But you haven't got any little house for one.  Maybe

Axel would make you a little house."



     "Oh, her can live in the barn, her can," Thor drawled

indifferently.



     Thea laughed and squeezed his hand.  She always liked

his sturdy matter-of-factness.  Boys ought to be like that,

she thought.



     When they reached the depot, Mr. Kronborg paced the

platform somewhat ceremoniously with his daughter.  Any

member of his flock would have gathered that he was giv-

ing her good counsel about meeting the temptations of the

world.  He did, indeed, begin to admonish her not to forget

that talents come from our Heavenly Father and are to be

used for his glory, but he cut his remarks short and looked

at his watch.  He believed that Thea was a religious girl,

but when she looked at him with that intent, that pas-

sionately inquiring gaze which used to move even Wunsch,

Mr. Kronborg suddenly felt his eloquence fail.  Thea was

like her mother, he reflected; you couldn't put much

sentiment across with her.  As a usual thing, he liked girls

to be a little more responsive.  He liked them to blush at

his compliments; as Mrs. Kronborg candidly said, "Father

could be very soft with the girls."  But this morning he was

thinking that hard-headedness was a reassuring quality in

a daughter who was going to Chicago alone.



     Mr. Kronborg believed that big cities were places where

people went to lose their identity and to be wicked.  He

himself, when he was a student at the Seminary--he

coughed and opened his watch again.  He knew, of course,

that a great deal of business went on in Chicago, that there

was an active Board of Trade, and that hogs and cattle

were slaughtered there.  But when, as a young man, he had

stopped over in Chicago, he had not interested himself in

the commercial activities of the city.  He remembered it as



<p 156>



a place full of cheap shows and dance halls and boys from

the country who were behaving disgustingly.



     Dr. Archie drove up to the station about ten minutes

before the train was due.  His man tied the ponies and stood

holding the doctor's alligator-skin bag--very elegant,

Thea thought it.  Mrs. Kronborg did not burden the doctor

with warnings and cautions.  She said again that she hoped

he could get Thea a comfortable place to stay, where they

had good beds, and she hoped the landlady would be a

woman who'd had children of her own.  "I don't go much

on old maids looking after girls," she remarked as she took

a pin out of her own hat and thrust it into Thea's blue

turban.  "You'll be sure to lose your hatpins on the train,

Thea.  It's better to have an extra one in case."  She tucked

in a little curl that had escaped from Thea's careful twist.

"Don't forget to brush your dress often, and pin it up to

the curtains of your berth to-night, so it won't wrinkle.

If you get it wet, have a tailor press it before it draws."



     She turned Thea about by the shoulders and looked her

over a last time.  Yes, she looked very well.  She wasn't

pretty, exactly,--her face was too broad and her nose was

too big.  But she had that lovely skin, and she looked fresh

and sweet.  She had always been a sweet-smelling child.

Her mother had always liked to kiss her, when she hap-

pened to think of it.



     The train whistled in, and Mr. Kronborg carried the

canvas "telescope" into the car.  Thea kissed them all

good-bye.  Tillie cried, but she was the only one who did.

They all shouted things up at the closed window of the Pull-

man car, from which Thea looked down at them as from

a frame, her face glowing with excitement, her turban a

little tilted in spite of three hatpins.  She had already taken

off her new gloves to save them.  Mrs. Kronborg reflected

that she would never see just that same picture again,

and as Thea's car slid off along the rails, she wiped a

tear from her eye.  "She won't come back a little girl,"



<p 157>



Mrs. Kronborg said to her husband as they turned to go

home.  "Anyhow, she's been a sweet one."



     While the Kronborg family were trooping slowly home-

ward, Thea was sitting in the Pullman, her telescope in the

seat beside her, her handbag tightly gripped in her fingers.

Dr. Archie had gone into the smoker.  He thought she

might be a little tearful, and that it would be kinder to

leave her alone for a while.  Her eyes did fill once, when

she saw the last of the sand hills and realized that she was

going to leave them behind for a long while.  They always

made her think of Ray, too.  She had had such good times

with him out there.



     But, of course, it was herself and her own adventure that

mattered to her.  If youth did not matter so much to itself,

it would never have the heart to go on.  Thea was sur-

prised that she did not feel a deeper sense of loss at leaving

her old life behind her.  It seemed, on the contrary, as she

looked out at the yellow desert speeding by, that she had

left very little.  Everything that was essential seemed to be

right there in the car with her.  She lacked nothing.  She

even felt more compact and confident than usual.  She

was all there, and something else was there, too,--in

her heart, was it, or under her cheek?  Anyhow, it was

about her somewhere, that warm sureness, that sturdy

little companion with whom she shared a secret.



     When Dr. Archie came in from the smoker, she was sit-

ting still, looking intently out of the window and smiling,

her lips a little parted, her hair in a blaze of sunshine.  The

doctor thought she was the prettiest thing he had ever

seen, and very funny, with her telescope and big handbag.

She made him feel jolly, and a little mournful, too.  He

knew that the splendid things of life are few, after all, and

so very easy to miss.



End of Part I
