





CHAPTER VII



THE PEASANTRY OF THE NORTH





Communal Land--System of Agriculture--Parish Fetes--Fasting--

Winter Occupations--Yearly Migrations--Domestic Industries--

Influence of Capital and Wholesale Enterprise--The State Peasants--

Serf-dues--Buckle's "History of Civilisation"--A precocious

Yamstchik--"People Who Play Pranks"--A Midnight Alarm--The Far

North.





Ivanofka may be taken as a fair specimen of the villages in the

northern half of the country, and a brief description of its

inhabitants will convey a tolerably correct notion of the northern

peasantry in general.



Nearly the whole of the female population, and about one-half of

the male inhabitants, are habitually engaged in cultivating the

Communal land, which comprises about two thousand acres of a light

sandy soil.  The arable part of this land is divided into three

large fields, each of which is cut up into long narrow strips.  The

first field is reserved for the winter grain--that is to say, rye,

which forms, in the shape of black bread, the principal food of the

rural population.  In the second are raised oats for the horses,

and buckwheat, which is largely used for food.  The third lies

fallow, and is used in the summer as pasturage for the cattle.



All the villagers in this part of the country divide the arable

land in this way, in order to suit the triennial rotation of crops.

This triennial system is extremely simple.  The field which is used

this year for raising winter grain will be used next year for

raising summer grain, and in the following year will lie fallow.

Before being sown with winter grain it ought to receive a certain

amount of manure.  Every family possesses in each of the two fields

under cultivation one or more of the long narrow strips or belts

into which they are divided.



The annual life of the peasantry is that of simple husbandman,

inhabiting a country where the winter is long and severe.  The

agricultural year begins in April with the melting of the snow.

Nature has been lying dormant for some months.  Awaking now from

her long sleep, and throwing off her white mantle, she strives to

make up for lost time.  No sooner has the snow disappeared than the

fresh young grass begins to shoot up, and very soon afterwards the

shrubs and trees begin to bud.  The rapidity of this transition

from winter to spring astonishes the inhabitants of more temperate

climes.



On St. George's Day (April 23rd*) the cattle are brought out for

the first time, and sprinkled with holy water by the priest.  They

are never very fat, but at this period of the year their appearance

is truly lamentable.  During the winter they have been cooped up in

small unventilated cow-houses, and fed almost exclusively on straw;

now, when they are released from their imprisonment, they look like

the ghosts of their former emaciated selves.  All are lean and

weak, many are lame, and some cannot rise to their feet without

assistance.





* With regard to saints' days, I always give the date according to

the old style.  To find the date according to our calendar,

thirteen days must be added.





Meanwhile the peasants are impatient to begin the field labour.  An

old proverb which they all know says: "Sow in mud and you will be a

prince"; and they always act in accordance with this dictate of

traditional wisdom.  As soon as it is possible to plough they begin

to prepare the land for the summer grain, and this labour occupies

them probably till the end of May.  Then comes the work of carting

out manure and preparing the fallow field for the winter grain,

which will last probably till about St. Peter's Day (June 29th),

when the hay-making generally begins.  After the hay-making comes

the harvest, by far the busiest time of the year.  From the middle

of July--especially from St. Elijah's Day (July 20th), when the

saint is usually heard rumbling along the heavens in his chariot of

fire*--until the end of August, the peasant may work day and night,

and yet he will find that he has barely time to get all his work

done.  In little more than a month he has to reap and stack his

grain--rye, oats, and whatever else he may have sown either in

spring or in the preceding autumn--and to sow the winter grain for

next year.  To add to his troubles, it sometimes happens that the

rye and the oats ripen almost simultaneously, and his position is

then still more difficult.





* It is thus that the peasants explain the thunder, which is often

heard at that season.





Whether the seasons favour him or not, the peasant has at this time

a hard task, for he can rarely afford to hire the requisite number

of labourers, and has generally the assistance merely of his wife

and family; but he can at this season work for a short time at high

pressure, for he has the prospect of soon obtaining a good rest and

an abundance of food.  About the end of September the field labour

is finished, and on the first day of October the harvest festival

begins--a joyous season, during which the parish fetes are commonly

celebrated.



To celebrate a parish fete in true orthodox fashion it is necessary

to prepare beforehand a large quantity of braga--a kind of home-

brewed small beer--and to bake a plentiful supply of piroghi or

meat pies.  Oil, too, has to be procured, and vodka (rye spirit) in

goodly quantity.  At the same time the big room of the izba, as the

peasant's house is called, has to be cleared, the floor washed, and

the table and benches scrubbed.  The evening before the fete, while

the piroghi are being baked, a little lamp burns before the Icon in

the corner of the room, and perhaps one or two guests from a

distance arrive in order that they may have on the morrow a full

day's enjoyment.



On the morning of the fete the proceedings begin by a long service

in the church, at which all the inhabitants are present in their

best holiday costumes, except those matrons and young women who

remain at home to prepare the dinner.  About mid-day dinner is

served in each izba for the family and their friends.  In general

the Russian peasant's fare is of the simplest kind, and rarely

comprises animal food of any sort--not from any vegetarian

proclivities, but merely because beef, mutton, and pork are too

expensive; but on a holiday, such as a parish fete, there is always

on the dinner table a considerable variety of dishes.  In the house

of a well-to-do family there will be not only greasy cabbage-soup

and kasha--a dish made from buckwheat--but also pork, mutton, and

perhaps even beef.  Braga will be supplied in unlimited quantities,

and more than once vodka will be handed round.  When the repast is

finished, all rise together, and, turning towards the Icon in the

corner, bow and cross themselves repeatedly.  The guests then say

to their host, "Spasibo za khelb za sol"--that is to say, "Thanks

for your hospitality," or more literally, "Thanks for bread and

salt"; and the host replies, "Do not be displeased, sit down once

more for good luck"--or perhaps he puts the last part of his

request into the form of a rhyming couplet to the following effect:

"Sit down, that the hens may brood, and that the chickens and bees

may multiply!"  All obey this request, and there is another round

of vodka.



After dinner some stroll about, chatting with their friends, or go

to sleep in some shady nook, whilst those who wish to make merry go

to the spot where the young people are singing, playing, and

amusing themselves in various ways.  As the sun sinks towards the

horizon, the more grave, staid guests wend their way homewards, but

many remain for supper; and as evening advances the effects of the

vodka become more and more apparent.  Sounds of revelry are heard

more frequently from the houses, and a large proportion of the

inhabitants and guests appear on the road in various degrees of

intoxication.  Some of these vow eternal affection to their

friends, or with flaccid gestures and in incoherent tones harangue

invisible audiences; others stagger about aimlessly in besotted

self-contentment, till they drop down in a state of complete

unconsciousness.  There they will lie tranquilly till they are

picked up by their less intoxicated friends, or more probably till

they awake of their own accord next morning.



As a whole, a village fete in Russia is a saddening spectacle.  It

affords a new proof--where, alas! no new proof was required--that

we northern nations, who know so well how to work, have not yet

learned the art of amusing ourselves.



If the Russian peasant's food were always as good and plentiful as

at this season of the year, he would have little reason to

complain; but this is by no means the case.  Gradually, as the

harvest-time recedes, it deteriorates in quality, and sometimes

diminishes in quantity.  Besides this, during a great part of the

year the peasant is prevented, by the rules of the Church, from

using much that he possesses.



In southern climes, where these rules were elaborated and first

practised, the prescribed fasts are perhaps useful not only in a

religious, but also in a sanitary sense.  Having abundance of fruit

and vegetables, the inhabitants do well to abstain occasionally

from animal food.  But in countries like Northern and Central

Russia the influence of these rules is very different.  The Russian

peasant cannot get as much animal food as he requires, whilst sour

cabbage and cucumbers are probably the only vegetables he can

procure, and fruit of any kind is for him an unattainable luxury.

Under these circumstances, abstinence from eggs and milk in all

their forms during several months of the year seems to the secular

mind a superfluous bit of asceticism.  If the Church would direct

her maternal solicitude to the peasant's drinking, and leave him to

eat what he pleases, she might exercise a beneficial influence on

his material and moral welfare.  Unfortunately she has a great deal

too much inherent immobility to attempt anything of the kind, so

the muzhik, while free to drink copiously whenever he gets the

chance, must fast during the seven weeks of Lent, during two or

three weeks in June, from the beginning of November till Christmas,

and on all Wednesdays and Fridays during the remainder of the year.



From the festival time till the following spring there is no

possibility of doing any agricultural work, for the ground is hard

as iron, and covered with a deep layer of snow.  The male peasants,

therefore, who remain in the villages, have very little to do, and

may spend the greater part of their time in lying idly on the

stove, unless they happen to have learned some handicraft that can

be practised at home.  Formerly, many of them were employed in

transporting the grain to the market town, which might be several

hundred miles distant; but now this species of occupation has been

greatly diminished by the extension of railways.



Another winter occupation which was formerly practised, and has now

almost fallen into disuse, was that of stealing wood in the forest.

This was, according to peasant morality, no sin, or at most a very

venial offence, for God plants and waters the trees, and therefore

forests belong properly to no one.  So thought the peasantry, but

the landed proprietors and the Administration of the Domains held a

different theory of property, and consequently precautions had to

be taken to avoid detection.  In order to ensure success it was

necessary to choose a night when there was a violent snowstorm,

which would immediately obliterate all traces of the expedition;

and when such a night was found, the operation was commonly

performed with success.  During the hours of darkness a tree would

be felled, stripped of its branches, dragged into the village, and

cut up into firewood, and at sunrise the actors would be tranquilly

sleeping on the stove as if they had spent the night at home.  In

recent years the judicial authorities have done much towards

putting down this practice and eradicating the loose conceptions of

property with which it was connected.



For the female part of the population the winter used to be a busy

time, for it was during these four or five months that the spinning

and weaving had to be done, but now the big factories, with their

cheap methods of production, are rapidly killing the home

industries, and the young girls are not learning to work at the

jenny and the loom as their mothers and grandmothers did.



In many of the northern villages, where ancient usages happen to be

preserved, the tedium of the long winter evenings is relieved by

so-called Besedy, a word which signifies literally conversazioni.

A Beseda, however, is not exactly a conversazione as we understand

the term, but resembles rather what is by some ladies called a

Dorcas meeting, with this essential difference, that those present

work for themselves and not for any benevolent purposes.  In some

villages as many as three Besedy regularly assemble about sunset;

one for the children, the second for the young people, and the

third for the matrons.  Each of the three has its peculiar

character.  In the first, the children work and amuse themselves

under the superintendence of an old woman, who trims the torch* and

endeavours to keep order.  The little girls spin flax in a

primitive way without the aid of a jenny, and the boys, who are, on

the whole, much less industrious, make simple bits of wicker-work.

Formerly--I mean within my own recollection--many of them used to

make rude shoes of plaited bark, called lapty, but these are being

rapidly supplanted by leather boots.  These occupations do not

prevent an almost incessant hum of talk, frequent discordant

attempts to sing in chorus, and occasional quarrels requiring the

energetic interference of the old woman who controls the

proceedings.  To amuse her noisy flock she sometimes relates to

them, for the hundredth time, one of those wonderful old stories

that lose nothing by repetition, and all listen to her attentively,

as if they had never heard the story before.





* The torch (lutchina) has now almost entirely disappeared and been

replaced by the petroleum lamp.





The second Beseda is held in another house by the young people of a

riper age.  Here the workers are naturally more staid, less given

to quarrelling, sing more in harmony, and require no one to look

after them.  Some people, however, might think that a chaperon or

inspector of some kind would be by no means out of place, for a

good deal of flirtation goes on, and if village scandal is to be

trusted, strict propriety in thought, word, and deed is not always

observed.  How far these reports are true I cannot pretend to say,

for the presence of a stranger always acts on the company like the

presence of a severe inspector.  In the third Beseda there is

always at least strict decorum.  Here the married women work

together and talk about their domestic concerns, enlivening the

conversation occasionally by the introduction of little bits of

village scandal.



Such is the ordinary life of the peasants who live by agriculture;

but many of the villagers live occasionally or permanently in the

towns.  Probably the majority of the peasants in this region have

at some period of their lives gained a living elsewhere.  Many of

the absentees spend yearly a few months at home, whilst others

visit their families only occasionally, and, it may be, at long

intervals.  In no case, however, do they sever their connection

with their native village.  Even the peasant who becomes a rich

merchant and settles permanently with his family in Moscow or St.

Petersburg remains probably a member of the Village Commune, and

pays his share of the taxes, though he does not enjoy any of the

corresponding privileges.  Once I remember asking a rich man of

this kind, the proprietor of several large houses in St.

Petersburg, why he did not free himself from all connection with

his native Commune, with which he had no longer any interests in

common.  His answer was, "It is all very well to be free, and I

don't want anything from the Commune now; but my old father lives

there, my mother is buried there, and I like to go back to the old

place sometimes.  Besides, I have children, and our affairs are

commercial (nashe dyelo torgovoe).  Who knows but my children may

he very glad some day to have a share of the Commune land?"



In respect to these non-agricultural occupations, each district has

its specialty.  The province of Yaroslavl, for instance, supplies

the large towns with waiters for the traktirs, or lower class of

restaurants, whilst the best hotels in Petersburg are supplied by

the Tartars of Kasimof, celebrated for their sobriety and honesty.

One part of the province of Kostroma has a special reputation for

producing carpenters and stove-builders, whilst another part, as I

once discovered to my surprise, sends yearly to Siberia--not as

convicts, but as free laborours--a large contingent of tailors and

workers in felt!  On questioning some youngsters who were

accompanying as apprentices one of these bands, I was informed by a

bright-eyed youth of about sixteen that he had already made the

journey twice, and intended to go every winter.  "And you always

bring home a big pile of money with you?" I inquired.  "Nitchevo!"

replied the little fellow, gaily, with an air of pride and self-

confidence; "last year I brought home three roubles!"  This answer

was, at the moment, not altogether welcome, for I had just been

discussing with a Russian fellow-traveller as to whether the

peasantry can fairly be called industrious, and the boy's reply

enabled my antagonist to score a point against me.  "You hear

that!" he said, triumphantly.  "A Russian peasant goes all the way

to Siberia and back for three roubles!  Could you get an Englishman

to work at that rate?"  "Perhaps not," I replied, evasively,

thinking at the same time that if a youth were sent several times

from Land's End to John o' Groat's House, and obliged to make the

greater part of the journey in carts or on foot, he would probably

expect, by way of remuneration for the time and labour expended,

rather more than seven and sixpence!



Very often the peasants find industrial occupations without leaving

home, for various industries which do not require complicated

machinery are practised in the villages by the peasants and their

families.  Wooden vessels, wrought iron, pottery, leather, rush-

matting, and numerous other articles are thus produced in enormous

quantities.  Occasionally we find not only a whole village, but

even a whole district occupied almost exclusively with some one

kind of manual industry.  In the province of Vladimir, for example,

a large group of villages live by Icon-painting; in one locality

near Nizhni-Novgorod nineteen villages are occupied with the

manufacture of axes; round about Pavlovo, in the same province,

eighty villages produce almost nothing but cutlery; and in a

locality called Ouloma, on the borders of Novgorod and Tver, no

less than two hundred villages live by nail-making.



These domestic industries have long existed, and were formerly an

abundant source of revenue--providing a certain compensation for

the poverty of the soil.  But at present they are in a very

critical position.  They belong to the primitive period of economic

development, and that period in Russia, as I shall explain in a

future chapter, is now rapidly drawing to a close.  Formerly the

Head of a Household bought the raw material, had it worked up at

home, and sold with a reasonable profit the manufactured articles

at the bazaars, as the local fairs are called, or perhaps at the

great annual yarmarkt* of Nizhni-Novgorod.  This primitive system

is now rapidly becoming obsolete.  Capital and wholesale enterprise

have come into the field and are revolutionising the old methods of

production and trade.  Already whole groups of industrial villages

have fallen under the power of middle-men, who advance money to the

working households and fix the price of the products.  Attempts are

frequently made to break their power by voluntary co-operative

associations, organised by the local authorities or benevolent

landed proprietors of the neighbourhood--like the benevolent people

in England who try to preserve the traditional cottage industries--

and some of the associations work very well; but the ultimate

success of such "efforts to stem the current of capitalism" is

extremely doubtful.  At the same time, the periodical bazaars and

yarmarki, at which producers and consumers transacted their affairs

without mediation, are being replaced by permanent stores and by

various classes of tradesmen--wholesale and retail.





* This term is a corruption of the German word Jahrmarkt.





To the political economist of the rigidly orthodox school this

important change may afford great satisfaction.  According to his

theories it is a gigantic step in the right direction, and must

necessarily redound to the advantage of all parties concerned.  The

producer now receives a regular supply of raw material, and

regularly disposes of the articles manufactured; and the time and

trouble which he formerly devoted to wandering about in search of

customers he can now employ more profitably in productive work.

The creation of a class between the producers and the consumers is

an important step towards that division and specialisation of

labour which is a necessary condition of industrial and commercial

prosperity.  The consumer no longer requires to go on a fixed day

to some distant point, on the chance of finding there what he

requires, but can always buy what he pleases in the permanent

stores.  Above all, the production is greatly increased in amount,

and the price of manufactured goods is proportionally lessened.



All this seems clear enough in theory, and any one who values

intellectual tranquillity will feel disposed to accept this view of

the case without questioning its accuracy; but the unfortunate

traveller who is obliged to use his eyes as well as his logical

faculties may find some little difficulty in making the facts fit

into the a priori formula.  Far be it from me to question the

wisdom of political economists, but I cannot refrain from remarking

that of the three classes concerned--small producers, middle-men,

and consumers--two fail to perceive and appreciate the benefits

which have been conferred upon them.  The small producers complain

that on the new system they work more and gain less; and the

consumers complain that the manufactured articles, if cheaper and

more showy in appearance, are far inferior in quality.  The

middlemen, who are accused, rightly or wrongly, of taking for

themselves the lion's share of the profits, alone seem satisfied

with the new arrangement.



Interesting as this question undoubtedly is, it is not of permanent

importance, because the present state of things is merely

transitory.  Though the peasants may continue for a time to work at

home for the wholesale dealers, they cannot in the long run compete

with the big factories and workshops, organised on the European

model with steam-power and complicated machinery, which already

exist in many provinces.  Once a country has begun to move forward

on the great highway of economic progress, there is no possibility

of stopping halfway.



Here again the orthodox economists find reason for congratulation,

because big factories and workshops are the cheapest and most

productive form of manufacturing industry; and again, the observant

traveller cannot shut his eyes to ugly facts which force themselves

on his attention.  He notices that this cheapest and most

productive form of manufacturing industry does not seem to advance

the material and moral welfare of the population.  Nowhere is there

more disease, drunkenness, demoralisation and misery than in the

manufacturing districts.



The reader must not imagine that in making these statements I wish

to calumniate the spirit of modern enterprise, or to advocate a

return to primitive barbarism.  All great changes produce a mixture

of good and evil, and at first the evil is pretty sure to come

prominently forward.  Russia is at this moment in a state of

transition, and the new condition of things is not yet properly

organised.  With improved organisation many of the existing evils

will disappear.  Already in recent years I have noticed sporadic

signs of improvement.  When factories were first established no

proper arrangements were made for housing and feeding the workmen,

and the consequent hardships were specially felt when the factories

were founded, as is often the case, in rural districts.  Now, the

richer and more enterprising manufacturers build large barracks for

the workmen and their families, and provide them with common

kitchens, wash-houses, steam-baths, schools, and similar requisites

of civilised life.  At the same time the Government appoints

inspectors to superintend the sanitary arrangements and see that

the health and comfort of the workers are properly attended to.



On the whole we must assume that the activity of these inspectors

tends to improve the condition of the working-classes.  Certainly

in some instances it has that effect.  I remember, for example,

some thirty years ago, visiting a lucifer-match factory in which

the hands employed worked habitually in an atmosphere impregnated

with the fumes of phosphorus, which produce insidious and very

painful diseases.  Such a thing is hardly possible nowadays.  On

the other hand, official inspection, like Factory Acts, everywhere

gives rise to a good deal of dissatisfaction and does not always

improve the relations between employers and employed.  Some of the

Russian inspectors, if I may credit the testimony of employers, are

young gentlemen imbued with socialist notions, who intentionally

stir up discontent or who make mischief from inexperience.  An

amusing illustration of the current complaints came under my notice

when, in 1903, I was visiting a landed proprietor of the southern

provinces, who has a large sugar factory on his estate.  The

inspector objected to the traditional custom of the men sleeping in

large dormitories and insisted on sleeping-cots being constructed

for them individually.  As soon as the change was made the workmen

came to the proprietor to complain, and put their grievance in an

interrogative form: "Are we cattle that we should be thus couped up

in stalls?"



To return to the northern agricultural region, the rural population

have a peculiar type, which is to be accounted for by the fact that

they never experienced to its full extent the demoralising

influence of serfage.  A large proportion of them were settled on

State domains and were governed by a special branch of the Imperial

administration, whilst others lived on the estates of rich absentee

landlords, who were in the habit of leaving the management of their

properties to a steward acting under a code of instructions.  In

either case, though serfs in the eye of the law, they enjoyed

practically a very large amount of liberty.  By paying a small sum

for a passport they could leave their villages for an indefinite

period, and as long as they sent home regularly the money required

for taxes and dues, they were in little danger of being molested.

Many of them, though officially inscribed as domiciled in their

native communes, lived permanently in the towns, and not a few

succeeded in amassing large fortunes.  The effect of this

comparative freedom is apparent even at the present day.  These

peasants of the north are more energetic, more intelligent, more

independent, and consequently less docile and pliable than those of

the fertile central provinces.  They have, too, more education.  A

large proportion of them can read and write, and occasionally one

meets among them men who have a keen desire for knowledge.  Several

times I encountered peasants in this region who had a small

collection of books, and twice I found in such collections, much to

my astonishment, a Russian translation of Buckle's "History of

Civilisation."



How, it may be asked, did a work of this sort find its way to such

a place?  If the reader will pardon a short digression, I shall

explain the fact.



Immediately after the Crimean War there was a curious intellectual

movement--of which I shall have more to say hereafter--among the

Russian educated classes.  The movement assumed various forms, of

which two of the most prominent were a desire for encyclopaedic

knowledge, and an attempt to reduce all knowledge to a scientific

form.  For men in this state of mind Buckle's great work had

naturally a powerful fascination.  It seemed at first sight to

reduce the multifarious conflicting facts of human history to a few

simple principles, and to evolve order out of chaos.  Its success,

therefore, was great.  In the course of a few years no less than

four independent translations were published and sold.  Every one

read, or at least professed to have read, the wonderful book, and

many believed that its author was the greatest genius of his time.

During the first year of my residence in Russia (1870), I rarely

had a serious conversation without hearing Buckle's name mentioned;

and my friends almost always assumed that he had succeeded in

creating a genuine science of history on the inductive method.  In

vain I pointed out that Buckle had merely thrown out some hints in

his introductory chapter as to how such a science ought to be

constructed, and that he had himself made no serious attempt to use

the method which he commended.  My objections had little or no

effect: the belief was too deep-rooted to be so easily eradicated.

In books, periodicals, newspapers, and professional lectures the

name of Buckle was constantly cited--often violently dragged in

without the slightest reason--and the cheap translations of his

work were sold in enormous quantities.  It is not, then, so very

wonderful after all that the book should have found its way to two

villages in the province of Yaroslavl.



The enterprising, self-reliant, independent spirit which is often

to be found among those peasants manifests itself occasionally in

amusing forms among the young generation.  Often in this part of

the country I have encountered boys who recalled young America

rather than young Russia.  One of these young hopefuls I remember

well.  I was waiting at a post-station for the horses to be

changed, when he appeared before me in a sheep-skin, fur cap, and

gigantic double-soled boots--all of which articles had been made on

a scale adapted to future rather than actual requirements.  He must

have stood in his boots about three feet eight inches, and he could

not have been more than twelve years of age; but he had already

learned to look upon life as a serious business, wore a commanding

air, and knitted his innocent little brows as if the cares of an

empire weighed on his diminutive shoulders.  Though he was to act

as yamstchik he had to leave the putting in of the horses to larger

specimens of the human species, but he took care that all was done

properly.  Putting one of his big boots a little in advance, and

drawing himself up to his full shortness, he watched the operation

attentively, as if the smallness of his stature had nothing to do

with his inactivity.  When all was ready, he climbed up to his

seat, and at a signal from the station-keeper, who watched with

paternal pride all the movements of the little prodigy, we dashed

off at a pace rarely attained by post-horses.  He had the faculty

of emitting a peculiar sound--something between a whirr and a

whistle--that appeared to have a magical effect on the team and

every few minutes he employed this incentive.  The road was rough,

and at every jolt he was shot upwards into the air, but he always

fell back into his proper position, and never lost for a moment his

self-possession or his balance.  At the end of the journey I found

we had made nearly fourteen miles within the hour.



Unfortunately this energetic, enterprising spirit sometimes takes

an illegitimate direction.  Not only whole villages, but even whole

districts, have in this way acquired a bad reputation for robbery,

the manufacture of paper-money, and similar offences against the

criminal law.  In popular parlance, these localities are said to

contain "people who play pranks" (narod shalit).  I must, however,

remark that, if I may judge by my own experience, these so-called

"playful" tendencies are greatly exaggerated.  Though I have

travelled hundreds of miles at night on lonely roads, I was never

robbed or in any way molested.  Once, indeed, when travelling at

night in a tarantass, I discovered on awaking that my driver was

bending over me, and had introduced his hand into one of my

pockets; but the incident ended without serious consequences.  When

I caught the delinquent hand, and demanded an explanation from the

owner, he replied, in an apologetic, caressing tone, that the night

was cold, and he wished to warm his fingers; and when I advised him

to use for that purpose his own pockets rather than mine, he

promised to act in future according to my advice.  More than once,

it is true, I believed that I was in danger of being attacked, but

on every occasion my fears turned out to be unfounded, and

sometimes the catastrophe was ludicrous rather than tragical.  Let

the following serve as an illustration.



I had occasion to traverse, in company with a Russian friend, the

country lying to the east of the river Vetluga--a land of forest

and morass, with here and there a patch of cultivation.  The

majority of the population are Tcheremiss, a Finnish tribe; but

near the banks of the river there are villages of Russian peasants,

and these latter have the reputation of "playing pranks."  When we

were on the point of starting from Kozmodemiansk a town on the bank

of the Volga, we received a visit from an officer of rural police,

who painted in very sombre colours the habits and moral character--

or, more properly, immoral character--of the people whose

acquaintance we were about to make.  He related with melodramatic

gesticulation his encounters with malefactors belonging to the

villages through which we had to pass, and ended the interview with

a strong recommendation to us not to travel at night, and to keep

at all times our eyes open and our revolver ready.  The effect of

his narrative was considerably diminished by the prominence of the

moral, which was to the effect that there never had been a police-

officer who had shown so much zeal, energy, and courage in the

discharge of his duty as the worthy man before us.  We considered

it, however, advisable to remember his hint about keeping our eyes

open.



In spite of our intention of being very cautious, it was already

dark when we arrived at the village which was to be our halting-

place for the night, and it seemed at first as if we should be

obliged to spend the night in the open air.  The inhabitants had

already retired to rest, and refused to open their doors to unknown

travellers.  At length an old woman, more hospitable than her

neighbours, or more anxious to earn an honest penny, consented to

let us pass the night in an outer apartment (seni), and this

permission we gladly accepted.  Mindful of the warnings of the

police officer, we barricaded the two doors and the window, and the

precaution was evidently not superfluous, for almost as soon as the

light was extinguished we could hear that an attempt was being made

stealthily to effect an entrance.  Notwithstanding my efforts to

remain awake, and on the watch, I at last fell asleep, and was

suddenly aroused by some one grasping me tightly by the arm.

Instantly I sprang to my feet and endeavoured to close with my

invisible assailant.  In vain!  He dexterously eluded my grasp, and

I stumbled over my portmanteau, which was lying on the floor; but

my prompt action revealed who the intruder was, by producing a wild

flutter and a frantic cackling!  Before my companion could strike a

light the mysterious attack was fully explained.  The supposed

midnight robber and possible assassin was simply a peaceable hen

that had gone to roost on my arm, and, on finding her position

unsteady, had dug her claws into what she mistook for a roosting-

pole!



When speaking of the peasantry of the north I have hitherto had in

view the inhabitants of the provinces of Old-Novgorod, Tver,

Yaroslavl, Nizhni-Novgorod, Kostroma, Kazan, and Viatka, and I have

founded my remarks chiefly on information collected on the spot.

Beyond this lies what may be called the Far North.  Though I cannot

profess to have the same personal acquaintance with the peasantry

of that region, I may perhaps be allowed to insert here some

information regarding them which I collected from various

trustworthy sources.



If we draw a wavy line eastward from a point a little to the north

of St. Petersburg, as is shown in the map facing page 1 of this

volume, we shall have between that line and the Polar Ocean what

may be regarded as a distinct, peculiar region, differing in many

respects from the rest of Russia.  Throughout the whole of it the

climate is very severe.  For about half of the year the ground is

covered by deep snow, and the rivers are frozen.  By far the

greater part of the land is occupied by forests of pine, fir,

larch, and birch, or by vast, unfathomable morasses.  The arable

land and pasturage taken together form only about one and a half

per cent, of the area.  The population is scarce--little more than

one to the English square mile--and settled chiefly along the banks

of the rivers.  The peasantry support themselves by fishing,

hunting, felling and floating timber, preparing tar and charcoal,

cattle-breeding, and, in the extreme north, breeding reindeer.



These are their chief occupations, but the people do not entirely

neglect agriculture.  They make the most of their short summer by

means of a peculiar and ingenious mode of farming, well adapted to

the peculiar local conditions.  The peasant knows of course nothing

about agronomical chemistry, but he, as well as his forefathers,

have observed that if wood be burnt on a field, and the ashes be

mixed with the soil, a good harvest may be confidently expected.

On this simple principle his system of farming is based.  When

spring comes round and the leaves begin to appear on the trees, a

band of peasants, armed with their hatchets, proceed to some spot

in the woods previously fixed upon.  Here they begin to make a

clearing.  This is no easy matter, for tree-felling is hard and

tedious work; but the process does not take so much time as might

be expected, for the workmen have been brought up to the trade, and

wield their axes with marvellous dexterity.  When they have felled

all the trees, great and small, they return to their homes, and

think no more about their clearing till the autumn, when they

return, in order to strip the fallen trees of the branches, to pick

out what they require for building purposes or firewood, and to

pile up the remainder in heaps.  The logs for building or firewood

are dragged away by horses as soon as the first fall of snow has

made a good slippery road, but the piles are allowed to remain till

the following spring, when they are stirred up with long poles and

ignited.  The flames rapidly spread in all directions till they

join together and form a gigantic bonfire, such as is never seen in

more densely-populated countries.  If the fire does its work

properly, the whole of the space is covered with a layer of ashes;

and when these have been slightly mixed with soil by means of a

light plough, the seed is sown.



On the field prepared in this original fashion is sown barley, rye,

or flax, and the harvests, nearly always good, sometimes border on

the miraculous.  Barley or rye may be expected to produce about

sixfold in ordinary years, and they may produce as much as thirty-

fold under peculiarly favourable circumstances.  The fertility is,

however, short-lived.  If the soil is poor and stony, not more than

two crops can be raised; if it is of a better quality, it may give

tolerable harvests for six or seven successive years.  In most

countries this would be an absurdly expensive way of manuring, for

wood is much too valuable a commodity to be used for such a

purpose; but in this northern region the forests are boundless, and

in the districts where there is no river or stream by which timber

may be floated, the trees not used in this way rot from old age.

Under these circumstances the system is reasonable, but it must be

admitted that it does not give a very large return for the amount

of labour expended, and in bad seasons it gives almost no return at

all.



The other sources of revenue are scarcely less precarious.  With

his gun and a little parcel of provisions the peasant wanders about

in the trackless forests, and too often returns after many days

with a very light bag; or he starts in autumn for some distant

lake, and comes back after five or six weeks with nothing better

than perch and pike.  Sometimes he tries his luck at deep-sea

fishing.  In this case he starts in February--probably on foot--for

Kem, on the shore of the White Sea, or perhaps for the more distant

Kola, situated on a small river which falls into the Arctic Ocean.

There, in company with three or four comrades, he starts on a

fishing cruise along the Murman coast, or, it may be, off the coast

of Spitzbergen.  His gains will depend on the amount caught, for it

is a joint-venture; but in no case can they be very great, for

three-fourths of the fish brought into port belongs to the owner of

the craft and tackle.  Of the sum realised, he brings home perhaps

only a small part, for he has a strong temptation to buy rum, tea,

and other luxuries, which are very dear in those northern

latitudes.  If the fishing is good and he resists temptation, he

may save as much as 100 roubles--about 10 pounds--and thereby live

comfortably all winter; but if the fishing season is bad, he may

find himself at the end of it not only with empty pockets, but in

debt to the owner of the boat.  This debt he may pay off, if he has

a horse, by transporting the dried fish to Kargopol, St.

Petersburg, or some other market.



It is here in the Far North that the ancient folk-lore--popular

songs, stories, and fragments of epic poetry--has been best

preserved; but this is a field on which I need not enter, for the

reader can easily find all that he may desire to know on the

subject in the brilliant writings of M. Rambaud and the very

interesting, conscientious works of the late Mr. Ralston,* which

enjoy a high reputation in Russia.





* Rambaud, "La Russie Epique," Paris, 1876; Ralston, "The Songs of

the Russian People," London, 1872; and "Russian Folk-tales,"

London, 1873.
