





CHAPTER XXXI



THE EMANCIPATED PEASANTRY





The Effects of Liberty--Difficulty of Obtaining Accurate

Information--Pessimist Testimony of the Proprietors--Vague Replies

of the Peasants--My Conclusions in 1877--Necessity of Revising

Them--My Investigations Renewed in 1903--Recent Researches by

Native Political Economists--Peasant Impoverishment Universally

Recognised--Various Explanations Suggested--Demoralisation of the

Common People--Peasant Self-government--Communal System of Land

Tenure--Heavy Taxation--Disruption of Peasant Families--Natural

Increase of Population--Remedies Proposed--Migration--Reclamation

of Waste Land--Land-purchase by Peasantry--Manufacturing Industry--

Improvement of Agricultural Methods--Indications of Progress.





At the commencement of last chapter I pointed out in general terms

the difficulty of describing clearly the immediate consequences of

the Emancipation.  In beginning now to speak of the influence which

the great reform has had on the peasantry, I feel that the

difficulty has reached its climax.  The foreigner who desires

merely to gain a general idea of the subject cannot be expected to

take an interest in details, and even if he took the trouble to

examine them attentively, he would derive from the labour little

real information.  What he wishes is a clear, concise, and dogmatic

statement of general results.  Has the material and moral condition

of the peasantry improved since the Emancipation?  That is the

simple question which he has to put, and he naturally expects a

simple, categorical answer.



In beginning my researches in this interesting field of inquiry, I

had no adequate conception of the difficulties awaiting me.  I

imagined that I had merely to question intelligent, competent men

who had had abundant opportunities of observation, and to criticise

and boil down the information collected; but when I put this method

of investigation to the test of experience it proved

unsatisfactory.  Very soon I came to perceive that my authorities

were very far from being impartial observers.  Most of them were

evidently suffering from shattered illusions.  They had expected

that the Emancipation would produce instantaneously a wonderful

improvement in the life and character of the rural population, and

that the peasant would become at once a sober, industrious, model

agriculturist.



These expectations were not realised.  One year passed, five years

passed, ten years passed, and the expected transformation did not

take place.  On the contrary, there appeared certain very ugly

phenomena which were not at all in the programme.  The peasants

began to drink more and to work less,* and the public life which

the Communal institutions produced was by no means of a desirable

kind.  The "bawlers" (gorlopany) acquired a prejudicial influence

in the Village Assemblies, and in very many Volosts the peasant

judges, elected by their fellow-villagers, acquired a bad habit of

selling their decisions for vodka.  The natural consequence of all

this was that those who had indulged in exaggerated expectations

sank into a state of inordinate despondency, and imagined things to

be much worse than they really were.





* I am not at all sure that the peasants really drank more, but

such was, and still is, a very general conviction.





For different reasons, those who had not indulged in exaggerated

expectations, and had not sympathised with the Emancipation in the

form in which it was effected, were equally inclined to take a

pessimistic view of the situation.  In every ugly phenomenon they

found a confirmation of their opinions.  The result was precisely

what they had foretold.  The peasants had used their liberty and

their privileges to their own detriment and to the detriment of

others!



The extreme "Liberals" were also inclined, for reasons of their

own, to join in the doleful chorus.  They desired that the

condition of the peasantry should be further improved by

legislative enactments, and accordingly they painted the evils in

as dark colours as possible.



Thus, from various reasons, the majority of the educated classes

were unduly disposed to represent to themselves and to others the

actual condition of the peasantry in a very unfavourable light, and

I felt that from them there was no hope of obtaining the lumen

siccum which I desired.  I determined, therefore, to try the method

of questioning the peasants themselves.  Surely they must know

whether their condition was better or worse than it had been before

their Emancipation.



Again I was doomed to disappointment.  A few months' experience

sufficed to convince me that my new method was by no means so

effectual as I had imagined.  Uneducated people rarely make

generalisations which have no practical utility, and I feel sure

that very few Russian peasants ever put to themselves the question:

Am I better off now than I was in the time of serfage?  When such a

question is put to them they feel taken aback.  And in truth it is

no easy matter to sum up the two sides of the account and draw an

accurate balance, save in those exceptional cases in which the

proprietor flagrantly abused his authority.  The present money-dues

and taxes are often more burdensome than the labour-dues in the old

times.  If the serfs had a great many ill-defined obligations to

fulfil--such as the carting of the master's grain to market, the

preparing of his firewood, the supplying him with eggs, chickens,

home-made linen, and the like--they had, on the other hand, a good

many ill-defined privileges.  They grazed their cattle during a

part of the year on the manor-land; they received firewood and

occasionally logs for repairing their huts; sometimes the

proprietor lent them or gave them a cow or a horse when they had

been visited by the cattle-plague or the horse-stealer; and in

times of famine they could look to their master for support.  All

this has now come to an end.  Their burdens and their privileges

have been swept away together, and been replaced by clearly

defined, unbending, unelastic legal relations.  They have now to

pay the market-price for every stick of firewood which they burn,

for every log which they require for repairing their houses, and

for every rood of land on which to graze their cattle.  Nothing is

now to be had gratis.  The demand to pay is encountered at every

step.  If a cow dies or a horse is stolen, the owner can no longer

go to the proprietor with the hope of receiving a present, or at

least a loan without interest, but must, if he has no ready money,

apply to the village usurer, who probably considers twenty or

thirty per cent, as a by no means exorbitant rate of interest.



Besides this, from the economic point of view village life has been

completely revolutionised.  Formerly the members of a peasant

family obtained from their ordinary domestic resources nearly all

they required.  Their food came from their fields, cabbage-garden,

and farmyard.  Materials for clothing were supplied by their plots

of flax and their sheep, and were worked up into linen and cloth by

the female members of the household.  Fuel, as I have said, and

torches wherewith to light the izba--for oil was too expensive and

petroleum was unknown--were obtained gratis.  Their sheep, cattle,

and horses were bred at home, and their agricultural implements,

except in so far as a little iron was required, could be made by

themselves without any pecuniary expenditure.  Money was required

only for the purchase of a few cheap domestic utensils, such as

pots, pans, knives, hatchets, wooden dishes, and spoons, and for

the payment of taxes, which were small in amount and often paid by

the proprietor.  In these circumstances the quantity of money in

circulation among the peasants was infinitesimally small, the few

exchanges which took place in a village being generally effected by

barter.  The taxes, and the vodka required for village festivals,

weddings, or funerals, were the only large items of expenditure for

the year, and they were generally covered by the sums brought home

by the members of the family who went to work in the towns.



Very different is the present condition of affairs.  The spinning,

weaving, and other home industries have been killed by the big

factories, and the flax and wool have to be sold to raise a little

ready money for the numerous new items of expenditure.  Everything

has to be bought--clothes, firewood, petroleum, improved

agricultural implements, and many other articles which are now

regarded as necessaries of life, whilst comparatively little is

earned by working in the towns, because the big families have been

broken up, and a household now consists usually of husband and

wife, who must both remain at home, and children who are not yet

bread-winners.  Recalling to mind all these things and the other

drawbacks and advantages of his actual position, the old muzhik has

naturally much difficulty in striking a balance, and he may well be

quite sincere when, on being asked whether things now are on the

whole better or worse than in the time of serfage, he scratches the

back of his head and replies hesitatingly, with a mystified

expression on his wrinkled face: "How shall I say to you?  They are

both better and worse!" ("Kak vam skazat'?  I lûtche i khûdzhe!")

If, however, you press him further and ask whether he would himself

like to return to the old state of things, he is pretty sure to

answer, with a slow shake of the head and a twinkle in his eye, as

if some forgotten item in the account had suddenly recurred to him:

"Oh, no!"



What materially increases the difficulty of this general

computation is that great changes have taken place in the well-

being of the particular households.  Some have greatly prospered,

while others have become impoverished.  That is one of the most

characteristic consequences of the Emancipation.  In the old times

the general economic stagnation and the uncontrolled authority of

the proprietor tended to keep all the households of a village on

the same level.  There was little opportunity for an intelligent,

enterprising serf to become rich, and if he contrived to increase

his revenue he had probably to give a considerable share of it to

the proprietor, unless he had the good fortune to belong to a grand

seigneur like Count Sheremetief, who was proud of having rich men

among his serfs.  On the other hand, the proprietor, for evident

reasons of self-interest, as well as from benevolent motives,

prevented the less intelligent and less enterprising members of the

Commune from becoming bankrupt.  The Communal equality thus

artificially maintained has now disappeared, the restrictions on

individual freedom of action have been removed, the struggle for

life has become intensified, and, as always happens in such

circumstances, the strong men go up in the world while the weak

ones go to the wall.  All over the country we find on the one hand

the beginnings of a village aristocracy--or perhaps we should call

it a plutocracy, for it is based on money--and on the other hand an

ever-increasing pauperism.  Some peasants possess capital, with

which they buy land outside the Commune or embark in trade, while

others have to sell their live stock, and have sometimes to cede to

neighbours their share of the Communal property.  This change in

rural life is so often referred to that, in order to express it a

new, barbarous word, differentsiatsia (differentiation) has been

invented.



Hoping to obtain fuller information with the aid of official

protection, I attached myself to one of the travelling sections of

an agricultural Commission appointed by the Government, and during

a whole summer I helped to collect materials in the provinces

bordering on the Volga.  The inquiry resulted in a gigantic report

of nearly 2,500 folio pages, but the general conclusions were

extremely vague.  The peasantry, it was said, were passing, like

the landed proprietors, through a period of transition, in which

the main features of their future normal life had not yet become

clearly defined.  In some localities their condition had decidedly

improved, whereas in others it had improved little or not at all.

Then followed a long list of recommendations in favour of

Government assistance, better agronomic education, competitive

exhibitions, more varied rotation of crops, and greater zeal on the

part of the clergy in disseminating among the people moral

principles in general and love of work in particular.



Not greatly enlightened by this official activity, I returned to my

private studies, and at the end of six years I published my

impressions and conclusions in the first edition of this work.

While recognising that there was much uncertainty as to the future,

I was inclined, on the whole, to take a hopeful view of the

situation.  I was unable, however, to maintain permanently that

comfortable frame of mind.  After my departure from Russia in 1878,

the accounts which reached me from various parts of the country

became blacker and blacker, and were partly confirmed by short

tours which I made in 1889-1896.  At last, in the summer of 1903, I

determined to return to some of my old haunts and look at things

with my own eyes.  At that moment some hospitable friends invited

me to pay them a visit at their country-house in the province of

Smolensk, and I gladly accepted the invitation, because Smolensk,

when I knew it formerly, was one of the poorest provinces, and I

thought it well to begin my new studies by examining the

impoverishment, of which I had heard so much, at its maximum.



From the railway station at Viazma, where I arrived one morning at

sunrise, I had some twenty miles to drive, and as soon as I got

clear of the little town I began my observations.  What I saw

around me seemed to contradict the sombre accounts I had received.

The villages through which I passed had not at all the look of

dilapidation and misery which I expected.  On the contrary, the

houses were larger and better constructed than they used to be, and

each of them had a chimney!  That latter fact was important because

formerly a large proportion of the peasants of this region had no

such luxury, and allowed the smoke to find its exit by the open

door.  In vain I looked for a hut of the old type, and my yamstchik

assured me I should have to go a long way to find one.  Then I

noticed a good many iron ploughs of the European model, and my

yamstchik informed me that their predecessor, the sokha with which

I had been so familiar, had entirely disappeared from the district.

Next I noticed that in the neighbourhood of the villages flax was

grown in large quantities.  That was certainly not an indication of

poverty, because flax is a valuable product which requires to be

well manured, and plentiful manure implies a considerable quantity

of live stock.  Lastly, before arriving at my destination, I

noticed clover being grown in the fields.  This made me open my

eyes with astonishment, because the introduction of artificial

grasses into the traditional rotation of crops indicates the

transition to a higher and more intensive system of agriculture.

As I had never seen clover in Russia except on the estates of very

advanced proprietors, I said to my yamstchik:



"Listen, little brother!  That field belongs to the landlord?"



"Not at all, Master; it is muzhik-land."



On arriving at the country-house I told my friends what I had seen,

and they explained it to me.  Smolensk is no longer one of the

poorer provinces; it has become comparatively prosperous.  In two

or three districts large quantities of flax are produced and give

the cultivators a big revenue; in other districts plenty of

remunerative work is supplied by the forests.  Everywhere a

considerable proportion of the younger men go regularly to the

towns and bring home savings enough to pay the taxes and make a

little surplus in the domestic budget.  A few days afterwards the

village secretary brought me his books, and showed me that there

were practically no arrears of taxation.



Passing on to other provinces I found similar proofs of progress

and prosperity, but at the same time not a few indications of

impoverishment; and I was rapidly relapsing into my previous state

of uncertainty as to whether any general conclusions could be

drawn, when an old friend, himself a first-rate authority with many

years of practical experience, came to my assistance.*  He informed

me that a number of specialists had recently made detailed

investigations into the present economic conditions of the rural

population, and he kindly placed at my disposal, in his charming

country-house near Moscow, the voluminous researches of these

investigators.  Here, during a good many weeks, I revelled in the

statistical materials collected, and to the best of my ability I

tested the conclusions drawn from them.  Many of these conclusions

I had to dismiss with the Scotch verdict of "not proven," whilst

others seemed to me worthy of acceptance.  Of these latter the most

important were those drawn from the arrears of taxation.





* I hope I am committing no indiscretion when I say that the old

friend in question was Prince Alexander Stcherbatof of Vasilefskoe.





The arrears in the payment of taxes may be regarded as a pretty

safe barometer for testing the condition of the rural population,

because the peasant habitually pays his rates and taxes when he has

the means of doing so; when he falls seriously and permanently into

arrears it may be assumed that he is becoming impoverished.  If the

arrears fluctuate from year to year, the causes of the

impoverishment may be regarded as accidental and perhaps temporary,

but if they steadily accumulate, we must conclude that there is

something radically wrong.  Bearing these facts in mind, let us

hear what the statistics say.



During the first twenty years after the Emancipation (1861-81)

things went on in their old grooves.  The poor provinces remained

poor, and the fertile provinces showed no signs of distress.

During the next twenty years (1881-1901) the arrears of the whole

of European Russia rose, roughly speaking, from 27 to 144 millions

of roubles, and the increase, strange to say, took place in the

fertile provinces.  In 1890, for example, out of 52 millions,

nearly 41 millions, or 78 per cent., fell to the share of the

provinces of the Black-earth Zone.  In seven of these the average

arrears per male, which had been in 1882 only 90 kopeks, rose in

1893 to 600, and in 1899 to 2,200!  And this accumulation had taken

place in spite of reductions of taxation to the extent of 37

million roubles in 1881-83, and successive famine grants from the

Treasury in 1891-99 to the amount of 203 millions.*  On the other

hand, in the provinces with a poor soil the arrears had greatly

decreased.  In Smolensk, for example, they had sunk from 202 per

cent, to 13 per cent. of the annual sum to be paid, and in nearly

all the other provinces of the west and north a similar change for

the better had taken place.



These and many other figures which I might quote show that a great

and very curious economic revolution has been gradually effected.

The Black-earth Zone, which was formerly regarded as the

inexhaustible granary of the Empire, has become impoverished,

whilst the provinces which were formerly regarded as hopelessly

poor are now in a comparatively flourishing condition.  This fact

has been officially recognised.  In a classification of the

provinces according to their degree of prosperity, drawn up by a

special commission of experts in 1903, those with a poor light soil

appear at the top, and those with the famous black earth are at the

bottom of the list.  In the deliberations of the commission many

reasons for this extraordinary state of things are adduced.  Most

of them have merely a local significance.  The big fact, taken as a

whole, seems to me to show that, in consequence of certain changes

of which I shall speak presently, the peasantry of European Russia

can no longer live by the traditional modes of agriculture, even in

the most fertile districts, and require for their support some

subsidiary occupations such as are practised in the less fertile

provinces.





* In 1901 an additional famine grant of 33 1/2 million roubles had

to be made by the Government.





Another sign of impoverishment is the decrease in the quantity of

live stock.  According to the very imperfect statistics available,

for every hundred inhabitants the number of horses has decreased

from 26 to 17, the number of cattle from 36 to 25, and the number

of sheep from 73 to 40.  This is a serious matter, because it means

that the land is not so well manured and cultivated as formerly,

and is consequently not so productive.  Several economists have

attempted to fix precisely to what extent the productivity has

decreased, but I confess I have little faith in the accuracy of

their conclusions.  M. Polenof, for example, a most able and

conscientious investigator, calculates that between 1861 and 1895,

all over Russia, the amount of food produced, in relation to the

number of the population, has decreased by seven per cent.  His

methods of calculation are ingenious, but the statistical data with

which he operates are so far from accurate that his conclusions on

this point have, in my opinion, little or no scientific value.

With all due deference to Russian economists, I may say

parenthetically that they are very found of juggling with

carelessly collected statistics, as if their data were mathematical

quantities.



Several of the Zemstvos have grappled with this question of peasant

impoverishment, and the data which they have collected make a very

doleful impression.  In the province of Moscow, for example, a

careful investigation gave the following results: Forty per cent.

of the peasant households had no longer any horses, 15 per cent.

had given up agriculture altogether, and about 10 per cent. had no

longer any land.  We must not, however, assume, as is often done,

that the peasant families who have no live stock and no longer till

the land are utterly ruined.  In reality many of them are better

off than their neighbours who appear as prosperous in the official

statistics, having found profitable occupation in the home

industries, in the towns, in the factories, or on the estates of

the landed proprietors.  It must be remembered that Moscow is the

centre of one of the regions in which manufacturing industry has

progressed with gigantic strides during the last half-century, and

it would be strange indeed if, in such a region, the peasantry who

supply the labour to the towns and factories remained thriving

agriculturists.  That many Russians are surprised and horrified at

the actual state of things shows to what an extent the educated

classes are still under the illusion that Russia can create for

herself a manufacturing industry capable of competing with that of

Western Europe without uprooting from the soil a portion of her

rural population.



It is only in the purely agricultural regions that families

officially classed as belonging to the peasantry may be regarded as

on the brink of pauperism because they have no live stock, and even

with regard to them I should hesitate to make such an assumption,

because the muzhiks, as I have already had occasion to remark, have

strange nomadic habits unknown to the rural population of other

countries.  It is a mistake, therefore, to calculate the Russian

peasant's budget exclusively on the basis of local resources.



To the pessimists who assure me that according to their

calculations the peasantry in general must be on the brink of

starvation, I reply that there are many facts, even in the

statistical tables on which they rely, which run counter to their

deductions.  Let me quote one by way of illustration.  The total

amount of deposits in savings banks, about one-fourth of which is

believed to belong to the rural population, rose in the course of

six years (1894-1900) from 347 to 680 millions of roubles.  Besides

the savings banks, there existed in the rural districts on 1st

December, 1902, no less than 1,614 small-credit institutions, with

a total capital (1st January, 1901) of 69 million roubles, of which

only 4,653,000 had been advanced by the State Bank and the Zemstvo,

the remainder coming in from private sources.  This is not much for

a big country like Russia, but it is a beginning, and it suggests

that the impoverishment is not so severe and so universal as the

pessimists would have us believe.



There is thus room for differences of opinion as to how far the

peasantry have become impoverished, but there is no doubt that

their condition is far from satisfactory, and we have to face the

important problem why the abolition of serfage has not produced the

beneficent consequences which even moderate men so confidently

predicted, and how the present unsatisfactory state of things is to

be remedied.



The most common explanation among those who have never seriously

studied the subject is that it all comes from the demoralisation of

the common people.  In this view there is a modicum of truth.  That

the peasantry injure their material welfare by drunkenness and

improvidence there can be no reasonable doubt, as is shown by the

comparatively flourishing state of certain villages of Old

Ritualists and Molokanye in which there is no drunkenness, and in

which the community exercises a strong moral control over the

individual members.  If the Orthodox Church could make the

peasantry refrain from the inordinate use of strong drink as

effectually as it makes them refrain during a great part of the

year from animal food, and if it could instil into their minds a

few simple moral principles as successfully as it has inspired them

with a belief in the efficacy of the Sacraments, it would certainly

confer on them an inestimable benefit.  But this is not to be

expected.  The great majority of the parish priests are quite unfit

for such a task, and the few who have aspirations in that direction

rarely acquire a perceptible moral influence over their

parishioners.  Perhaps more is to be expected from the schoolmaster

than from the priest, but it will be long before the schools can

produce even a partial moral regeneration.  Their first influence,

strange as the assertion may seem, is often in a diametrically

opposite direction.  When only a few peasants in a village can read

and write they have such facilities for overreaching their "dark"

neighbours that they are apt to employ their knowledge for

dishonest purposes; and thus it occasionally happens that the man

who has the most education is the greatest scoundrel in the Mir.

Such facts are often used by the opponents of popular education,

but in reality they supply a good reason for disseminating primary

education as rapidly as possible.  When all the peasants have

learned to read and write they will present a less inviting field

for swindling, and the temptations to dishonesty will be

proportionately diminished.  Meanwhile, it is only fair to state

that the common assertions about drunkenness being greatly on the

increase are not borne out by the official statistics concerning

the consumption of spirituous liquors.



After drunkenness, the besetting sin which is supposed to explain

the impoverishment of the peasantry is incorrigible laziness.  On

that subject I feel inclined to put in a plea of extenuating

circumstances in favour of the muzhik.  Certainly he is very slow

in his movements--slower perhaps than the English rustic--and he

has a marvellous capacity for wasting valuable time without any

perceptible qualms of conscience; but he is in this respect, if I

may use a favourite phrase of the Social Scientists, "the product

of environment."  To the proprietors who habitually reproach him

with time-wasting he might reply with a very strong tu quoque

argument, and to all the other classes the argument might likewise

be addressed.  The St. Petersburg official, for example, who writes

edifying disquisitions about peasant indolence, considers that for

himself attendance at his office for four hours, a large portion of

which is devoted to the unproductive labour of cigarette smoking,

constitutes a very fair day's work.  The truth is that in Russia

the struggle for life is not nearly so intense as in more densely

populated countries, and society is so constituted that all can

live without very strenuous exertion.  The Russians seem,

therefore, to the traveller who comes from the West an indolent,

apathetic race.  If the traveller happens to come from the East--

especially if he has been living among pastoral races--the Russians

will appear to him energetic and laborious.  Their character in

this respect corresponds to their geographical position: they stand

midway between the laborious, painstaking, industrious population

of Western Europe and the indolent, undisciplined, spasmodically

energetic populations of Central Asia.  They are capable of

effecting much by vigorous, intermittent effort--witness the

peasant at harvest-time, or the St. Petersburg official when some

big legislative project has to be submitted to the Emperor within a

given time--but they have not yet learned regular laborious habits.

In short, the Russians might move the world if it could be done by

a jerk, but they are still deficient in that calm perseverance and

dogged tenacity which characterise the Teutonic race.



Without seeking further to determine how far the moral defects of

the peasantry have a deleterious influence on their material

welfare, I proceed to examine the external causes which are

generally supposed to contribute largely to their impoverishment,

and will deal first with the evils of peasant self-government.



That the peasant self-government is very far from being in a

satisfactory condition must be admitted by any impartial observer.

The more laborious and well-to-do peasants, unless they wish to

abuse their position directly or indirectly for their own

advantage, try to escape election as office-bearers, and leave the

administration in the hands of the less respectable members.  Not

unfrequently a Volost Elder trades with the money he collects as

dues or taxes; and sometimes, when he becomes insolvent, the

peasants have to pay their taxes and dues a second time.  The

Village Assemblies, too, have become worse than they were in the

days of serfage.  At that time the Heads of Households--who, it

must be remembered, have alone a voice in the decisions--were few

in number, laborious, and well-to-do, and they kept the lazy,

unruly members under strict control.  Now that the large families

have been broken up and almost every adult peasant is Head of a

Household, the Communal affairs are sometimes decided by a noisy

majority; and certain Communal decisions may be obtained by

"treating the Mir"--that is to say, by supplying a certain amount

of vodka.  Often I have heard old peasants speak of these things,

and finish their recital by some such remark as this: "There is no

order now; the people have been spoiled; it was better in the time

of the masters."



These evils are very real, and I have no desire to extenuate them,

but I believe they are by no means so great as is commonly

supposed.  If the lazy, worthless members of the Commune had really

the direction of Communal affairs we should find that in the

Northern Agricultural Zone, where it is necessary to manure the

soil, the periodical redistributions of the Communal land would be

very frequent; for in a new distribution the lazy peasant has a

good chance of getting a well-manured lot in exchange for the lot

which he has exhausted.  In reality, so far as my observations

extend, these general distributions of the land are not more

frequent than they were before.



Of the various functions of the peasant self-government the

judicial are perhaps the most frequently and the most severely

criticised.  And certainly not without reason, for the Volost

Courts are too often accessible to the influence of alcohol, and in

some districts the peasants say that he who becomes a judge takes a

sin on his soul.  I am not at all sure, however, that it would be

well to abolish these courts altogether, as some people propose.

In many respects they are better suited to peasant requirements

than the ordinary tribunals.  Their procedure is infinitely

simpler, more expeditious, and incomparably less expensive, and

they are guided by traditional custom and plain common-sense,

whereas the ordinary tribunals have to judge according to the civil

law, which is unknown to the peasantry and not always applicable to

their affairs.



Few ordinary judges have a sufficiently intimate knowledge of the

minute details of peasant life to be able to decide fairly the

cases that are brought before the Volost Courts; and even if a

Justice had sufficient knowledge he could not adopt the moral and

juridical notions of the peasantry.  These are often very different

from those of the upper classes.  In cases of matrimonial

separation, for instance, the educated man naturally assumes that,

if there is any question of aliment, it should be paid by the

husband to the wife.  The peasant, on the contrary, assumes as

naturally that it should be paid by the wife to the husband--or

rather to the Head of the Household--as a compensation for the loss

of labour which her desertion involves.  In like manner, according

to traditional peasant-law, if an unmarried son is working away

from home, his earnings do not belong to himself, but to the

family, and in Volost Court they could be claimed by the Head of

the Household.



Occasionally, it is true, the peasant judges allow their respect

for old traditional conceptions in general and for the authority of

parents in particular, to carry them a little too far.  I was told

lately of one affair which took place not long ago, within a

hundred miles of Moscow, in which the judge decided that a

respectable young peasant should be flogged because he refused to

give his father the money he earned as groom in the service of a

neighbouring proprietor, though it was notorious in the district

that the father was a disreputable old drunkard who carried to the

kabak (gin-shop) all the money he could obtain by fair means and

foul.  When I remarked to my informant, who was not an admirer of

peasant institutions, that the incident reminded me of the respect

for the patria potestas in old Roman times, he stared at me with a

look of surprise and indignation, and exclaimed laconically,

"Patria potestas? . . . Vodka!"  He was evidently convinced that

the disreputable father had got his respectable son flogged by

"treating" the judges.  In such cases flogging can no longer be

used, for the Volost Courts, as we have seen, were recently

deprived of the right to inflict corporal punishment.



These administrative and judicial abuses gradually reached the ears

of the Government, and in 1889 it attempted to remove them by

creating a body of Rural Supervisors (Zemskiye Natchalniki).  Under

their supervision and control some abuses may have been

occasionally prevented or corrected, and some rascally Volost

secretaries may have been punished or dismissed, but the peasant

self-government as a whole has not been perceptibly improved.



Let us glance now at the opinions of those who hold that the

material progress of the peasantry is prevented chiefly, not by the

mere abuses of the Communal administration, but by the essential

principles of the Communal institutions, and especially by the

practice of periodically redistributing the Communal land.  From

the theoretical point of view this question is one of great

interest, and it may acquire in the future an immense practical

significance; but for the present it has not, in my opinion, the

importance which is usually attributed to it.  There can be no

doubt that it is much more difficult to farm well on a large number

of narrow strips of land, many of which are at a great distance

from the farmyard, than on a compact piece of land which the farmer

may divide and cultivate as he pleases; and there can be as little

doubt that the husbandman is more likely to improve his land if his

tenure is secure.  All this and much more of the same kind must be

accepted as indisputable truth, but it has little direct bearing on

the practical question under consideration.  We are not considering

in the abstract whether it would be better that the peasant should

be a farmer with abundant capital and all the modern scientific

appliances, but simply the practical question, What are the

obstructions which at present prevent the peasant from ameliorating

his actual condition?



That the Commune prevents its members from adopting various systems

of high farming is a supposition which scarcely requires serious

consideration.  The peasants do not yet think of any such radical

innovations; and if they did, they have neither the knowledge nor

the capital necessary to effect them.  In many villages a few of

the richer and more intelligent peasants have bought land outside

of the Commune and cultivate it as they please, free from all

Communal restraints; and I have always found that they cultivate

this property precisely in the same way as their share of the

Communal land.  As to minor changes, we know by experience that the

Mir opposes to them no serious obstacles.



The cultivation of beet for the production of sugar has greatly

increased in the central and southwestern provinces, and flax is

now largely produced in Communes in northern districts where it was

formerly cultivated merely for domestic use.  The Communal system

is, in fact, extremely elastic, and may be modified as soon as the

majority of the members consider modifications profitable.  When

the peasants begin to think of permanent improvements, such as

drainage, irrigation, and the like, they will find the Communal

institutions a help rather than an obstruction; for such

improvements, if undertaken at all, must be undertaken on a larger

scale, and the Mir is an already existing association.  The only

permanent improvements which can be for the present profitably

undertaken consist in the reclaiming of waste land; and such

improvements are already sometimes attempted.  I know at least of

one case in which a Commune in the province of Yaroslavl has

reclaimed a considerable tract of waste land by means of hired

labourers.  Nor does the Mir prevent in this respect individual

initiative.  In many Communes of the northern provinces it is a

received principle of customary law that if any member reclaims

waste land he is allowed to retain possession of it for a number of

years proportionate to the amount of labour expended.



But does not the Commune, as it exists, prevent good cultivation

according to the mode of agriculture actually in use?



Except in the far north and the steppe region, where the

agriculture is of a peculiar kind, adapted to the local conditions,

the peasants invariably till their land according to the ordinary

three-field system, in which good cultivation means, practically

speaking, the plentiful use of manure.  Does, then, the existence

of the Mir prevent the peasants from manuring their fields well?



Many people who speak on this subject in an authoritative tone seem

to imagine that the peasants in general do not manure their fields

at all.  This idea is an utter mistake.  In those regions, it is

true, where the rich black soil still retains a large part of its

virgin fertility, the manure is used as fuel, or simply thrown

away, because the peasants believe that it would not be profitable

to put it on their fields, and their conviction is, at least to

some extent, well founded;* but in the Northern Agricultural Zone,

where unmanured soil gives almost no harvest, the peasants put upon

their fields all the manure they possess.  If they do not put

enough it is simply because they have not sufficient live stock.





* As recently as two years ago (1903) I found that one of the most

intelligent and energetic landlords of the province of Voronezh

followed in this respect the example of the peasants, and he

assured me that he had proved by experience the advantage of doing

so.





It is only in the southern provinces, where no manure is required,

that periodical re-distributions take place frequently.  As we

travel northward we find the term lengthens; and in the Northern

Agricultural Zone, where manure is indispensable, general re-

distributions are extremely rare.  In the province of Yaroslavl,

for example, the Communal land is generally divided into two parts:

the manured land lying near the village, and the unmanured land

lying beyond.  The latter alone is subject to frequent re-

distribution.  On the former the existing tenures are rarely

disturbed, and when it becomes necessary to give a share to a new

household, the change is effected with the least possible prejudice

to vested rights.



The policy of the Government has always been to admit

redistributions in principle, but to prevent their too frequent

recurrence.  For this purpose the Emancipation Law stipulated that

they could be decreed only by a three-fourths majority of the

Village Assembly, and in 1893 a further obstacle was created by a

law providing that the minimum term between two re-distributions

should be twelve years, and that they should never be undertaken

without the sanction of the Rural Supervisor.



A certain number of Communes have made the experiment of

transforming the Communal tenure into hereditary allotments, and

its only visible effect has been that the allotments accumulate in

the hands of the richer and more enterprising peasants, and the

poorer members of the Commune become landless, while the primitive

system of agriculture remains unimproved.



Up to this point I have dealt with the so-called causes of peasant

impoverishment which are much talked of, but which are, in my

opinion, only of secondary importance.  I pass now to those which

are more tangible and which have exerted on the condition of the

peasantry a more palpable influence.  And, first, inordinate

taxation.



This is a very big subject, on which a bulky volume might be

written, but I shall cut it very short, because I know that the

ordinary reader does not like to be bothered with voluminous

financial statistics.  Briefly, then, the peasant has to pay three

kinds of direct taxation: Imperial to the Central Government, local

to the Zemstvo, and Commune to the Mir and the Volost; and besides

these he has to pay a yearly sum for the redemption of the land-

allotment which he received at the time of the Emancipation.  Taken

together, these form a heavy burden, but for ten or twelve years

the emancipated peasantry bore it patiently, without falling very

deeply into arrears.  Then began to appear symptoms of distress,

especially in the provinces with a poor soil, and in 1872 the

Government appointed a Commission of Inquiry, in which I had the

privilege of taking part unofficially.  The inquiry showed that

something ought to be done, but at that moment the Government was

so busy with administrative reforms and with trying to develop

industry and commerce that it had little time to devote to studying

and improving the economic position of the silent, long-suffering

muzhik.  It was not till nearly ten years later, when the

Government began to feel the pinch of the ever-increasing arrears,

that it recognised the necessity of relieving the rural population.

For this purpose it abolished the salt-tax and the poll-tax and

repeatedly lessened the burden of the redemption-payments.  At a

later period (1899) it afforded further relief by an important

reform in the mode of collecting the direct taxes.  From the

police, who often ruined peasant householders by applying distraint

indiscriminately, the collection of taxes was transferred to

special authorities who took into consideration the temporary

pecuniary embarrassments of the tax-payers.  Another benefit

conferred on the peasantry by this reform is that an individual

member of the Commune is no longer responsible for the fiscal

obligations of the Commune as a whole.



Since these alleviations have been granted the annual total

demanded from the peasantry for direct taxation and land-redemption

payments is 173 million roubles, and the average annual sum to be

paid by each peasant household varies, according to the locality,

from 11 1/2 to 20 roubles (21s. 6d. to 40s.).  In addition to this

annuity there is a heavy burden of accumulated arrears, especially

in the central and eastern provinces, which amounted in 1899 to 143

millions.  Of the indirect taxes I can say nothing definite,

because it is impossible to calculate, even approximately, the

share of them which falls on the rural population, but they must

not be left out of account.  During the ten years of M. Witte's

term of office the revenue of the Imperial Treasury was nearly

doubled, and though the increase was due partly to improvements in

the financial administration, we can hardly believe that the

peasantry did not in some measure contribute to it.  In any case,

it is very difficult, if not impossible, for them, under actual

conditions, to improve their economic position.  On that point all

Russian economists are agreed.  One of the most competent and

sober-minded of them, M. Schwanebach, calculates that the head of a

peasant household, after deducting the grain required to feed his

family, has to pay into the Imperial Treasury, according to the

district in which he resides, from 25 to 100 per cent, of his

agricultural revenue.  If that ingenious calculation is even

approximately correct, we must conclude that further financial

reforms are urgently required, especially in those provinces where

the population live exclusively by agriculture.



Heavy as the burden of taxation undoubtedly is, it might perhaps be

borne without very serious inconvenience if the peasant families

could utilise productively all their time and strength.

Unfortunately in the existing economic organisation a great deal of

their time and energy is necessarily wasted.  Their economic life

was radically dislocated by the Emancipation, and they have not yet

succeeded in reorganising it according to the new conditions.



In the time of serfage an estate formed, from the economic point of

view, a co-operative agricultural association, under a manager who

possessed unlimited authority, and sometimes abused it, but who was

generally worldly-wise enough to understand that the prosperity of

the whole required the prosperity of the component parts.  By the

abolition of serfage the association was dissolved and liquidated,

and the strong, compact whole fell into a heap of independent

units, with separate and often mutually hostile interests.  Some of

the disadvantages of this change for the peasantry I have already

enumerated above.  The most important I have now to mention.  In

virtue of the Emancipation Law each family received an amount of

land which tempted it to continue farming on its own account, but

which did not enable it to earn a living and pay its rates and

taxes.  The peasant thus became a kind of amphibious creature--half

farmer and half something else--cultivating his allotment for a

portion of his daily bread, and obliged to have some other

occupation wherewith to cover the inevitable deficit in his

domestic budget.  If he was fortunate enough to find near his home

a bit of land to be let at a reasonable rent, he might cultivate it

in addition to his own and thereby gain a livelihood; but if he had

not the good luck to find such a piece of land in the immediate

neighbourhood, he had to look for some subsidiary occupation in

which to employ his leisure time; and where was such occupation to

be found in an ordinary Russian village?  In former years he might

have employed himself perhaps in carting the proprietor's grain to

distant markets or still more distant seaports, but that means of

making a little money has been destroyed by the extension of

railways.  Practically, then, he is now obliged to choose between

two alternatives: either to farm his allotment and spend a great

part of the year in idleness, or to leave the cultivation of his

allotment to his wife and children and to seek employment

elsewhere--often at such a distance that his earnings hardly cover

the expenses of the journey.  In either case much time and energy

are wasted.



The evil results of this state of things were intensified by

another change which was brought about by the Emancipation.  In the

time of serfage the peasant families, as I have already remarked,

were usually very large.  They remained undivided, partly from the

influence of patriarchal conceptions, but chiefly because the

proprietors, recognising the advantage of large units, prevented

them from breaking up.  As soon as the proprietor's authority was

removed, the process of disintegration began and spread rapidly.

Every one wished to be independent, and in a very short time nearly

every able-bodied married peasant had a house of his own.  The

economic consequences were disastrous.  A large amount of money had

to be expended in constructing new houses and farmsteadings; and

the old habit of one male member remaining at home to cultivate the

land allotment with the female members of the family whilst the

others went to earn wages elsewhere had to be abandoned.  Many

large families, which had been prosperous and comfortable--rich

according to peasant conceptions--dissolved into three or four

small ones, all on the brink of pauperism.



The last cause of peasant impoverishment that I have to mention is

perhaps the most important of all: I mean the natural increase of

population without a corresponding increase in the means of

subsistence.  Since the Emancipation in 1861 the population has

nearly doubled, whilst the amount of Communal land has remained the

same.  It is not surprising, therefore, that when talking with

peasants about their actual condition, one constantly hears the

despairing cry, "Zemli malo!" ("There is not enough land"); and one

notices that those who look a little ahead ask anxiously: "What is

to become of our children?  Already the Communal allotment is too

small for our wants, and the land outside is doubling and trebling

in price!  What will it be in the future?"  At the same time, not a

few Russian economists tell us--and their apprehensions are shared

by foreign observers--that millions of peasants are in danger of

starvation in the near future.



Must we, then, accept for Russia the Malthus doctrine that

population increases more rapidly than the means of subsistence,

and that starvation can be avoided only by plague, pestilence, war,

and other destructive forces?  I think not.  It is quite true that,

if the amount of land actually possessed by the peasantry and the

present system of cultivating it remained unchanged, semi-

starvation would be the inevitable result within a comparatively

short space of time; but the danger can be averted, and the proper

remedies are not far to seek.  If Russia is suffering from over-

population, it must be her own fault, for she is, with the

exception of Norway and Sweden, the most thinly populated country

in Europe, and she has more than her share of fertile soil and

mineral resources.



A glance at the map showing the density of population in the

various provinces suggests an obvious remedy, and I am happy to say

it is already being applied.  The population of the congested

districts of the centre is gradually spreading out, like a drop of

oil on a sheet of soft paper, towards the more thinly populated

regions of the south and east.  In this way the vast region

containing millions and millions of acres which lies to the north

of the Black Sea, the Caucasus, the Caspian, and Central Asia is

yearly becoming more densely peopled, and agriculture is steadily

encroaching on the pastoral area.  Breeders of sheep and cattle,

who formerly lived and throve in the western portion of that great

expanse, are being pushed eastwards by the rapid increase in the

value of land, and their place is being taken by enterprising

tillers of the soil.  Further north another stream of emigration is

flowing into Central Siberia.  It does not flow so rapidly, because

in that part of the Empire, unlike the bare, fertile steppes of the

south, the land has to be cleared before the seed can be sown, and

the pioneer colonists have to work hard for a year or two before

they get any return for their labour; but the Government and

private societies come to their assistance, and for the last twenty

years their numbers have been steadily increasing.  During the ten

years 1886-96 the annual contingent rose from 25,000 to 200,000,

and the total number amounted to nearly 800,000.  For the

subsequent period I have not been able to obtain the official

statistics, but a friend who has access to the official sources of

information on this subject assures me that during the last twelve

years about four millions of peasants from European Russia have

been successfully settled in Siberia.



Even in the European portion of the Empire millions of acres which

are at present unproductive might be utilised.  Any one who has

travelled by rail from Berlin to St. Petersburg must have noticed

how the landscape suddenly changes its character as soon as he has

crossed the frontier.  Leaving a prosperous agricultural country,

he traverses for many weary hours a region in which there is hardly

a sign of human habitation, though the soil and climate of that

region resembles closely the soil and climate of East Prussia.  The

difference lies in the amount of labour and capital expended.

According to official statistics the area of European Russia

contains, roughly speaking, 406 millions of dessyatins, of which 78

millions, or 19 per cent., are classified as neudobniya, unfit for

cultivation; 157 millions, or 39 per cent., as forest; 106

millions, or 26 per cent., as arable land; and 65 millions, or 16

per cent., as pasturage.  Thus the arable and pasture land compose

only 42 per cent., or considerably less than half the area.



Of the land classed as unfit for cultivation--19 per cent. of the

whole--a large portion, including the perennially frozen tundri of

the far north, must ever remain unproductive, but in latitudes with

a milder climate this category of land is for the most part

ordinary morass or swamp, which can be transformed into pasturage,

or even into arable land, by drainage at a moderate cost.  As a

proof of this statement I may cite the draining of the great Pinsk

swamps, which was begun by the Government in 1872.  If we may trust

an official report of the progress of the works in 1897, an area of

2,855,000 dessyatins (more than seven and a half million acres) had

been drained at an average cost of about three shillings an acre,

and the price of land had risen from four to twenty-eight roubles

per dessyatin.



Reclamation of marshes might be undertaken elsewhere on a much more

moderate scale.  The observant traveller on the highways and byways

of the northern provinces must have noticed on the banks of almost

every stream many acres of marshy land producing merely reeds or

coarse rank grass that no well-brought-up animal would look at.

With a little elementary knowledge of engineering and the

expenditure of a moderate amount of manual labour these marshes

might be converted into excellent pasture or even into highly

productive kitchen-gardens; but the peasants have not yet learned

to take advantage of such opportunities, and the reformers, who

deal only in large projects and scientific panaceas for the cure of

impoverishment, consider such trifles as unworthy of their

attention.  The Scotch proverb that if the pennies be well looked

after, the pounds will look after themselves, contains a bit of

homely wisdom totally unknown to the Russian educated classes.



After the morasses, swamps, and marshes come the forests,

constituting 39 per cent. of the whole area, and the question

naturally arises whether some portions of them might not be

advantageously transformed into pasturage or arable land.  In the

south and east they have been diminished to such an extent as to

affect the climate injuriously, so that the area of them should be

increased rather than lessened; but in the northern provinces the

vast expanses of forest, covering millions of acres, might perhaps

be curtailed with advantage.  The proprietors prefer, however, to

keep them in their present condition because they give a modest

revenue without any expenditure of capital.



Therein lies the great obstacle to land-reclamation in Russia: it

requires an outlay of capital, and capital is extremely scarce in

the Empire of the Tsars.  Until it becomes more plentiful, the area

of arable land and pasturage is not likely to be largely increased,

and other means of checking the impoverishment of the peasantry

must be adopted.



A less expensive means is suggested by the statistics of foreign

trade.  In the preceding chapter we have seen that from 1860 to

1900 the average annual export of grain rose steadily from under 1

1/2 millions to over 6 millions of tons.  It is evident, therefore,

that in the food supply, so far from there being a deficiency,

there has been a large and constantly increasing surplus.  If the

peasantry have been on short rations, it is not because the

quantity of food produced has fallen short of the requirements of

the population, but because it has been unequally distributed.  The

truth is that the large landed proprietors produce more and the

peasants less than they consume, and it has naturally occurred to

many people that the present state of things might be improved if a

portion of the arable land passed, without any socialistic,

revolutionary measures, from the one class to the other.  This

operation began spontaneously soon after the Emancipation.  Well-

to-do peasants who had saved a little money bought from the

proprietors bits of land near their villages and cultivated them in

addition to their allotments.  At first this extension of peasant

land was confined within very narrow limits, because the peasants

had very little capital at their disposal, but in 1882 the

Government came to their aid by creating the Peasant Land Bank, the

object of which was to advance money to purchasers of the peasant

class on the security of the land purchased, at the rate of 7 1/2

per cent., including sinking fund.*  From that moment the purchases

increased rapidly.  They were made by individual peasants, by rural

Communes, and, most of all, by small voluntary associations

composed of three, four, or more members.  In the course of twenty

years (1883-1903) the Bank made 47,791 advances, and in this way

were purchased about eighteen million acres.  This sounds a very

big acquisition, but it will not do much to relieve the pressure on

the peasantry as a whole, because it adds only about 6 per cent. to

the amount they already possessed in virtue of the Emancipation

Law.





* This arrangement extinguishes the debt in 34 1/2 years; an

additional 1 per cent, extinguishes it in 24 1/2 years.  By recent

legislation other arrangements are permitted.





Nearly all of this land purchased by the peasantry comes directly

or indirectly from the Noblesse, and much more will doubtless pass

from the one class to the other if the Government continues to

encourage the operation; but already symptoms of a change of policy

are apparent.  In the higher official regions it is whispered that

the existing policy is objectionable from the political point of

view, and one sometimes hears the question asked: Is it right and

desirable that the Noblesse, who have ever done their duty in

serving faithfully the Tsar and Fatherland, and who have ever been

the representatives of civilisation and culture in Russian country

life, should be gradually expropriated in favour of other and less

cultivated social classes?  Not a few influential personages are of

opinion that such a change is unjust and undesirable, and they

argue that it is not advantageous to the peasants themselves,

because the price of land has risen much more than the rents.  It

is not at all uncommon, for example, to find that land can be

rented at five roubles per dessyatin, whereas it cannot be bought

under 200 roubles.  In that case the peasant can enjoy the use of

the land at the moderate rate of 2 1/2 per cent. of the capital

value, whereas by purchasing the land with the assistance of the

bank he would have to pay, without sinking fund, more than double

that rate.  The muzhik, however, prefers to be owner of the land,

even at a considerable sacrifice.  When he can be induced to give

his reasons, they are usually formulated thus: "With my own land I

can do as I like; if I hire land from the neighbouring proprietor,

who knows whether, at the end of the term, he may not raise the

rent or refuse to renew the contract at any price?"



Even if the Government should continue to encourage the purchase of

land by the peasantry, the process is too slow to meet all the

requirements of the situation.  Some additional expedient must be

found, and we naturally look for it in the experience of older

countries with a denser population.



In the more densely populated countries of Western Europe a safety-

valve for the inordinate increase of the rural population has been

provided by the development of manufacturing industry.  High wages

and the attractions of town life draw the rural population to the

industrial centres, and the movement has increased to such an

extent that already complaints are heard of the rural districts

becoming depopulated.  In Russia a similar movement is taking place

on a smaller scale.  During the last forty years, under the

fostering influence of a protective tariff, the manufacturing

industry has made gigantic strides, as we shall see in a future

chapter, and it has already absorbed about two millions of the

redundant hands in the villages; but it cannot keep pace with the

rapid increasing surplus.  Two millions are less than two per cent.

of the population.  The great mass of the people has always been,

and must long continue to be, purely agricultural; and it is to

their fields that they must look for the means of subsistence.  If

the fields do not supply enough for their support under the

existing primitive methods of cultivation, better methods must be

adopted.  To use a favourite semi-scientific phrase, Russia has now

reached the point in her economic development at which she must

abandon her traditional extensive system of agriculture and adopt a

more intensive system.  So far all competent authorities are

agreed.  But how is the transition, which requires technical

knowledge, a spirit of enterprise, an enormous capital, and a dozen

other things which the peasantry do not at present possess, to be

effected?  Here begin the well-marked differences of opinion.



Hitherto the momentous problem has been dealt with chiefly by the

theorists and doctrinaires who delight in radical solutions by

means of panaceas, and who have little taste for detailed local

investigation and gradual improvement.  I do not refer to the so-

called "Saviours of the Fatherland" (Spasiteli Otetchestva), well-

meaning cranks and visionaries who discover ingenious devices for

making their native country at once prosperous and happy.  I speak

of the great majority of reasonable, educated men who devote some

attention to the problem.  Their favourite method of dealing with

it is this: The intensive system of agriculture requires scientific

knowledge and a higher level of intellectual culture.  What has to

be done, therefore, is to create agricultural colleges supplied

with all the newest appliances of agronomic research and to educate

the peasantry to such an extent that they may be able to use the

means which science recommends.



For many years this doctrine prevailed in the Press, among the

reading public, and even in the official world.  The Government was

accordingly urged to improve and multiply the agronomic colleges

and the schools of all grades and descriptions.  Learned

dissertations were published on the chemical constitution of the

various soils, the action of the atmosphere on the different

ingredients, the necessity of making careful meteorological

observations, and numerous other topics of a similar kind; and

would-be reformers who had no taste for such highly technical

researches could console themselves with the idea that they were

advancing the vital interests of the country by discussing the

relative merits of Communal and personal land-tenure--deciding

generally in favour of the former as more in accordance with the

peculiarities of Russian, as contrasted with West European,

principles of economic and social development.



While much valuable time and energy were thus being expended to

little purpose, on the assumption that the old system might be left

untouched until the preparations for a radical solution had been

completed, disagreeable facts which could not be entirely

overlooked gradually produced in influential quarters the

conviction that the question was much more urgent than was commonly

supposed.  A sensitive chord in the heart of the Government was

struck by the steadily increasing arrears of taxation, and

spasmodic attempts have since been made to cure the evil.



In the local administration, too, the urgency of the question has

come to be recognised, and measures are now being taken by the

Zemstvo to help the peasantry in making gradually the transition to

that higher system of agriculture which is the only means of

permanently saving them from starvation.  For this purpose, in many

districts well-trained specialists have been appointed to study the

local conditions and to recommend to the villagers such simple

improvements as are within their means.  These improvements may be

classified under the following heads:



(1) Increase of the cereal crops by better seed and improved

implements.



(2) Change in the rotation of crops by the introduction of certain

grasses and roots which improve the soil and supply food for live

stock.



(3) Improvement and increase of live stock, so as to get more

labour-power, more manure, more dairy-produce, and more meat.



(4) Increased cultivation of vegetables and fruit.



With these objects in view the Zemstvo is establishing depots in

which improved implements and better seed are sold at moderate

prices, and the payments are made in installments, so that even the

poorer members of the community can take advantage of the

facilities offered.  Bulls and stallions are kept at central points

for the purpose of improving the breed of cattle and horses, and

the good results are already visible.  Elementary instruction in

farming and gardening is being introduced into the primary schools.

In some districts the exertions of the Zemstvo are supplemented by

small agricultural societies, mutual credit associations, and

village banks, and these are to some extent assisted by the Central

Government.  But the beneficent action in this direction is not all

official.  Many proprietors deserve great praise for the good

influence which they exercise on the peasants of their

neighbourhood and the assistance they give them; and it must be

admitted that their patience is often sorely tried, for the

peasants have the obstinacy of ignorance, and possess other

qualities which are not sympathetic.  I know one excellent

proprietor who began his civilising efforts by giving to the Mir of

the nearest village an iron plough as a model and a fine pedigree

ram as a producer, and who found, on returning from a tour abroad,

that during his absence the plough had been sold for vodka, and the

pedigree ram had been eaten before it had time to produce any

descendants!  In spite of this he continues his efforts, and not

altogether without success.



It need hardly be said that the progress of the peasantry is not so

rapid as could be wished.  The muzhik is naturally conservative,

and is ever inclined to regard novelties with suspicion.  Even when

he is half convinced of the utility of some change, he has still to

think about it for a long time and talk it over again and again

with his friends and neighbours, and this preparatory stage of

progress may last for years.  Unless he happens to be a man of

unusual intelligence and energy, it is only when he sees with his

own eyes that some humble individual of his own condition in life

has actually gained by abandoning the old routine and taking to new

courses, that he makes up his mind to take the plunge himself.

Still, he is beginning to jog on.  E pur si muove!  A spirit of

progress is beginning to move on the face of the long-stagnant

waters, and progress once begun is pretty sure to continue with

increasing rapidity.  With starvation hovering in the rear, even

the most conservative are not likely to stop or turn back.

