





CHAPTER XX



THE NOBLESSE





The Nobles In Early Times--The Mongol Domination--The Tsardom of

Muscovy--Family Dignity--Reforms of Peter the Great--The Nobles

Adopt West-European Conceptions--Abolition of Obligatory Service--

Influence of Catherine II.--The Russian Dvoryanstvo Compared with

the French Noblesse and the English Aristocracy--Russian Titles--

Probable Future of the Russian Noblesse.





Hitherto I have been compelling the reader to move about among what

we should call the lower classes--peasants, burghers, traders,

parish priests, Dissenters, heretics, Cossacks, and the like--and

he feels perhaps inclined to complain that he has had no

opportunity of mixing with what old-fashioned people call gentle-

folk and persons of quality.  By way of making amends to him for

this reprehensible conduct on my part, I propose now to present him

to the whole Noblesse* in a body, not only those at present living,

but also their near and distant ancestors, right back to the

foundation of the Russian Empire a thousand years ago.  Thereafter

I shall introduce him to some of the country families and invite

him to make with me a few country-house visits.





* I use here a foreign, in preference to an English, term, because

the word "Nobility" would convey a false impression.

Etymologically the Russian word "Dvoryanin" means a Courtier (from

Dvor=court); but this term is equally objectionable, because the

great majority of the Dvoryanstvo have nothing to do with the

Court.





In the old times, when Russia was merely a collection of some

seventy independent principalities, each reigning prince was

surrounded by a group of armed men, composed partly of Boyars, or

large landed proprietors, and partly of knights, or soldiers of

fortune.  These men, who formed the Noblesse of the time, were to a

certain extent under the authority of the Prince, but they were by

no means mere obedient, silent executors of his will.  The Boyars

might refuse to take part in his military expeditions, and the

"free-lances" might leave his service and seek employment

elsewhere.  If he wished to go to war without their consent, they

could say to him, as they did on one occasion, "You have planned

this yourself, Prince, so we will not go with you, for we knew

nothing of it."  Nor was this resistance to the princely will

always merely passive.  Once, in the principality of Galitch, the

armed men seized their prince, killed his favourites, burned his

mistress, and made him swear that he would in future live with his

lawful wife.  To his successor, who had married the wife of a

priest, they spoke thus: "We have not risen against YOU, Prince,

but we will not do reverence to a priest's wife: we will put her to

death, and then you may marry whom you please."  Even the energetic

Bogolubski, one of the most remarkable of the old Princes, did not

succeed in having his own way.  When he attempted to force the

Boyars he met with stubborn opposition, and was finally

assassinated.  From these incidents, which might be indefinitely

multiplied from the old chronicles, we see that in the early period

of Russian history the Boyars and knights were a body of free men,

possessing a considerable amount of political power.



Under the Mongol domination this political equilibrium was

destroyed.  When the country had been conquered, the Princes became

servile vassals of the Khan and arbitrary rulers towards their own

subjects.  The political significance of the nobles was thereby

greatly diminished.  It was not, however, by any means annihilated.

Though the Prince no longer depended entirely on their support, he

had an interest in retaining their services, to protect his

territory in case of sudden attack, or to increase his possessions

at the expense of his neighbours when a convenient opportunity

presented itself.  Theoretically, such conquests were impossible,

for all removing of the ancient landmarks depended on the decision

of the Khan; but in reality the Khan paid little attention to the

affairs of his vassals so long as the tribute was regularly paid;

and much took place in Russia without his permission.  We find,

therefore, in some of the principalities the old relations still

subsisting under Mongol rule.  The famous Dmitri of the Don, for

instance, when on his death-bed, speaks thus to his Boyars: "You

know my habits and my character; I was born among you, grew up

among you, governed with you--fighting by your side, showing you

honour and love, and placing you over towns and districts.  I loved

your children, and did evil to no one.  I rejoiced with you in your

joy, mourned with you in your grief, and called you the princes of

my land."  Then, turning to his children, he adds, as a parting

advice: "Love your Boyars, my children; show them the honour which

their services merit, and undertake nothing without their consent."



When the Grand Princes of Moscow brought the other principalities

under their power, and formed them into the Tsardom of Muscovy, the

nobles descended another step in the political scale.  So long as

there were many principalities they could quit the service of a

Prince as soon as he gave them reason to be discontented, knowing

that they would be well received by one of his rivals; but now they

had no longer any choice.  The only rival of Moscow was Lithuania,

and precautions were taken to prevent the discontented from

crossing the Lithuanian frontier.  The nobles were no longer

voluntary adherents of a Prince, but had become subjects of a Tsar;

and the Tsars were not as the old Princes had been.  By a violent

legal fiction they conceived themselves to be the successors of the

Byzantine Emperors, and created a new court ceremonial, borrowed

partly from Constantinople and partly from the Mongol Horde.  They

no longer associated familiarly with the Boyars, and no longer

asked their advice, but treated them rather as menials.  When the

nobles entered their august master's presence they prostrated

themselves in Oriental fashion--occasionally as many as thirty

times--and when they incurred his displeasure they were summarily

flogged or executed, according to the Tsar's good pleasure.  In

succeeding to the power of the Khans, the Tsars had adopted, we

see, a good deal of the Mongol system of government.



It may seem strange that a class of men which had formerly shown a

proud spirit of independence should have submitted quietly to such

humiliation and oppression without making a serious effort to curb

the new power, which had no longer a Tartar Horde at its back to

quell opposition.  But we must remember that the nobles, as well as

the Princes, had passed in the meantime through the school of the

Mongol domination.  In the course of two centuries they had

gradually become accustomed to despotic rule in the Oriental sense.

If they felt their position humiliating and irksome, they must have

felt, too, how difficult it was to better it.  Their only resource

lay in combining against the common oppressor; and we have only to

glance at the motley, disorganised group, as they cluster round the

Tsar, to perceive that combination was extremely difficult.  We can

distinguish there the mediatised Princes, still harbouring designs

for the recovery of their independence; the Moscow Boyars, jealous

of their family honour and proud of Muscovite supremacy; Tartar

Murzi, who have submitted to be baptised and have received land

like the other nobles; the Novgorodian magnate, who cannot forget

the ancient glory of his native city; Lithuanian nobles, who find

it more profitable to serve the Tsar than their own sovereign;

petty chiefs who have fled from the opposition of the Teutonic

order; and soldiers of fortune from every part of Russia.  Strong,

permanent political factors are not easily formed out of such

heterogeneous material.



At the end of the sixteenth century the old dynasty became extinct,

and after a short period of political anarchy, commonly called "the

troublous times" (smutnoe vremya), the Romanof family were raised

to the throne by the will of the people, or at least by those who

were assumed to be its representatives.  By this change the

Noblesse acquired a somewhat better position.  They were no longer

exposed to capricious tyranny and barbarous cruelty, such as they

had experienced at the hands of Ivan the Terrible, but they did

not, as a class, gain any political influence.  There were still

rival families and rival factions, but there were no political

parties in the proper sense of the term, and the highest aim of

families and factions was to gain the favour of the Tsar.



The frequent quarrels about precedence which took place among the

rival families at this period form one of the most curious episodes

of Russian history.  The old patriarchal conception of the family

as a unit, one and indivisible, was still so strong among these men

that the elevation or degradation of one member of a family was

considered to affect deeply the honour of all the other members.

Each noble family had its rank in a recognised scale of dignity,

according to the rank which it held, or had previously held, in the

Tsar's service; and a whole family would have considered itself

dishonoured if one of its members accepted a post lower than that

to which he was entitled.  Whenever a vacant place in the service

was filled up, the subordinates of the successful candidate

examined the official records and the genealogical trees of their

families, in order to discover whether some ancestor of their new

superior had not served under one of their own ancestors.  If the

subordinate found such a case, he complained to the Tsar that it

was not becoming for him to serve under a man who had less family

honour than himself.



Unfounded complaints of this kind often entailed imprisonment or

corporal punishment, but in spite of this the quarrels for

precedence were very frequent.  At the commencement of a campaign

many such disputes were sure to arise, and the Tsar's decision was

not always accepted by the party who considered himself aggrieved.

I have met at least with one example of a great dignitary

voluntarily mutilating his hand in order to escape the necessity of

serving under a man whom he considered his inferior in family

dignity.  Even at the Tsar's table these rivalries sometimes

produced unseemly incidents, for it was almost impossible to

arrange the places so as to satisfy all the guests.  In one

recorded instance a noble who received a place lower than that to

which he considered himself entitled openly declared to the Tsar

that he would rather be condemned to death than submit to such an

indignity.  In another instance of a similar kind the refractory

guest was put on his chair by force, but saved his family honour by

slipping under the table!



The next transformation of the Noblesse was effected by Peter the

Great.  Peter was by nature and position an autocrat, and could

brook no opposition.  Having set before himself a great aim, he

sought everywhere obedient, intelligent, energetic instruments to

carry out his designs.  He himself served the State zealously--as a

common artisan, when he considered it necessary--and he insisted on

all his subjects doing likewise, under pain of merciless

punishment.  To noble birth and long pedigrees he habitually showed

a most democratic, or rather autocratic, indifference.  Intent on

obtaining the service of living men, he paid no attention to the

claims of dead ancestors, and gave to his servants the pay and

honour which their services merited, irrespectively of birth or

social position.  Hence many of his chief coadjutors had no

connection with the old Russian families.  Count Yaguzhinski, who

long held one of the most important posts in the State, was the son

of a poor sacristan; Count Devier was a Portuguese by birth, and

had been a cabin-boy; Baron Shafirof was a Jew; Hannibal, who died

with the rank of Commander in Chief, was a negro who had been

bought in Constantinople; and his Serene Highness Prince Menshikof

had begun life, it was said, as a baker's apprentice!  For the

future, noble birth was to count for nothing.  The service of the

State was thrown open to men of all ranks, and personal merit was

to be the only claim to promotion.



This must have seemed to the Conservatives of the time a most

revolutionary and reprehensible proceeding, but it did not satisfy

the reforming tendencies of the great autocrat.  He went a step

further, and entirely changed the legal status of the Noblesse.

Down to his time the nobles were free to serve or not as they

chose, and those who chose to serve enjoyed land on what we should

call a feudal tenure.  Some served permanently in the military or

civil administration, but by far the greater number lived on their

estates, and entered the active service merely when the militia was

called out in view of war.  This system was completely changed when

Peter created a large standing army and a great centralised

bureaucracy.  By one of those "fell swoops" which periodically

occur in Russian history, he changed the feudal into freehold

tenures, and laid down the principle that all nobles, whatever

their landed possessions might be, should serve the State in the

army, the fleet, or the civil administration, from boyhood to old

age.  In accordance with this principle, any noble who refused to

serve was not only deprived of his estate, as in the old times, but

was declared to be a traitor and might be condemned to capital

punishment.



The nobles were thus transformed into servants of the State, and

the State in the time of Peter was a hard taskmaster.  They

complained bitterly, and with reason, that they had been deprived

of their ancient rights, and were compelled to accept quietly and

uncomplainingly whatever burdens their master chose to place upon

them.  "Though our country," they said, "is in no danger of

invasion, no sooner is peace concluded than plans are laid for a

new war, which has generally no other foundation than the ambition

of the Sovereign, or perhaps merely the ambition of one of his

Ministers.  To please him our peasants are utterly exhausted, and

we ourselves are forced to leave our homes and families, not as

formerly for a single campaign, but for long years.  We are

compelled to contract debts and to entrust our estates to thieving

overseers, who commonly reduce them to such a condition that when

we are allowed to retire from the service, in consequence of old

age or illness, we cannot to the end of our lives retrieve our

prosperity.  In a word, we are so exhausted and ruined by the

keeping up of a standing army, and by the consequences flowing

therefrom, that the most cruel enemy, though he should devastate

the whole Empire, could not cause us one-half of the injury."*





* These complaints have been preserved by Vockerodt, a Prussian

diplomatic agent of the time.





This Spartan regime, which ruthlessly sacrificed private interests

to considerations of State policy, could not long be maintained in

its pristine severity.  It undermined its own foundations by

demanding too much.  Draconian laws threatening confiscation and

capital punishment were of little avail.  Nobles became monks,

inscribed themselves as merchants, or engaged themselves as

domestic servants, in order to escape their obligations.  "Some,"

says a contemporary, "grow old in disobedience and have never once

appeared in active service. . . .  There is, for instance, Theodore

Mokeyef. . . .  In spite of the strict orders sent regarding him no

one could ever catch him.  Some of those sent to take him he

belaboured with blows, and when he could not beat the messengers,

he pretended to be dangerously ill, or feigned idiocy, and, running

into the pond, stood in the water up to his neck; but as soon as

the messengers were out of sight he returned home and roared like a

lion." *





* Pososhkof, "O skudosti i bogatstve."





After Peter's death the system was gradually relaxed, but the

Noblesse could not be satisfied by partial concessions.  Russia had

in the meantime moved, as it were, out of Asia into Europe, and had

become one of the great European Powers.  The upper classes had

been gradually learning something of the fashions, the literature,

the institutions, and the moral conceptions of Western Europe, and

the nobles naturally compared the class to which they belonged with

the aristocracies of Germany and France.  For those who were

influenced by the new foreign ideas the comparison was humiliating.

In the West the Noblesse was a free and privileged class, proud of

its liberty, its rights, and its culture; whereas in Russia the

nobles were servants of the State, without privileges, without

dignity, subject to corporal punishment, and burdened with onerous

duties from which there was no escape.  Thus arose in that section

of the Noblesse which had some acquaintance with Western

civilisation a feeling of discontent, and a desire to gain a social

position similar to that of the nobles in France and Germany.

These aspirations were in part realised by Peter III., who in 1762

abolished the principle of obligatory service.  His consort,

Catherine II., went much farther in the same direction, and

inaugurated a new epoch in the history of the Dvoryanstvo, a period

in which its duties and obligations fell into the background, and

its rights and privileges came to the front.



Catherine had good reason to favour the Noblesse.  As a foreigner

and a usurper, raised to the throne by a Court conspiracy, she

could not awaken in the masses that semi-religious veneration which

the legitimate Tsars have always enjoyed, and consequently she had

to seek support in the upper classes, who were less rigid and

uncompromising in their conceptions of legitimacy.  She confirmed,

therefore, the ukaz which abolished obligatory service of the

nobles, and sought to gain their voluntary service by honours and

rewards.  In her manifestoes she always spoke of them in the most

flattering terms; and tried to convince them that the welfare of

the country depended on their loyalty and devotion.  Though she had

no intention of ceding any of her political power, she formed the

nobles of each province into a corporation, with periodical

assemblies, which were supposed to resemble the French Provincial

Parliaments, and entrusted to each of these corporations a large

part of the local administration.  By these and similar means,

aided by her masculine energy and feminine tact, she made herself

very popular, and completely changed the old conceptions about the

public service.  Formerly service had been looked on as a burden;

now it came to be looked on as a privilege.  Thousands who had

retired to their estates after the publication of the liberation

edict now flocked back and sought appointments, and this tendency

was greatly increased by the brilliant campaigns against the Turks,

which excited the patriotic feelings and gave plentiful

opportunities of promotion.  "Not only landed proprietors," it is

said in a comedy of the time,* "but all men, even shopkeepers and

cobblers, aim at becoming officers, and the man who has passed his

whole life without official rank seems to be not a human being."





* Knyazhnina, "Khvastun."





And Catherine did more than this.  She shared the idea--generally

accepted throughout Europe since the brilliant reign of Louis XIV.--

that a refined, pomp-loving, pleasure-seeking Court Noblesse was

not only the best bulwark of Monarchy, but also a necessary

ornament of every highly civilised State; and as she ardently

desired that her country should have the reputation of being highly

civilised, she strove to create this national ornament.  The love

of French civilisation, which already existed among the upper

classes of her subjects, here came to her aid, and her efforts in

this direction were singularly successful.  The Court of St.

Petersburg became almost as brilliant, as galant, and as frivolous

as the Court of Versailles.  All who aimed at high honours adopted

French fashions, spoke the French language, and affected an

unqualified admiration for French classical literature.  The

Courtiers talked of the point d'honneur, discussed the question as

to what was consistent with the dignity of a noble, sought to

display "that chivalrous spirit which constitutes the pride and

ornament of France"; and looked back with horror on the humiliating

position of their fathers and grandfathers.  "Peter the Great,"

writes one of them, "beat all who surrounded him, without

distinction of family or rank; but now, many of us would certainly

prefer capital punishment to being beaten or flogged, even though

the castigation were applied by the sacred hands of the Lord's

Anointed."



The tone which reigned in the Court circle of St. Petersburg spread

gradually towards the lower ranks of the Dvoryanstvo, and it seemed

to superficial observers that a very fair imitation of the French

Noblesse had been produced; but in reality the copy was very unlike

the model.  The Russian Dvoryanin easily learned the language and

assumed the manners of the French gentilhomme, and succeeded in

changing his physical and intellectual exterior; but all those

deeper and more delicate parts of human nature which are formed by

the accumulated experience of past generations could not be so

easily and rapidly changed.  The French gentilhomme of the

eighteenth century was the direct descendant of the feudal baron,

with the fundamental conceptions of his ancestors deeply embedded

in his nature.  He had not, indeed, the old haughty bearing towards

the Sovereign, and his language was tinged with the fashionable

democratic philosophy of the time; but he possessed a large

intellectual and moral inheritance that had come down to him

directly from the palmy days of feudalism--an inheritance which

even the Great Revolution, which was then preparing, could not

annihilate.  The Russian noble, on the contrary, had received from

his ancestors entirely different traditions.  His father and

grandfather had been conscious of the burdens rather than the

privileges of the class to which they belonged.  They had

considered it no disgrace to receive corporal punishment, and had

been jealous of their honour, not as gentlemen or descendants of

Boyars, but as Brigadiers, College Assessors, or Privy Counsellors.

Their dignity had rested not on the grace of God, but on the will

of the Tsar.  Under these circumstances even the proudest magnate

of Catherine's Court, though he might speak French as fluently as

his mother tongue, could not be very deeply penetrated with the

conception of noble blood, the sacred character of nobility, and

the numerous feudal ideas interwoven with these conceptions.  And

in adopting the outward forms of a foreign culture the nobles did

not, it seems, gain much in true dignity.  "The old pride of the

nobles has fallen!" exclaims one who had more genuine aristocratic

feeling than his fellows.*  "There are no longer any honourable

families; but merely official rank and personal merits.  All seek

official rank, and as all cannot render direct services,

distinctions are sought by every possible means--by flattering the

Monarch and toadying the important personages."  There was

considerable truth in this complaint, but the voice of this

solitary aristocrat was as of one crying in the wilderness.  The

whole of the educated classes--men of old family and parvenus

alike--were, with few exceptions, too much engrossed with place-

hunting to attend to such sentimental wailing.





* Prince Shtcherbatof.





If the Russian Noblesse was thus in its new form but a very

imperfect imitation of its French model, it was still more unlike

the English aristocracy.  Notwithstanding the liberal phrases in

which Catherine habitually indulged, she never had the least

intention of ceding one jot or tittle of her autocratic power, and

the Noblesse as a class never obtained even a shadow of political

influence.  There was no real independence under the new airs of

dignity and hauteur.  In all their acts and openly expressed

opinions the courtiers were guided by the real or supposed wishes

of the Sovereign, and much of their political sagacity was employed

in endeavouring to discover what would please her.  "People never

talk politics in the salons," says a contemporary witness,* not

even to praise the Government.  Fear has produced habits of

prudence, and the Frondeurs of the Capital express their opinions

only in the confidence of intimate friendship or in a relationship

still more confidential.  Those who cannot bear this constraint

retire to Moscow, which cannot be called the centre of opposition,

for there is no such thing as opposition in a country with an

autocratic Government, but which is the capital of the

discontented."  And even there the discontent did not venture to

show itself in the Imperial presence.  "In Moscow," says another

witness, accustomed to the obsequiousness of Versailles, "you might

believe yourself to be among republicans who have just thrown off

the yoke of a tyrant, but as soon as the Court arrives you see

nothing but abject slaves."**





* Segur, long Ambassador of France at the Court of Catherine.



** Sabathier de Cabres, "Catherine II. et la Cour de Russie en

1772."





Though thus excluded from direct influence in political affairs the

Noblesse might still have acquired a certain political significance

in the State, by means of the Provincial Assemblies, and by the

part they took in local administration; but in reality they had

neither the requisite political experience nor the requisite

patience, nor even the desire to pursue such a policy.  The

majority of the proprietors preferred the chances of promotion in

the Imperial service to the tranquil life of a country gentleman;

and those who resided permanently on their estates showed

indifference or positive antipathy to everything connected with the

local administration.  What was officially described as "a

privilege conferred on the nobles for their fidelity, and for the

generous sacrifice of their lives in their country's cause," was

regarded by those who enjoyed it as a new kind of obligatory

service--an obligation to supply judges and officers of rural

police.



If we require any additional proof that the nobles amidst all these

changes were still as dependent as ever on the arbitrary will or

caprice of the Monarch, we have only to glance at their position in

the time of Paul I., the capricious, eccentric, violent son and

successor of Catherine.  The autobiographical memoirs of the time

depict in vivid colours the humiliating position of even the

leading men in the State, in constant fear of exciting by act,

word, or look the wrath of the Sovereign.  As we read these

contemporary records we seem to have before us a picture of ancient

Rome under the most despotic and capricious of her Emperors.

Irritated and embittered before his accession to the throne by the

haughty demeanour of his mother's favourites, Paul lost no

opportunity of showing his contempt for aristocratic pretensions,

and of humiliating those who were supposed to harbour them.

"Apprenez, Monsieur," he said angrily on one occasion to Dumouriez,

who had accidentally referred to one of the "considerable"

personages of the Court, "Apprenez qu'il n'y a pas de considerable

ici, que la personne a laquelle je parle et pendant le temps que je

lui parle!"*





* This saying is often falsely attributed to Nicholas.  The

anecdote is related by Segur.





From the time of Catherine down to the accession of Alexander II.

in 1855 no important change was made in the legal status of the

Noblesse, but a gradual change took place in its social character

by the continual influx of Western ideas and Western culture.  The

exclusively French culture in vogue at the Court of Catherine

assumed a more cosmopolitan colouring, and permeated downwards till

all who had any pretensions to being civilises spoke French with

tolerable fluency and possessed at least a superficial acquaintance

with the literature of Western Europe.  What chiefly distinguished

them in the eye of the law from the other classes was the privilege

of possessing "inhabited estates"--that is to say, estates with

serfs.  By the emancipation of the serfs in 1861 this valuable

privilege was abolished, and about one-half of their landed

property passed into the hands of the peasantry.  By the

administrative reforms which have since taken place, any little

significance which the provincial corporations may have possessed

has been annihilated.  Thus at the present day the nobles are on a

level with the other classes with regard to the right of possessing

landed property and the administration of local affairs.



From this rapid sketch the reader will easily perceive that the

Russian Noblesse has had a peculiar historical development.  In

Germany, France, and England the nobles were early formed into a

homogeneous organised body by the political conditions in which

they were placed.  They had to repel the encroaching tendencies of

the Monarchy on the one hand, and of the bourgeoisie on the other;

and in this long struggle with powerful rivals they instinctively

held together and developed a vigorous esprit de corps.  New

members penetrated into their ranks, but these intruders were so

few in number that they were rapidly assimilated without modifying

the general character or recognised ideals of the class, and

without rudely disturbing the fiction of purity of blood.  The

class thus assumed more and more the nature of a caste with a

peculiar intellectual and moral culture, and stoutly defended its

position and privileges till the ever-increasing power of the

middle classes undermined its influence.  Its fate in different

countries has been different.  In Germany it clung to its feudal

traditions, and still preserves its social exclusiveness.  In

France it was deprived of its political influence by the Monarchy

and crushed by the Revolution.  In England it moderated its

pretensions, allied itself with the middle classes, created under

the disguise of constitutional monarchy an aristocratic republic,

and conceded inch by inch, as necessity demanded, a share of its

political influence to the ally that had helped it to curb the

Royal power.  Thus the German baron, the French gentilhomme, and

the English nobleman represent three distinct, well-marked types;

but amidst all their diversities they have much in common.  They

have all preserved to a greater or less extent a haughty

consciousness of innate inextinguishable superiority over the lower

orders, together with a more or less carefully disguised dislike

for the class which has been, and still is, an aggressive rival.



The Russian Noblesse has not these characteristics.  It was formed

out of more heterogeneous materials, and these materials did not

spontaneously combine to form an organic whole, but were crushed

into a conglomerate mass by the weight of the autocratic power.  It

never became a semi-independent factor in the State.  What rights

and privileges it possesses it received from the Monarchy, and

consequently it has no deep-rooted jealousy or hatred of the

Imperial prerogative.  On the other hand, it has never had to

struggle with the other social classes, and therefore it harbours

towards them no feelings of rivalry or hostility.  If we hear a

Russian noble speak with indignation of autocracy or with acrimony

of the bourgeoisie, we may be sure that these feelings have their

source, not in traditional conceptions, but in principles learned

from the modern schools of social and political philosophy.  The

class to which he belongs has undergone so many transformations

that it has no hoary traditions or deep-rooted prejudices, and

always willingly adapts itself to existing conditions.  Indeed, it

may be said in general that it looks more to the future than the

past, and is ever ready to accept any new ideas that wear the badge

of progress.  Its freedom from traditions and prejudices makes it

singularly susceptible of generous enthusiasm and capable of

vigorous spasmodic action, but calm moral courage and tenacity of

purpose are not among its prominent attributes.  In a word, we find

in it neither the peculiar virtues nor the peculiar vices which are

engendered and fostered by an atmosphere of political liberty.



However we may explain the fact, there is no doubt that the Russian

Noblesse has little or nothing of what we call aristocratic

feeling--little or nothing of that haughty, domineering, exclusive

spirit which we are accustomed to associate with the word

aristocracy.  We find plenty of Russians who are proud of their

wealth, of their culture, or of their official position, but we

rarely find a Russian who is proud of his birth or imagines that

the fact of his having a long pedigree gives him any right to

political privileges or social consideration.  Hence there is a

certain amount of truth in the oft-repeated saying that there is in

reality no aristocracy in Russia.



Certainly the Noblesse as a whole cannot be called an aristocracy.

If the term is to be used at all, it must be applied to a group of

families which cluster around the Court and form the highest ranks

of the Noblesse.  This social aristocracy contains many old

families, but its real basis is official rank and general culture

rather than pedigree or blood.  The feudal conceptions of noble

birth, good family, and the like have been adopted by some of its

members, but do not form one of its conspicuous features.  Though

habitually practising a certain exclusiveness, it has none of those

characteristics of a caste which we find in the German Adel, and is

utterly unable to understand such institutions as Tafelfähigkeit,

by which a man who has not a pedigree of a certain length is

considered unworthy to sit down at a royal table.  It takes rather

the English aristocracy as its model, and harbours the secret hope

of one day obtaining a social and political position similar to

that of the nobility and gentry of England.  Though it has no

peculiar legal privileges, its actual position in the

Administration and at Court gives its members great facilities for

advancement in the public service.  On the other hand, its semi-

bureaucratic character, together with the law and custom of

dividing landed property among the children at the death of their

parents, deprives it of stability.  New men force their way into it

by official distinction, whilst many of the old families are

compelled by poverty to retire from its ranks.  The son of a small

proprietor, or even of a parish priest, may rise to the highest

offices of State, whilst the descendants of the half-mythical Rurik

may descend to the position of peasants.  It is said that not very

long ago a certain Prince Krapotkin gained his living as a cabman

in St. Petersburg!



It is evident, then, that this social aristocracy must not be

confounded with the titled families.  Titles do not possess the

same value in Russia as in Western Europe.  They are very common--

because the titled families are numerous, and all the children bear

the titles of the parents even while the parents are still alive--

and they are by no means always associated with official rank,

wealth, social position, or distinction of any kind.  There are

hundreds of princes and princesses who have not the right to appear

at Court, and who would not be admitted into what is called in St.

Petersburg la societe, or indeed into refined society in any

country.



The only genuine Russian title is Knyaz, commonly translated

"Prince."  It is borne by the descendants of Rurik, of the

Lithuanian Prince Ghedimin, and of the Tartar Khans and Murzi

officially recognised by the Tsars.  Besides these, there are

fourteen families who have adopted it by Imperial command during

the last two centuries.  The titles of count and baron are modern

importations, beginning with the time of Peter the Great.  From

Peter and his successors about seventy families have received the

title of count and ten that of baron.  The latter are all, with two

exceptions, of foreign extraction, and are mostly descended from

Court bankers.*





* Besides these, there are of course the German counts and barons

of the Baltic Provinces, who are Russian subjects.





There is a very common idea that Russian nobles are as a rule

enormously rich.  This is a mistake.  The majority of them are

poor.  At the time of the Emancipation, in 1861, there were 100,247

landed proprietors, and of these, more than 41,000 were possessors

of less than twenty-one male serfs--that is to say, were in a

condition of poverty.  A proprietor who was owner of 500 serfs was

not considered as by any means very rich, and yet there were only

3,803 proprietors belonging in that category.  There were a few,

indeed, whose possessions were enormous.  Count Sheremetief, for

instance, possessed more than 150,000 male serfs, or in other words

more than 300,000 souls; and thirty years ago Count Orloff-Davydof

owned considerably more than half a million of acres.  The Demidof

family derive colossal revenues from their mines, and the

Strogonofs have estates which, if put together, would be sufficient

in extent to form a good-sized independent State in Western Europe.

The very rich families, however, are not numerous.  The lavish

expenditure in which Russian nobles often indulge indicates too

frequently not large fortune, but simply foolish ostentation and

reckless improvidence.



Perhaps, after having spoken so much about the past history of the

Noblesse, I ought to endeavour to cast its horoscope, or at least

to say something of its probable future.  Though predictions are

always hazardous, it is sometimes possible, by tracing the great

lines of history in the past, to follow them for a little distance

into the future.  If it be allowable to apply this method of

prediction in the present matter, I should say that the Russian

Dvoryanstvo will assimilate with the other classes, rather than

form itself into an exclusive corporation.  Hereditary

aristocracies may be preserved--or at least their decomposition may

be retarded--where they happen to exist, but it seems that they can

no longer be created.  In Western Europe there is a large amount of

aristocratic sentiment, both in the nobles and in the people; but

it exists in spite of, rather than in consequence of, actual social

conditions.  It is not a product of modern society, but an heirloom

that has come down to us from feudal times, when power, wealth, and

culture were in the hands of a privileged few.  If there ever was

in Russia a period corresponding to the feudal times in Western

Europe, it has long since been forgotten.  There is very little

aristocratic sentiment either in the people or in the nobles, and

it is difficult to imagine any source from which it could now be

derived.  More than this, the nobles do not desire to make such an

acquisition.  In so far as they have any political aspirations,

they aim at securing the political liberty of the people as a

whole, and not at acquiring exclusive rights and privileges for

their own class.



In that section which I have called a social aristocracy there are

a few individuals who desire to gain exclusive political influence

for the class to which they belong, but there is very little chance

of their succeeding.  If their desires were ever by chance

realised, we should probably have a repetition of the scene which

occurred in 1730.  When in that year some of the great families

raised the Duchess of Courland to the throne on condition of her

ceding part of her power to a supreme council, the lower ranks of

the Noblesse compelled her to tear up the constitution which she

had signed!  Those who dislike the autocratic power dislike the

idea of an aristocratic oligarchy infinitely more.  Nobles and

people alike seem to hold instinctively the creed of the French

philosopher, who thought it better to be governed by a lion of good

family than by a hundred rats of his own species.



Of the present condition of the Noblesse I shall again have

occasion to speak when I come to consider the consequences of the

Emancipation.

