





CHAPTER XVIII



THE DISSENTERS





Dissenters not to be Confounded with Heretics--Extreme Importance

Attached to Ritual Observances--The Raskol, or Great Schism in the

Seventeenth Century--Antichrist Appears!--Policy of Peter the Great

and Catherine II.--Present Ingenious Method of Securing Religious

Toleration--Internal Development of the Raskol--Schism among the

Schismatics--The Old Ritualists--The Priestless People--Cooling of

the Fanatical Enthusiasm and Formation of New Sects--Recent Policy

of the Government towards the Sectarians--Numerical Force and

Political Significance of Sectarianism.





We must be careful not to confound those heretical sects,

Protestant and fantastical, of which I have spoken in the preceding

chapter, with the more numerous Dissenters or Schismatics, the

descendants of those who seceded from the Russian Church--or more

correctly from whom the Russian Church seceded--in the seventeenth

century.  So far from regarding themselves as heretics, these

latter consider themselves more orthodox than the official Orthodox

Church.  They are conservatives, too, in the social as well as the

religious sense of the term.  Among them are to be found the last

remnants of old Russian life, untinged by foreign influences.



The Russian Church, as I have already had occasion to remark, has

always paid inordinate attention to ceremonial observances and

somewhat neglected the doctrinal and moral elements of the faith

which it professes.  This peculiarity greatly facilitated the

spread of its influence among a people accustomed to pagan rites

and magical incantations, but it had the pernicious effect of

confirming in the new converts their superstitious belief in the

virtue of mere ceremonies.  Thus the Russians became zealous

Christians in all matters of external observance, without knowing

much about the spiritual meaning of the rites which they practised.

They looked upon the rites and sacraments as mysterious charms

which preserved them from evil influences in the present life and

secured them eternal felicity in the life to come, and they

believed that these charms would inevitably lose their efficacy if

modified in the slightest degree.  Extreme importance was therefore

attached to the ritual minutiae, and the slightest modification of

these minutiae assumed the importance of an historical event.  In

the year 1476, for instance, the Novgorodian Chronicler gravely

relates:



"This winter some philosophers (!) began to sing, 'O Lord, have

mercy,' and others merely, 'Lord, have mercy.'"  And this attaching

of enormous importance to trifles was not confined to the ignorant

multitude.  An Archbishop of Novgorod declared solemnly that those

who repeat the word "Alleluia" only twice at certain points in the

liturgy "sing to their own damnation," and a celebrated

Ecclesiastical Council, held in 1551, put such matters as the

position of the fingers when making the sign of the cross on the

same level as heresies--formally anathematising those who acted in

such trifles contrary to its decisions.



This conservative spirit in religious concerns had a considerable

influence on social life.  As there was no clear line of

demarcation between religious observances and simple traditional

customs, the most ordinary act might receive a religious

significance, and the slightest departure from a traditional custom

might be looked upon as a deadly sin.  A Russian of the olden time

would have resisted the attempt to deprive him of his beard as

strenuously as a Calvinist of the present day would resist the

attempt to make him abjure the doctrine of Predestination--and both

for the same reason.  As the doctrine of Predestination is for the

Calvinist, so the wearing of a beard was for the old Russian--an

essential of salvation.  "Where," asked one of the Patriarchs of

Moscow, "will those who shave their chins stand at the Last Day?--

among the righteous adorned with beards, or among the beardless

heretics?"  The question required no answer.



In the seventeenth century this superstitious, conservative spirit

reached its climax.  The civil wars and foreign invasions,

accompanied by pillage, famine, and plagues with which that century

opened, produced a wide-spread conviction that the end of all

things was at hand.  The mysterious number of the Beast was found

to indicate the year 1666, and timid souls began to discover signs

of that falling away from the Faith which is spoken of in the

Apocalypse.  The majority of the people did not perhaps share this

notion, but they believed that the sufferings with which they had

been visited were a Divine punishment for having forsaken the

ancient customs.  And it could not be denied that considerable

changes had taken place.  Orthodox Russia was now tainted with the

presence of heretics.  Foreigners who shaved their chins and smoked

the accursed weed had been allowed to settle in Moscow, and the

Tsars not only held converse with them, but had even adopted some

of their "pagan" practises.  Besides this, the Government had

introduced innovations and reforms, many of which were displeasing

to the people.  In short, the country was polluted with "heresy"--a

subtle, evil influence lurking in everything foreign, and very

dangerous to the spiritual and temporal welfare of the Faithful--

something of the nature of an epidemic, but infinitely more

dangerous; for disease kills merely the body, whereas "heresy"

kills the soul, and causes both soul and body to be cast into hell-

fire.



Had the Government introduced the innovations slowly and

cautiously, respecting as far as possible all outward forms, it

might have effected much without producing a religious panic; but,

instead of acting circumspectly as the occasion demanded, it ran

full-tilt against the ancient prejudices and superstitious fears,

and drove the people into open resistance.  When the art of

printing was introduced, it became necessary to choose the best

texts of the Liturgy, Psalter, and other religious books, and on

examination it was found that, through the ignorance and

carelessness of copyists, numerous errors had crept into the

manuscripts in use.  This discovery led to further investigation,

which showed that certain irregularities had likewise crept into

the ceremonial.  The chief of the clerical errors lay in the

orthography of the word "Jesus," and the chief irregularity in the

ceremonial regarded the position of the fingers when making the

sign of the cross.



To correct these errors the celebrated Nikon, who was Patriarch in

the time of Tsar Alexis, father of Peter the Great, ordered all the

old liturgical books and the old Icons to be called in, and new

ones to be distributed; but the clergy and the people resisted.

Believing these "Nikonian novelties" to be heretical, they clung to

their old Icons, their old missals and their old religious customs

as the sole anchors of safety which could save the Faithful from

drifting to perdition.  In vain the Patriarch assured the people

that the change was a return to the ancient forms still preserved

in Greece and Constantinople.  "The Greek Church," it was replied,

"is no longer free from heresy.  Orthodoxy has become many-coloured

from the violence of the Turkish Mahomet; and the Greeks, under the

sons of Hagar, have fallen away from the ancient traditions."



An anathema, formally pronounced by an Ecclesiastical Council

against these Nonconformists, had no more effect than the

admonitions of the Patriarch.  They persevered in their obstinacy,

and refused to believe that the blessed saints and holy martyrs who

had used the ancient forms had not prayed and crossed themselves

aright.  "Not those holy men of old, but the present Patriarch and

his counsellors must be heretics."  "Woe to us!  Woe to us!" cried

the monks of Solovetsk when they received the new Liturgies.  "What

have you done with the Son of God?  Give him back to us!  You have

changed Isus [the old Russian form of Jesus] into Iisus!  It is

fearful not only to commit such a sin, but even to think of it!"

And the sturdy monks shut their gates, and defied Patriarch,

Council, and Tsar for seven long years, till the monastery was

taken by an armed force.



The decree of excommunication pronounced by the Ecclesiastical

Council placed the Nonconformists beyond the pale of the Church,

and the civil power undertook the task of persecuting them.

Persecution had of course merely the effect of confirming the

victims in their belief that the Church and the Tsar had become

heretical.  Thousands fled across the frontier and settled in the

neighbouring countries--Poland, Russia, Sweden, Austria, Turkey,

the Caucasus, and Siberia.  Others concealed themselves in the

northern forests and the densely wooded region near the Polish

frontier, where they lived by agriculture or fishing, and prayed,

crossed themselves and buried their dead according to the customs

of their forefathers.  The northern forests were their favourite

place of refuge.  Hither flocked many of those who wished to keep

themselves pure and undefiled.  Here the more learned men among the

Nonconformists--well acquainted with Holy Writ, with fragmentary

translations from the Greek Fathers, and with the more important

decisions of the early Ecumenical Councils--wrote polemical and

edifying works for the confounding of heretics and the confirming

of true believers.  Hence were sent out in all directions zealous

missionaries, in the guise of traders, peddlers, and labourers, to

sow what they called the living seed, and what the official Church

termed "Satan's tares."  When the Government agents discovered

these retreats, the inmates generally fled from the "ravenous

wolves"; but on more than one occasion a large number of fanatical

men and women, shutting themselves up, set fire to their houses,

and voluntarily perished in the flames.  In Paleostrofski

Monastery, for instance, in the year 1687, no less than 2,700

fanatics gained the crown of martyrdom in this way; and many

similar instances are on record.*  As in all periods of religious

panic, the Apocalypse was carefully studied, and the Millennial

ideas rapidly spread.  The signs of the time were plain: Satan was

being let loose for a little season.  Men anxiously looked for the

reappearance of Antichrist--and Antichrist appeared!





* A list of well-authenticated cases is given by Nilski, "Semeinaya

zhizn v russkom Raskole," St. Petersburg, 1869; part I., pp. 55-57.

The number of these self-immolators certainly amounted to many

thousands.





The man in whom the people recognised the incarnate spirit of evil

was no other than Peter the Great.



From the Nonconformist point of view, Peter had very strong claims

to be considered Antichrist.  He had none of the staid, pious

demeanour of the old Tsars, and showed no respect for many things

which were venerated by the people.  He ate, drank, and habitually

associated with heretics, spoke their language, wore their costume,

chose from among them his most intimate friends, and favoured them

more than his own people.  Imagine the horror and commotion which

would be produced among pious Catholics if the Pope should some day

appear in the costume of the Grand Turk, and should choose Pashas

as his chief counsellors!  The horror which Peter's conduct

produced among a large section of his subjects was not less great.

They could not explain it otherwise than by supposing him to be the

Devil in disguise, and they saw in all his important measures

convincing proofs of his Satanic origin.  The newly invented

census, or "revision," was a profane "numbering of the people," and

an attempt to enrol in the service of Beëlzebub those whose names

were written in the Lamb's Book of Life.  The new title of

Imperator was explained to mean something very diabolical.  The

passport bearing the Imperial arms was the seal of Antichrist.  The

order to shave the beard was an attempt to disfigure "the image of

God," after which man had been created, and by which Christ would

recognise His own at the Last Day.  The change in the calendar, by

which New Year's Day was transferred from September to January, was

the destruction of "the years of our Lord," and the introduction of

the years of Satan in their place.  Of the ingenious arguments by

which these theses were supported, I may quote one by way of

illustration.  The world, it was explained, could not have been

created in January as the new calendar seemed to indicate, because

apples are not ripe at that season, and consequently Eve could not

have been tempted in the way described!*





* I found this ingenious argument in one of the polemical treatises

of the Old Believers.





These ideas regarding Peter and his reforms were strongly confirmed

by the vigorous persecutions which took place during the earlier

years of his reign.  The Nonconformists were constantly convicted

of political disaffection--especially of "insulting the Imperial

Majesty"--and were accordingly flogged, tortured, and beheaded

without mercy.  But when Peter had succeeded in putting down all

armed opposition, and found that the movement was no longer

dangerous for the throne, he adopted a policy more in accordance

with his personal character.  Whether he had himself any religious

belief whatever may be doubted; certainly he had not a spark of

religious fanaticism in his nature.  Exclusively occupied with

secular concerns, he took no interest in subtle questions of

religious ceremonial, and was profoundly indifferent as to how his

subjects prayed and crossed themselves, provided they obeyed his

orders in worldly matters and paid their taxes regularly.  As soon,

therefore, as political considerations admitted of clemency, he

stopped the persecutions, and at last, in 1714, issued ukazes to

the effect that all Dissenters might live unmolested, provided they

inscribed themselves in the official registers and paid a double

poll-tax.  Somewhat later they were allowed to practise freely all

their old rites and customs, on condition of paying certain fines.



With the accession of Catherine II., "the friend of philosophers,"

the Raskol,* as the schism had come to be called, entered on a new

phase.  Penetrated with the ideas of religious toleration then in

fashion in Western Europe, Catherine abolished the disabilities to

which the Raskolniks were subjected, and invited those of them who

had fled across the frontier to return to their homes.  Thousands

accepted the invitation, and many who had hitherto sought to

conceal themselves from the eyes of the authorities became rich and

respected merchants.  The peculiar semi-monastic religious

communities, which had up till that time existed only in the

forests of the northern and western provinces, began to appear in

Moscow, and were officially recognised by the Administration.  At

first they took the form of hospitals for the sick, or asylums for

the aged and infirm, but soon they became regular monasteries, the

superiors of which exercised an undefined spiritual authority not

only over the inmates, but also over the members of the sect

throughout the length and breadth of the Empire.





* The term is derived from two Russian words--ras, asunder; and

kolot, to split.  Those who belong to the Raskol are called

Raskolniki.  They call themselves Staro-obriadtsi (Old Ritualists)

or Staroveri (Old Believers).





From that time down to the present the Government has followed a

wavering policy, oscillating between complete tolerance and active

persecution.  It must, however, be said that the persecution has

never been of a very searching kind.  In persecution, as in all

other manifestations, the Russian Church directs its attention

chiefly to external forms.  It does not seek to ferret out heresy

in a man's opinions, but complacently accepts as Orthodox all who

annually appear at confession and communion, and who refrain from

acts of open hostility.  Those who can make these concessions to

convenience are practically free from molestation, and those who

cannot so trifle with their conscience have an equally convenient

method of escaping persecution.  The parish clergy, with their

customary indifference to things spiritual and their traditional

habit of regarding their functions from the financial point of

view, are hostile to sectarianism chiefly because it diminishes

their revenues by diminishing the number of parishioners requiring

their ministrations.  This cause of hostility can easily be removed

by a certain pecuniary sacrifice on the part of the sectarians, and

accordingly there generally exists between them and their parish

priest a tacit contract, by which both parties are perfectly

satisfied.  The priest receives his income as if all his

parishioners belonged to the State Church, and the parishioners are

left in peace to believe and practise what they please.  By this

rude, convenient method a very large amount of toleration is

effectually secured.  Whether the practise has a beneficial moral

influence on the parish clergy is, of course, an entirely different

question.



When the priest has been satisfied, there still remains the police,

which likewise levies an irregular tax on heterodoxy; but the

negotiations are generally not difficult, for it is in the interest

of both parties that they should come to terms and live in good-

fellowship.  Thus practically the Raskolniki live in the same

condition as in the time of Peter: they pay a tax and are not

molested--only the money paid does not now find its way into the

Imperial Exchequer.



These external changes in the history of the Raskol have exercised

a powerful influence on its internal development.



When formally anathematised and excluded from the dominant Church

the Nonconformists had neither a definite organisation nor a

positive creed.  The only tie that bound them together was

hostility to the "Nikonian novelties," and all they desired was to

preserve intact the beliefs and customs of their forefathers.  At

first they never thought of creating any permanent organisation.

The more moderate believed that the Tsar would soon re-establish

Orthodoxy, and the more fanatical imagined that the end of all

things was at hand.*  In either case they had only to suffer for a

little season, keeping themselves free from the taint of heresy and

from all contact with the kingdom of Antichrist.





* Some had coffins made, and lay down in them at night, in the

expectation that the Second Advent might take place before the

morning.





But years passed, and neither of these expectations was fulfilled.

The fanatics awaited in vain the sound of the last trump and the

appearance of Christ, coming with His angels to judge the world.

The sun continued to rise, and the seasons followed each other in

their accustomed course, but the end was not yet.  Nor did the

civil power return to the old faith.  Nikon fell a victim to Court

intrigues and his own overweening pride, and was formally deposed.

Tsar Alexis in the fulness of time was gathered unto his fathers.

But there was no sign of a re-establishment of the old Orthodoxy.

Gradually the leading Raskolniki perceived that they must make

preparations, not for the Day of Judgment, but for a terrestrial

future--that they must create some permanent form of ecclesiastical

organisation.  In this work they encountered at the very outset not

only practical, but also theoretical difficulties.



So long as they confined themselves simply to resisting the

official innovations, they seemed to be unanimous; but when they

were forced to abandon this negative policy and to determine

theoretically their new position, radical differences of opinion

became apparent.  All were convinced that the official Russian

Church had become heretical, and that it had now Antichrist instead

of Christ as its head; but it was not easy to determine what should

be done by those who refused to bow the knee to the Son of

Destruction.  According to Protestant conceptions there was a very

simple solution of the difficulty: the Nonconformists had simply to

create a new Church for themselves, and worship God in the way that

seemed good to them.  But to the Russians of that time such notions

were still more repulsive than the innovations of Nikon.  These men

were Orthodox to the backbone--"plus royalistes que le roi"--and

according to Orthodox conceptions the founding of a new Church is

an absurdity.  They believed that if the chain of historic

continuity were once broken, the Church must necessarily cease to

exist, in the same way as an ancient family becomes extinct when

its sole representative dies without issue.  If, therefore, the

Church had already ceased to exist, there was no longer any means

of communication between Christ and His people, the sacraments were

no longer efficacious, and mankind was forever deprived of the

ordinary means of grace.



Now, on this important point there was a difference of opinion

among the Dissenters.  Some of them believed that, though the

ecclesiastical authorities had become heretical, the Church still

existed in the communion of those who had refused to accept the

innovations.  Others declared boldly that the Orthodox Church had

ceased to exist, that the ancient means of grace had been

withdrawn, and that those who had remained faithful must

thenceforth seek salvation, not in the sacraments, but in prayer

and such other religious exercises as did not require the co-

operation of duly consecrated priests.  Thus took place a schism

among the Schismatics.  The one party retained all the sacraments

and ceremonial observances in the older form; the other refrained

from the sacraments and from many of the ordinary rites, on the

ground that there was no longer a real priesthood, and that

consequently the sacraments could not be efficacious.  The former

party are termed Staro-obriadsti, or Old Ritualists; the latter are

called Bezpopoftsi--that is to say, people "without priests" (bez

popov).



The succeeding history of these two sections of the Nonconformists

has been widely different.  The Old Ritualists, being simply

ecclesiastical Conservatives desirous of resisting all innovations,

have remained a compact body little troubled by differences of

opinion.  The Priestless People, on the contrary, ever seeking to

discover some new effectual means of salvation, have fallen into an

endless number of independent sects.



The Old Ritualists had still, however, one important theoretical

difficulty.  At first they had amongst themselves plenty of

consecrated priests for the celebration of the ordinances, but they

had no means of renewing the supply.  They had no bishops, and

according to Orthodox belief the lower degrees of the clergy cannot

be created without episcopal consecration.  At the time of the

schism one bishop had thrown in his lot with the Schismatics, but

he had died shortly afterwards without leaving a successor, and

thereafter no bishop had joined their ranks.  As time wore on, the

necessity of episcopal consecration came to be more and more felt,

and it is not a little interesting to observe how these rigorists,

who held to the letter of the law and declared themselves ready to

die for a jot or a tittle, modified their theory in accordance with

the changing exigencies of their position.  When the priests who

had kept themselves "pure and undefiled"--free from all contact

with Antichrist--became scarce, it was discovered that certain

priests of the dominant Church might be accepted if they formally

abjured the Nikonian novelties.  At first, however, only those who

had been consecrated previous to the supposed apostasy of the

Church were accepted, for the very good reason that consecration by

bishops who had become heretical could not be efficacious.  When

these could no longer be obtained it was discovered that those who

had been baptised previous to the apostasy might be accepted; and

when even these could no longer be found, a still further

concession was made to necessity, and all consecrated priests were

received on condition of their solemnly abjuring their errors.  Of

such priests there was always an abundant supply.  If a regular

priest could not find a parish, or if he was deposed by the

authorities for some crime or misdemeanour, he had merely to pass

over to the Old Ritualists, and was sure to find among them a

hearty welcome and a tolerable salary.



By these concessions the indefinite prolongation of Old Ritualism

was secured, but many of the Old Ritualists could not but feel that

their position was, to say the least, extremely anomalous.  They

had no bishops of their own, and their priests were all consecrated

by bishops whom they believed to be heretical!  For many years they

hoped to escape from this dilemma by discovering "Orthodox"--that

is to say, Old Ritualist--bishops somewhere in the East; but when

the East had been searched in vain, and all their efforts to obtain

native bishops proved fruitless, they conceived the design of

creating a bishopric somewhere beyond the frontier, among the Old

Ritualists who had in times of persecution fled to Prussia,

Austria, and Turkey.  There were, however, immense difficulties in

the way.  In the first place it was necessary to obtain the formal

permission of some foreign Government; and in the second place an

Orthodox bishop must be found, willing to consecrate an Old

Ritualist or to become an Old Ritualist himself.  Again and again

the attempt was made, and failed; but at last, after years of

effort and intrigue, the design was realised.  In 1844 the Austrian

Government gave permission to found a bishopric at Belaya Krinitsa,

in Galicia, a few miles from the Russian frontier; and two years

later the deposed Metropolitan of Bosnia consented, after much

hesitation, to pass over to the Old Ritualist confession and accept

the diocese.*  From that time the Old Ritualists have had their own

bishops, and have not been obliged to accept the runaway priests of

the official Church.





* An interesting account of these negotiations, and a most curious

picture of the Orthodox ecciestiastical world in Constantinople, is

given by Subbotiny, "Istoria Belokrinitskoi Ierarkhii," Moscow,

1874.





The Old Ritualists were naturally much grieved by the schism, and

were often sorely tried by persecution, but they have always

enjoyed a certain spiritual tranquillity, proceeding from the

conviction that they have preserved for themselves the means of

salvation.  The position of the more extreme section of the

Schismatics was much more tragical.  They believed that the

sacraments had irretrievably lost their efficacy, that the ordinary

means of salvation were forever withdrawn, that the powers of

darkness had been let loose for a little season, that the

authorities were the agents of Satan, and that the personage who

filled the place of the old God-fearing Tsars was no other than

Antichrist.  Under the influence of these horrible ideas they fled

to the woods and the caves to escape from the rage of the Beast,

and to await the second coming of Our Lord.



This state of things could not continue permanently.  Extreme

religious fanaticism, like all other abnormal states, cannot long

exist in a mass of human beings without some constant exciting

cause.  The vulgar necessities of everyday life, especially among

people who have to live by the labour of their hands, have a

wonderfully sobering influence on the excited brain, and must

always, sooner or later, prove fatal to inordinate excitement.  A

few peculiarly constituted individuals may show themselves capable

of a lifelong enthusiasm, but the multitude is ever spasmodic in

its fervour, and begins to slide back to its former apathy as soon

as the exciting cause ceases to act.



All this we find exemplified in the history of the Priestless

People.  When it was found that the world did not come to an end,

and that the rigorous system of persecution was relaxed, the less

excitable natures returned to their homes, and resumed their old

mode of life; and when Peter the Great made his politic

concessions, many who had declared him to be Antichrist came to

suspect that he was really not so black as he was painted.  This

idea struck deep root in a religious community near Lake Onega

(Vuigovski Skit) which had received special privileges on condition

of supplying labourers for the neighbouring mines; and here was

developed a new theory which opened up a way of reconciliation with

the Government.  By a more attentive study of Holy Writ and ancient

books it was discovered that the reign of Antichrist would consist

of two periods.  In the former, the Son of Destruction would reign

merely in the spiritual sense, and the Faithful would not be much

molested; in the latter, he would reign visibly in the flesh, and

true believers would be subjected to the most frightful

persecution.  The second period, it was held, had evidently not yet

arrived, for the Faithful now enjoyed "a time of freedom, and not

of compulsion or oppression."  Whether this theory is strictly in

accordance with Apocalyptic prophecy and patristic theology may be

doubted, but it fully satisfied those who had already arrived at

the conclusion by a different road, and who sought merely a means

of justifying their position.  Certain it is that very many

accepted it, and determined to render unto Caesar the things that

were Caesar's, or, in secular language, to pray for the Tsar and to

pay their taxes.



This ingenious compromise was not accepted by all the Priestless

People.  On the contrary, many of them regarded it as a woeful

backsliding--a new device of the Evil One; and among these

irreconcilables was a certain peasant called Theodosi, a man of

little education, but of remarkable intellectual power and unusual

strength of character.  He raised anew the old fanaticism by his

preaching and writings--widely circulated in manuscript--and

succeeded in founding a new sect in the forest region near the

Polish frontier.



The Priestless Nonconformists thus fell into two sections; the one,

called Pomortsi,* accepted at least a partial reconciliation with

the civil power; the other, called Theodosians, after their

founder, held to the old opinions, and refused to regard the Tsar

otherwise than as Antichrist.





*The word Pomortsi means "those who live near the seashore."  It is

commonly applied to the inhabitants of the Northern provinces--that

is, those who live near the shore of the White Sea, the only

maritime frontier that Russia possessed previous to the conquests

of Peter the Great.





These latter were at first very wild in their fanaticism, but ere

long they gave way to the influences which had softened the

fanaticism of the Pomortsi.  Under the liberal, conciliatory rule

of Catherine they lived in contentment, and many of them enriched

themselves by trade.  Their fanatical zeal and exclusiveness

evaporated under the influence of material well-being and constant

contact with the outer world, especially after they were allowed to

build a monastery in Moscow.  The Superior of this monastery, a man

of much shrewdness and enormous wealth, succeeded in gaining the

favour not only of the lower officials, who could be easily bought,

but even of high-placed dignitaries, and for many years he

exercised a very real, if undefined, authority over all sections of

the Priestless People.  "His fame," it is said, "sounded throughout

Moscow, and the echoes were heard in Petropol (St. Petersburg),

Riga, Astrakhan, Nizhni-Novgorod, and other lands of piety"; and

when deputies came to consult him, they prostrated themselves in

his presence, as before the great ones of the earth.  Living thus

not only in peace and plenty, but even in honour and luxury, "the

proud Patriarch of the Theodosian Church" could not consistently

fulminate against "the ravenous wolves" with whom he was on

friendly terms, or excite the fanaticism of his followers by highly

coloured descriptions of "the awful sufferings and persecution of

God's people in these latter days," as the founder of the sect had

been wont to do.  Though he could not openly abandon any

fundamental doctrines, he allowed the ideas about the reign of

Antichrist to fall into the background, and taught by example, if

not by precept, that the Faithful might, by prudent concessions,

live very comfortably in this present evil world.  This seed fell

upon soil already prepared for its reception.  The Faithful

gradually forgot their old savage fanaticism, and they have since

contrived, while holding many of their old ideas in theory, to

accommodate themselves in practice to the existing order of things.



The gradual softening and toning down of the original fanaticism in

these two sects are strikingly exemplified in their ideas of

marriage.  According to Orthodox doctrine, marriage is a sacrament

which can only be performed by a consecrated priest, and

consequently for the Priestless People the celebration of marriage

was an impossibility.  In the first ages of sectarianism a state of

celibacy was quite in accordance with their surroundings.  Living

in constant fear of their persecutors, and wandering from one place

of refuge to another, the sufferers for the Faith had little time

or inclination to think of family ties, and readily listened to the

monks, who exhorted them to mortify the lusts of the flesh.



The result, however, proved that celibacy in the creed by no means

ensures chastity in practice.  Not only in the villages of the

Dissenters, but even in those religious communities which professed

a more ascetic mode of life, a numerous class of "orphans" began to

appear, who knew not who their parents were; and this ignorance of

blood-relationship naturally led to incestuous connections.

Besides this, the doctrine of celibacy had grave practical

inconveniences, for the peasant requires a housewife to attend to

domestic concerns and to help him in his agricultural occupations.

Thus the necessity of re-establishing family life came to be felt,

and the feeling soon found expression in a doctrinal form both

among the Pomortsi and among the Theodsians.  Learned dissertations

were written and disseminated in manuscript copies, violent

discussions took place, and at last a great Council was held in

Moscow to discuss the question.*  The point at issue was never

unanimously decided, but many accepted the ingenious arguments in

favour of matrimony, and contracted marriages which were, of

course, null and void in the eye of the law and of the Church, but

valid in all other respects.





* I cannot here enter into the details of this remarkable

controversy, but I may say that in studying it I have been

frequently astonished by the dialectical power and logical subtlety

displayed by the disputants, some of them simple peasants.





This new backsliding of the unstable multitude produced a new

outburst of fanaticism among the stubborn few.  Some of those who

had hitherto sought to conceal the origin of the "orphan" class

above referred to now boldly asserted that the existence of this

class was a religious necessity, because in order to be saved men

must repent, and in order to repent men must sin!  At the same time

the old ideas about Antichrist were revived and preached with

fervour by a peasant called Philip, who founded a new sect called

the Philipists.  This sect still exists.  They hold fast to the old

belief that the Tsar is Antichrist, and that the civil and

ecclesiastical authorities are the servants of Satan--an idea that

was kept alive by the corruption and extortion for which the

Administration was notorious.  They do not venture on open

resistance to the authorities, but the bolder members take little

pains to conceal their opinions and sentiments, and may be easily

recognised by their severe aspect, their Puritanical manner, and

their Pharisaical horror of everything which they suppose heretical

and unclean.  Some of them, it is said, carry this fastidiousness

to such an extent that they throw away the handle of a door if it

has been touched by a heretic!



It may seem that we have here reached the extreme limits of

fanaticism, but in reality there were men whom even the Pharisaical

Puritanism of the Philipists did not satisfy.  These new zealots,

who appeared in the time of Catherine II., but first became known

to the official world in the reign of Nicholas I., rebuked the

lukewarmness of their brethren, and founded a new sect in order to

preserve intact the asceticism practised immediately after the

schism.  This sect still exists.  They call themselves "Christ's

people" (Christoviye Lyudi), but are better known under the popular

name of "Wanderers" (Stranniki), or "Fugitives" (Beguny).  Of all

the sects they are the most hostile to the existing political and

social organisation.  Not content with condemning the military

conscription, the payment of taxes, the acceptance of passports,

and everything connected with the civil and ecclesiastical

authorities, they consider it sinful to live peaceably among an

orthodox--that is, according to their belief, a heretical--

population, and to have dealings with any who do not share their

extreme views.  Holding the Antichrist doctrine in the extreme

form, they declare that Tsars are the vessels of Satan, that the

Established Church is the dwelling-place of the Father of Lies, and

that all who submit to the authorities are children of the Devil.

According to this creed, those who wish to escape from the wrath to

come must have neither houses nor fixed places of abode, must sever

all ties that bind them to the world, and must wander about

continually from place to place.  True Christians are but strangers

and pilgrims in the present life, and whoso binds himself to the

world will perish with the world.



Such is the theory of these Wanderers, but among them, as among the

less fanatical sects, practical necessities have produced

concessions and compromises.  As it is impossible to lead a nomadic

life in Russian forests, the Wanderers have been compelled to admit

into their ranks what may be called lay-brethren--men who nominally

belong to the sect, but who live like ordinary mortals and have

some rational way of gaining a livelihood.  These latter live in

the villages or towns, support themselves by agriculture or trade,

accept passports from the authorities, pay their taxes regularly,

and conduct themselves in all outward respects like loyal subjects.

Their chief religious duty consists in giving food and shelter to

their more zealous brethren, who have adopted a vagabond life in

practise as well as in theory.  It is only when they feel death

approaching that they consider it necessary to separate themselves

from the heretical world, and they effect this by having themselves

carried out to some neighbouring wood--or into a garden if there is

no wood at hand--where they may die in the open air.



Thus, we see, there is among the Russian Nonconformist sects what

may be called a gradation of fanaticism, in which is reflected the

history of the Great Schism.  In the Wanderers we have the

representatives of those who adopted and preserved the Antichrist

doctrine in its extreme form--the successors of those who fled to

the forests to escape from the rage of the Beast and to await the

second coming of Christ.  In the Philipists we have the

representatives of those who adopted these ideas in a somewhat

softer form, and who came to recognise the necessity of having some

regular means of subsistence until the last trump should be heard.

The Theodosians represent those who were in theory at one with the

preceding category, but who, having less religious fanaticism,

considered it necessary to yield to force and make peace with the

Government without sacrificing their convictions.  In the Pomortsi

we see those who preserved only the religious ideas of the schism,

and became reconciled with the civil power.  Lastly we have the Old

Ritualists, who differed from all the other sects in retaining the

old ordinances, and who simply rejected the spiritual authority of

the dominant Church.  Besides these chief sections of the

Nonconformists there are a great many minor denominations (tolki),

differing from each other on minor points of doctrine.  In certain

districts, it is said, nearly every village has one or two

independent sects.  This is especially the case among the Don

Cossacks and the Cossacks of the Ural, who are in part descendants

of the men who fled from the early persecutions.



Of all the sects the Old Ritualists stand nearest to the official

Church.  They hold the same dogmas, practise the same rites, and

differ only in trifling ceremonial matters, which few people

consider essential.  In the hope of inducing them to return to the

official fold the Government created at the beginning of last

century special churches, in which they were allowed to retain

their ceremonial peculiarities on condition of accepting regularly

consecrated priests and submitting to ecclesiastical jurisdiction.

As yet the design has not met with much success.  The great

majority of the Old Ritualists regard it as a trap, and assert that

the Church in making this concession has been guilty of self-

contradiction.  "The Ecclesiastical Council of Moscow," they say,

"anathematised our forefathers for holding to the old ritual, and

declared that the whole course of nature would be changed sooner

than the curse be withdrawn.  The course of nature has not been

changed, but the anathema has been cancelled."  This argument ought

to have a certain weight with those who believe in the

infallibility of Ecclesiastical Councils.



Towards the Priestless People the Government has always acted in a

much less conciliatory spirit.  Its severity has been sometimes

justified on the ground that sectarianism has had a political as

well as a religious significance.  A State like Russia cannot

overlook the existence of sects which preach the duty of systematic

resistance to the civil and ecclesiastical authorities and hold

doctrines which lead to the grossest immorality.  This argument, it

must be admitted, is not without a certain force, but it seems to

me that the policy adopted tended to increase rather than diminish

the evils which it sought to cure.  Instead of dispelling the

absurd idea that the Tsar was Antichrist by a system of strict and

evenhanded justice, punishing merely actual crimes and

delinquencies, the Government confirmed the notion in the minds of

thousands by persecuting those who had committed no crime and who

desired merely to worship God according to their conscience.  Above

all it erred in opposing and punishing those marriages which,

though legally irregular, were the best possible means of

diminishing fanaticism, by leading back the fanatics to healthy

social life.  Fortunately these errors have now been abandoned.  A

policy of greater clemency and conciliation has been adopted, and

has proved much more efficacious than persecution.  The Dissenters

have not returned to the official fold, but they have lost much of

their old fanaticism and exclusiveness.



In respect of numbers the sectarians compose a very formidable

body.  Of Old Ritualists and Priestless People there are, it is

said, no less than eleven millions; and the Protestant and

fantastical sects comprise probably about five millions more.  If

these numbers be correct, the sectarians constitute about an eighth

of the whole population of the Empire.  They count in their ranks

none of the nobles--none of the so-called enlightened class--but

they include in their number a respectable proportion of the

peasants, a third of the rich merchant class, the majority of the

Don Cossacks, and nearly all the Cossacks of the Ural.



Under these circumstances it is important to know how far the

sectarians are politically disaffected.  Some people imagine that

in the event of an insurrection or a foreign invasion they might

rise against the Government, whilst others believe that this

supposed danger is purely imaginary.  For my own part I agree with

the latter opinion, which is strongly supported by the history of

many important events, such as the French invasion in 1812, the

Crimean War, and the last Polish insurrection.  The great majority

of the Schismatics and heretics are, I believe, loyal subjects of

the Tsar.  The more violent sects, which are alone capable of

active hostility against the authorities, are weak in numbers, and

regard all outsiders with such profound mistrust that they are

wholly impervious to inflammatory influences from without.  Even if

all the sects were capable of active hostility, they would not be

nearly so formidable as their numbers seem to indicate, for they

are hostile to each other, and are wholly incapable of combining

for a common purpose.



Though sectarianism is thus by no means a serious political danger,

it has nevertheless a considerable political significance.  It

proves satisfactorily that the Russian people is by no means so

docile and pliable as is commonly supposed, and that it is capable

of showing a stubborn, passive resistance to authority when it

believes great interests to be at stake.  The dogged energy which

it has displayed in asserting for centuries its religious liberty

may perhaps some day be employed in the arena of secular politics.


