





CHAPTER XIII



THE PASTORAL TRIBES OF THE STEPPE





A Journey to the Steppe Region of the Southeast--The Volga--Town

and Province of Samara--Farther Eastward--Appearance of the

Villages--Characteristic Incident--Peasant Mendacity--Explanation

of the Phenomenon--I Awake in Asia--A Bashkir Aoul--Diner la

Tartare--Kumyss--A Bashkir Troubadour--Honest Mehemet Zian--Actual

Economic Condition of the Bashkirs Throws Light on a Well-known

Philosophical Theory--Why a Pastoral Race Adopts Agriculture--The

Genuine Steppe--The Kirghiz--Letter from Genghis Khan--The Kalmyks--

Nogai Tartars--Struggle between Nomadic Hordes and Agricultural

Colonists.





When I had spent a couple of years or more in the Northern and

North-Central provinces--the land of forests and of agriculture

conducted on the three-field system, with here and there a town of

respectable antiquity--I determined to visit for purposes of

comparison and contrast the Southeastern region, which possesses no

forests nor ancient towns, and corresponds to the Far West of the

United States of America.  My point of departure was Yaroslavl, a

town on the right bank of the Volga to the northeast of Moscow--and

thence I sailed down the river during three days on a large

comfortable steamer to Samara, the chief town of the province or

"government" of the name.  Here I left the steamer and prepared to

make a journey into the eastern hinterland.



Samara is a new town, a child of the last century.  At the time of

my first visit, now thirty years ago, it recalled by its unfinished

appearance the new towns of America.  Many of the houses were of

wood.  The streets were still in such a primitive condition that

after rain they were almost impassable from mud, and in dry, gusty

weather they generated thick clouds of blinding, suffocating dust.

Before I had been many days in the place I witnessed a dust-

hurricane, during which it was impossible at certain moments to see

from my window the houses on the other side of the street.  Amidst

such primitive surroundings the colossal new church seemed a little

out of keeping, and it occurred to my practical British mind that

some of the money expended on its construction might have been more

profitably employed.  But the Russians have their own ideas of the

fitness of things.  Religious after their own fashion, they

subscribe money liberally for ecclesiastical purposes--especially

for the building and decoration of their churches.  Besides this,

the Government considers that every chief town of a province should

possess a cathedral.



In its early days Samara was one of the outposts of Russian

colonisation, and had often to take precautions against the raids

of the nomadic tribes living in the vicinity; but the agricultural

frontier has since been pushed far forward to the east and south,

and the province was until lately, despite occasional droughts, one

of the most productive in the Empire.  The town is the chief market

of this region, and therein lies its importance.  The grain is

brought by the peasants from great distances, and stored in large

granaries by the merchants, who send it to Moscow or St.

Petersburg.  In former days this was a very tedious operation.  The

boats containing the grain were towed by horses or stout peasants

up the rivers and through the canals for hundreds of miles.  Then

came the period of "cabestans"--unwieldly machines propelled by

means of anchors and windlasses.  Now these primitive methods of

transport have disappeared.  The grain is either despatched by rail

or put into gigantic barges, which are towed up the river by

powerful tug-steamers to some point connected with the great

network of railways.



When the traveller has visited the Cathedral and the granaries he

has seen all the lions--not very formidable lions, truly--of the

place.  He may then inspect the kumyss establishments, pleasantly

situated near the town.  He will find there a considerable number

of patients--mostly consumptive--who drink enormous quantities of

fermented mare's-milk, and who declare that they receive great

benefit from this modern health-restorer.



What interested me more than the lions of the town or the suburban

kumyss establishments were the offices of the local administration,

where I found in the archives much statistical and other

information of the kind I was in search of, regarding the economic

condition of the province generally, and of the emancipated

peasantry in particular.  Having filled my note-book with material

of this sort, I proceeded to verify and complete it by visiting

some characteristic villages and questioning the inhabitants.  For

the student of Russian affairs who wishes to arrive at real, as

distinguished from official, truth, this is not an altogether

superfluous operation.



When I had thus made the acquaintance of the sedentary agricultural

population in several districts I journeyed eastwards with the

intention of visiting the Bashkirs, a Tartar tribe which still

preserved--so at least I was assured--its old nomadic habits.  My

reasons for undertaking this journey were twofold.  In the first

place I was desirous of seeing with my own eyes some remnants of

those terrible nomadic tribes which had at one time conquered

Russia and long threatened to overrun Europe--those Tartar hordes

which gained, by their irresistible force and relentless cruelty,

the reputation of being "the scourge of God."  Besides this, I had

long wished to study the conditions of pastoral life, and

congratulated myself on having found a convenient opportunity of

doing so.



As I proceeded eastwards I noticed a change in the appearance of

the villages.  The ordinary wooden houses, with their high sloping

roofs, gradually gave place to flat-roofed huts, built of a

peculiar kind of unburnt bricks, composed of mud and straw.  I

noticed, too, that the population became less and less dense, and

the amount of fallow land proportionately greater.  The peasants

were evidently richer than those near the Volga, but they

complained--as the Russian peasant always does--that they had not

land enough.  In answer to my inquiries why they did not use the

thousands of acres that were lying fallow around them, they

explained that they had already raised crops on that land for

several successive years, and that consequently they must now allow

it to "rest."



In one of the villages through which I passed I met with a very

characteristic little incident.  The village was called Samovolnaya

Ivanofka--that is to say, "Ivanofka the Self-willed" or "the Non-

authorised."  Whilst our horses were being changed my travelling

companion, in the course of conversation with a group of peasants,

inquired about the origin of this extraordinary name, and

discovered a curious bit of local history.  The founders of the

village had settled on the land without the permission of the

absentee owner, and obstinately resisted all attempts at eviction.

Again and again troops had been sent to drive them away, but as

soon as the troops retired these "self-willed" people returned and

resumed possession, till at last the proprietor, who lived in St.

Petersburg or some other distant place, became weary of the contest

and allowed them to remain.  The various incidents were related

with much circumstantial detail, so that the narration lasted

perhaps half an hour.  All this time I listened attentively, and

when the story was finished I took out my note-book in order to jot

down the facts, and asked in what year the affair had happened.  No

answer was given to my question.  The peasants merely looked at

each other in a significant way and kept silence.  Thinking that my

question had not been understood, I asked it a second time,

repeating a part of what had been related.  To my astonishment and

utter discomfiture they all declared that they had never related

anything of the sort!  In despair I appealed to my friend, and

asked him whether my ears had deceived me--whether I was labouring

under some strange hallucination.  Without giving me any reply he

simply smiled and turned away.



When we had left the village and were driving along in our

tarantass the mystery was satisfactorily cleared up.  My friend

explained to me that I had not at all misunderstood what had been

related, but that my abrupt question and the sight of my note-book

had suddenly aroused the peasants' suspicions.  "They evidently

suspected," he continued, "that you were a tchinovnik, and that you

wished to use to their detriment the knowledge you had acquired.

They thought it safer, therefore, at once to deny it all.  You

don't yet understand the Russian muzhik!"



In this last remark I was obliged to concur, but since that time I

have come to know the muzhik better, and an incident of the kind

would now no longer surprise me.  From a long series of

observations I have come to the conclusion that the great majority

of the Russian peasants, when dealing with the authorities,

consider the most patent and barefaced falsehoods as a fair means

of self-defence.  Thus, for example, when a muzhik is implicated in

a criminal affair, and a preliminary investigation is being made,

he probably begins by constructing an elaborate story to explain

the facts and exculpate himself.  The story may be a tissue of

self-evident falsehoods from beginning to end, but he defends it

valiantly as long as possible.  When he perceives that the position

which he has taken up is utterly untenable, he declares openly that

all he has said is false, and that he wishes to make a new

declaration.  This second declaration may have the same fate as the

former one, and then he proposes a third.  Thus groping his way, he

tries various stories till he finds one that seems proof against

all objections.  In the fact of his thus telling lies there is of

course nothing remarkable, for criminals in all parts of the world

have a tendency to deviate from the truth when they fall into the

hands of justice.  The peculiarity is that he retracts his

statements with the composed air of a chess-player who requests his

opponent to let him take back an inadvertent move.  Under the old

system of procedure, which was abolished in the sixties, clever

criminals often contrived by means of this simple device to have

their trial postponed for many years.



Such incidents naturally astonish a foreigner, and he is apt, in

consequence, to pass a very severe judgment on the Russian

peasantry in general.  The reader may remember Karl Karl'itch's

remarks on the subject.  These remarks I have heard repeated in

various forms by Germans in all parts of the country, and there

must be a certain amount of truth in them, for even an eminent

Slavophil once publicly admitted that the peasant is prone to

perjury.*  It is necessary, however, as it seems to me, to draw a

distinction.  In the ordinary intercourse of peasants among

themselves, or with people in whom they have confidence, I do not

believe that the habit of lying is abnormally developed.  It is

only when the muzhik comes in contact with authorities that he

shows himself an expert fabricator of falsehoods.  In this there is

nothing that need surprise us.  For ages the peasantry were exposed

to the arbitrary power and ruthless exactions of those who were

placed over them; and as the law gave them no means of legally

protecting themselves, their only means of self-defence lay in

cunning and deceit.





* Kireyefski, in the Russakaya Beseda.





We have here, I believe, the true explanation of that "Oriental

mendacity" about which Eastern travellers have written so much.  It

is simply the result of a lawless state of society.  Suppose a

truth-loving Englishman falls into the hands of brigands or

savages.  Will he not, if he have merely an ordinary moral

character, consider himself justified in inventing a few falsehoods

in order to effect his escape?  If so, we have no right to condemn

very severely the hereditary mendacity of those races which have

lived for many generations in a position analogous to that of the

supposed Englishman among brigands.  When legitimate interests

cannot be protected by truthfulness and honesty, prudent people

always learn to employ means which experience has proved to be more

effectual.  In a country where the law does not afford protection,

the strong man defends himself by his strength, the weak by cunning

and duplicity.  This fully explains the fact that in Turkey the

Christians are less truthful than the Mahometans.



But we have wandered a long way from the road to Bashkiria.  Let us

therefore return at once.



Of all the journeys which I made in Russia this was one of the most

agreeable.  The weather was bright and warm, without being

unpleasantly hot; the roads were tolerably smooth; the tarantass,

which had been hired for the whole journey, was nearly as

comfortable as a tarantass can be; good milk, eggs, and white bread

could be obtained in abundance; there was not much difficulty in

procuring horses in the villages through which we passed, and the

owners of them were not very extortionate in their demands.  But

what most contributed to my comfort was that I was accompanied by

an agreeable, intelligent young Russian, who kindly undertook to

make all the necessary arrangements, and I was thereby freed from

those annoyances and worries which are always encountered in

primitive countries where travelling is not yet a recognised

institution.  To him I left the entire control of our movements,

passively acquiescing in everything, and asking no questions as to

what was coming.  Taking advantage of my passivity, he prepared for

me one evening a pleasant little surprise.



About sunset we had left a village called Morsha, and shortly

afterwards, feeling drowsy, and being warned by my companion that

we should have a long, uninteresting drive, I had lain down in the

tarantass and gone to sleep.  On awaking I found that the tarantass

had stopped, and that the stars were shining brightly overhead.  A

big dog was barking furiously close at hand, and I heard the voice

of the yamstchik informing us that we had arrived.  I at once sat

up and looked about me, expecting to see a village of some kind,

but instead of that I perceived a wide open space, and at a short

distance a group of haystacks.  Close to the tarantass stood two

figures in long cloaks, armed with big sticks, and speaking to each

other in an unknown tongue.  My first idea was that we had been

somehow led into a trap, so I drew my revolver in order to be ready

for all emergencies.  My companion was still snoring loudly by my

side, and stoutly resisted all my efforts to awaken him.



"What's this?" I said, in a gruff, angry voice, to the yamstchik.

"Where have you taken us to?"



"To where I was ordered, master!"



For the purpose of getting a more satisfactory explanation I took

to shaking my sleepy companion, but before he had returned to

consciousness the moon shone out brightly from behind a thick bank

of clouds, and cleared up the mystery.  The supposed haystacks

turned out to be tents.  The two figures with long sticks, whom I

had suspected of being brigands, were peaceable shepherds, dressed

in the ordinary Oriental khalat, and tending their sheep, which

were grazing close by.  Instead of being in an empty hay-field, as

I had imagined, we had before us a regular Tartar aoul, such as I

had often read about.  For a moment I felt astonished and

bewildered.  It seemed to me that I had fallen asleep in Europe and

woke up in Asia!



In a few minutes we were comfortably installed in one of the tents,

a circular, cupola-shaped erection, of about twelve feet in

diameter, composed of a frame-work of light wooden rods covered

with thick felt.  It contained no furniture, except a goodly

quantity of carpets and pillows, which had been formed into a bed

for our accommodation.  Our amiable host, who was evidently

somewhat astonished at our unexpected visit, but refrained from

asking questions, soon bade us good-night and retired.  We were

not, however, left alone.  A large number of black beetles remained

and gave us a welcome in their own peculiar fashion.  Whether they

were provided with wings, or made up for the want of flying

appliances by crawling up the sides of the tent and dropping down

on any object they wished to reach, I did not discover, but certain

it is that they somehow reached our heads--even when we were

standing upright--and clung to our hair with wonderful tenacity.

Why they should show such a marked preference for human hair we

could not conjecture, till it occurred to us that the natives

habitually shaved their heads, and that these beetles must

naturally consider a hair-covered cranium a curious novelty

deserving of careful examination.  Like all children of nature they

were decidedly indiscreet and troublesome in their curiosity, but

when the light was extinguished they took the hint and departed.



When we awoke next morning it was broad daylight, and we found a

crowd of natives in front of the tent.  Our arrival was evidently

regarded as an important event, and all the inhabitants of the aoul

were anxious to make our acquaintance.  First our host came

forward.  He was a short, slimly-built man, of middle age, with a

grave, severe expression, indicating an unsociable disposition.  We

afterwards learned that he was an akhun*--that is to say, a minor

officer of the Mahometan ecclesiastical administration, and at the

same time a small trader in silken and woollen stuffs.  With him

came the mullah, or priest, a portly old gentleman with an open,

honest face of the European type, and a fine grey beard.  The other

important members of the little community followed.  They were all

swarthy in colour, and had the small eyes and prominent cheek-bones

which are characteristic of the Tartar races, but they had little 

of that flatness of countenance and peculiar ugliness which 

distinguish the pure Mongol.  All of them, with the exception of 

the mullah, spoke a little Russian, and used it to assure us that 

we were welcome.  The children remained respectfully in the 

background, and the women, with laces veiled, eyed us furtively 

from the doors of the tents.





* I presume this is the same word as akhund, well known on the

Northwest frontier of India, where it was applied specially to the

late ruler of Svat.





The aoul consisted of about twenty tents, all constructed on the

same model, and scattered about in sporadic fashion, without the

least regard to symmetry.  Close by was a watercourse, which

appears on some maps as a river, under the name of Karalyk, but

which was at that time merely a succession of pools containing a

dark-coloured liquid.  As we more than suspected that these pools

supplied the inhabitants with water for culinary purposes, the

sight was not calculated to whet our appetites.  We turned away

therefore hurriedly, and for want of something better to do we

watched the preparations for dinner.  These were decidedly

primitive.  A sheep was brought near the door of our tent, and

there killed, skinned, cut up into pieces, and put into an immense

pot, under which a fire had been kindled.



The dinner itself was not less primitive than the manner of

preparing it.  The table consisted of a large napkin spread in the

middle of the tent, and the chairs were represented by cushions, on

which we sat cross-legged.  There were no plates, knives, forks,

spoons, or chopsticks.  Guests were expected all to eat out of a

common wooden bowl, and to use the instruments with which Nature

had provided them.  The service was performed by the host and his

son.  The fare was copious, but not varied--consisting entirely of

boiled mutton, without bread or other substitute, and a little

salted horse-flesh thrown in as an entree.



To eat out of the same dish with half-a-dozen Mahometans who accept

their Prophet's injunction about ablutions in a highly figurative

sense, and who are totally unacquainted with the use of forks and

spoons, is not an agreeable operation, even if one is not much

troubled with religious prejudices; but with these Bashkirs

something worse than this has to be encountered, for their

favourite method of expressing their esteem and affection for one

with whom they are eating consists in putting bits of mutton, and

sometimes even handfuls of hashed meat, into his month!  When I

discovered this unexpected peculiarity in Bashkir manners and

customs, I almost regretted that I had made a favourable impression

upon my new acquaintances.



When the sheep had been devoured, partly by the company in the tent

and partly by a nondescript company outside--for the whole aoul

took part in the festivities--kumyss was served in unlimited

quantities.  This beverage, as I have already explained, is mare's

milk fermented; but what here passed under the name was very

different from the kumyss I had tasted in the establissements of

Samara.  There it was a pleasant effervescing drink, with only the

slightest tinge of acidity; here it was a "still" liquid, strongly

resembling very thin and very sour butter-milk.  My Russian friend

made a wry face on first tasting it, and I felt inclined at first

to do likewise, but noticing that his grimaces made an unfavourable

impression on the audience, I restrained my facial muscles, and

looked as if I liked it.  Very soon I really came to like it, and

learned to "drink fair" with those who had been accustomed to it

from their childhood.  By this feat I rose considerably in the

estimation of the natives; for if one does not drink kumyss one

cannot be sociable in the Bashkir sense of the term, and by

acquiring the habit one adopts an essential principle of Bashkir

nationality.  I should certainly have preferred having a cup of it

to myself, but I thought it well to conform to the habits of the

country, and to accept the big wooden bowl when it was passed

round.  In return my friends made an important concession in my

favour: they allowed me to smoke as I pleased, though they

considered that, as the Prophet had refrained from tobacco,

ordinary mortals should do the same.



Whilst the "loving-cup" was going round I distributed some small

presents which I had brought for the purpose, and then proceeded to

explain the object of my visit.  In the distant country from which

I came--far away to the westward--I had heard of the Bashkirs as a

people possessing many strange customs, but very kind and

hospitable to strangers.  Of their kindness and hospitality I had

already learned something by experience, and I hoped they would

allow me to learn something of their mode of life, their customs,

their songs, their history, and their religion, in all of which I

assured them my distant countrymen took a lively interest.



This little after-dinner speech was perhaps not quite in accordance

with Bashkir etiquette, but it made a favourable impression.  There

was a decided murmur of approbation, and those who understood

Russian translated my words to their less accomplished brethren.  A

short consultation ensued, and then there was a general shout of

"Abdullah! Abdullah!" which was taken up and repeated by those

standing outside.



In a few minutes Abdullah appeared, with a big, half-picked bone in

his hand, and the lower part of his face besmeared with grease.  He

was a short, thin man, with a dark, sallow complexion, and a look

of premature old age; but the suppressed smile that played about

his mouth and a tremulous movement of his right eye-lid showed

plainly that he had not yet forgotten the fun and frolic of youth.

His dress was of richer and more gaudy material, but at the same

time more tawdry and tattered, than that of the others.  Altogether

he looked like an artiste in distressed circumstances, and such he

really was.  At a word and a sign from the host he laid aside his

bone and drew from under his green silk khalat a small wind-

instrument resembling a flute or flageolet.  On this he played a

number of native airs.  The first melodies which he played reminded

me of a Highland pibroch--at one moment low, solemn, and plaintive,

then gradually rising into a soul-stirring, martial strain, and

again descending to a plaintive wail.  The amount of expression

which he put into his simple instrument was truly marvellous.

Then, passing suddenly from grave to gay, he played a series of

light, merry airs, and some of the younger onlookers got up and

performed a dance as boisterous and ungraceful as an Irish jig.



This Abdullah turned out to be for me a most valuable acquaintance.

He was a kind of Bashkir troubadour, well acquainted not only with

the music, but also with the traditions, the history, the

superstitions, and the folk-lore of his people.  By the akhun and

the mullah he was regarded as a frivolous, worthless fellow, who

had no regular, respectable means of gaining a livelihood, but

among the men of less rigid principles he was a general favourite.

As he spoke Russian fluently I could converse with him freely

without the aid of an interpreter, and he willingly placed his

store of knowledge at my disposal.  When in the company of the

akhun he was always solemn and taciturn, but as soon as he was

relieved of that dignitary's presence he became lively and

communicative.



Another of my new acquaintances was equally useful to me in another

way.  This was Mehemet Zian, who was not so intelligent as

Abdullah, but much more sympathetic.  In his open, honest face, and

kindly, unaffected manner there was something so irresistibly

attractive that before I had known him twenty-four hours a sort of

friendship had sprung up between us.  He was a tall, muscular,

broad-shouldered man, with features that suggested a mixture of

European blood.  Though already past middle age, he was still wiry

and active--so active that he could, when on horseback, pick a

stone off the ground without dismounting.  He could, however, no

longer perform this feat at full gallop, as he had been wont to do

in his youth.  His geographical knowledge was extremely limited and

inaccurate--his mind being in this respect like those old Russian

maps in which the nations of the earth and a good many peoples who

had never more than a mythical existence are jumbled together in

hopeless confusion--but his geographical curiosity was insatiable.

My travelling-map--the first thing of the kind he had ever seen--

interested him deeply.  When he found that by simply examining it

and glancing at my compass I could tell him the direction and

distance of places he knew, his face was like that of a child who

sees for the first time a conjuror's performance; and when I

explained the trick to him, and taught him to calculate the

distance to Bokhara--the sacred city of the Mussulmans of that

region--his delight was unbounded.  Gradually I perceived that to

possess such a map had become the great object of his ambition.

Unfortunately I could not at once gratify him as I should have

wished, because I had a long journey before me and I had no other

map of the region, but I promised to find ways and means of sending

him one, and I kept my word by means of a native of the Karalyk

district whom I discovered in Samara.  I did not add a compass

because I could not find one in the town, and it would have been of

little use to him: like a true child of nature he always knew the

cardinal points by the sun or the stars.  Some years later I had

the satisfaction of learning that the map had reached its

destination safely, through no less a personage than Count Tolstoy.

One evening at the home of a friend in Moscow I was presented to

the great novelist, and as soon as he heard my name he said: "Oh! I

know you already, and I know your friend Mehemet Zian.  When I

passed a night this summer in his aoul he showed me a map with your

signature on the margin, and taught me how to calculate the

distance to Bokhara!"



If Mehemet knew little of foreign countries he was thoroughly well

acquainted with his own, and repaid me most liberally for my

elementary lessons in geography.  With him I visited the

neighbouring aouls.  In all of them he had numerous acquaintances,

and everywhere we were received with the greatest hospitality,

except on one occasion when we paid a visit of ceremony to a famous

robber who was the terror of the whole neighbourhood.  Certainly he

was one of the most brutalised specimens of humanity I have ever

encountered.  He made no attempt to be amiable, and I felt inclined

to leave his tent at once; but I saw that my friend wanted to

conciliate him, so I restrained my feelings and eventually

established tolerably good relations with him.  As a rule I avoided

festivities, partly because I knew that my hosts were mostly poor

and would not accept payment for the slaughtered sheep, and partly

because I had reason to apprehend that they would express to me

their esteem and affection more Bashkirico; but in kumyss-drinking,

the ordinary occupation of these people when they have nothing to

do, I had to indulge to a most inordinate extent.  On these

expeditions Abdullah generally accompanied us, and rendered

valuable service as interpreter and troubadour.  Mehemet could

express himself in Russian, but his vocabulary failed him as soon

as the conversation ran above very ordinary topics; Abdullah, on

the contrary, was a first-rate interpreter, and under the influence

of his musical pipe and lively talkativeness new acquaintances

became sociable and communicative.  Poor Abdullah!  He was a kind

of universal genius; but his faded, tattered khalat showed only too

plainly that in Bashkiria, as in more civilised countries,

universal genius and the artistic temperament lead to poverty

rather than to wealth.



I have no intention of troubling the reader with the miscellaneous

facts which, with the assistance of these two friends, I succeeded

in collecting--indeed, I could not if I would, for the notes I then

made were afterwards lost--but I wish to say a few words about the

actual economic condition of the Bashkirs.  They are at present

passing from pastoral to agricultural life; and it is not a little

interesting to note the causes which induce them to make this

change, and the way in which it is made.



Philosophers have long held a theory of social development

according to which men were at first hunters, then shepherds, and

lastly agriculturists.  How far this theory is in accordance with

reality we need not for the present inquire, but we may examine an

important part of it and ask ourselves the question, Why did

pastoral tribes adopt agriculture?  The common explanation is that

they changed their mode of life in consequence of some ill-defined,

fortuitous circumstances.  A great legislator arose amongst them

and taught them to till the soil, or they came in contact with an

agricultural race and adopted the customs of their neighbours.

Such explanations must appear unsatisfactory to any one who has

lived with a pastoral people.  Pastoral life is so incomparably

more agreeable than the hard lot of the agriculturist, and so much

more in accordance with the natural indolence of human nature, that

no great legislator, though he had the wisdom of a Solon and the

eloquence of a Demosthenes, could possibly induce his fellow-

countrymen to pass voluntarily from the one to the other.  Of all

the ordinary means of gaining a livelihood--with the exception

perhaps of mining--agriculture is the most laborious, and is never

voluntarily adopted by men who have not been accustomed to it from

their childhood.  The life of a pastoral race, on the contrary, is

a perennial holiday, and I can imagine nothing except the prospect

of starvation which could induce men who live by their flocks and

herds to make the transition to agricultural life.



The prospect of starvation is, in fact, the cause of the

transition--probably in all cases, and certainly in the case of the

Bashkirs.  So long as they had abundance of pasturage they never

thought of tilling the soil.  Their flocks and herds supplied them

with all that they required, and enabled them to lead a tranquil,

indolent existence.  No great legislator arose among them to teach

them the use of the plough and the sickle, and when they saw the

Russian peasants on their borders laboriously ploughing and

reaping, they looked on them with compassion, and never thought of

following their example.  But an impersonal legislator came to

them--a very severe and tyrannical legislator, who would not brook

disobedience--I mean Economic Necessity.  By the encroachments of

the Ural Cossacks on the east, and by the ever-advancing wave of

Russian colonisation from the north and west, their territory had

been greatly diminished.  With diminution of the pasturage came

diminution of the live stock, their sole means of subsistence.  In

spite of their passively conservative spirit they had to look about

for some new means of obtaining food and clothing--some new mode of

life requiring less extensive territorial possessions.  It was only

then that they began to think of imitating their neighbours.  They

saw that the neighbouring Russian peasant lived comfortably on

thirty or forty acres of land, whilst they possessed a hundred and

fifty acres per male, and were in danger of starvation.



The conclusion to be drawn from this was self-evident--they ought

at once to begin ploughing and sowing.  But there was a very

serious obstacle to the putting of this principle in practice.

Agriculture certainly requires less land than sheep-farming, but it

requires very much more labour, and to hard work the Bashkirs were

not accustomed.  They could bear hardships and fatigues in the

shape of long journeys on horseback, but the severe, monotonous

labour of the plough and the sickle was not to their taste.  At

first, therefore, they adopted a compromise.  They had a portion of

their land tilled by Russian peasants, and ceded to these a part of

the produce in return for the labour expended; in other words, they

assumed the position of landed proprietors, and farmed part of

their land on the metayage system.



The process of transition had reached this point in several aouls

which I visited.  My friend Mehemet Zian showed me at some distance

from the tents his plot of arable land, and introduced me to the

peasant who tilled it--a Little-Russian, who assured me that the

arrangement satisfied all parties.  The process of transition

cannot, however, stop here.  The compromise is merely a temporary

expedient.  Virgin soil gives very abundant harvests, sufficient to

support both the labourer and the indolent proprietor, but after a

few years the soil becomes exhausted and gives only a very moderate

revenue.  A proprietor, therefore, must sooner or later dispense

with the labourers who take half of the produce as their

recompense, and must himself put his hand to the plough.



Thus we see the Bashkirs are, properly speaking, no longer a purely

pastoral, nomadic people.  The discovery of this fact caused me

some little disappointment, and in the hope of finding a tribe in a

more primitive condition I visited the Kirghiz of the Inner Horde,

who occupy the country to the southward, in the direction of the

Caspian.  Here for the first time I saw the genuine Steppe in the

full sense of the term--a country level as the sea, with not a

hillock or even a gentle undulation to break the straight line of

the horizon, and not a patch of cultivation, a tree, a bush, or

even a stone, to diversify the monotonous expanse.



Traversing such a region is, I need scarcely say, very weary work--

all the more as there are no milestones or other landmarks to show

the progress you are making.  Still, it is not so overwhelmingly

wearisome as might be supposed.  In the morning you may watch the

vast lakes, with their rugged promontories and well-wooded banks,

which the mirage creates for your amusement.  Then during the

course of the day there are always one or two trifling incidents

which arouse you for a little from your somnolence.  Now you descry

a couple of horsemen on the distant horizon, and watch them as they

approach; and when they come alongside you may have a talk with

them if you know the language or have an interpreter; or you may

amuse yourself with a little pantomime, if articulate speech is

impossible.  Now you encounter a long train of camels marching

along with solemn, stately step, and speculate as to the contents

of the big packages with which they are laden.  Now you encounter

the carcass of a horse that has fallen by the wayside, and watch

the dogs and the steppe eagles fighting over their prey; and if you

are murderously inclined you may take a shot with your revolver at

these great birds, for they are ignorantly brave, and will

sometimes allow you to approach within twenty or thirty yards.  At

last you perceive--most pleasant sight of all--a group of haystack-

shaped tents in the distance; and you hurry on to enjoy the

grateful shade, and quench your thirst with "deep, deep draughts"

of refreshing kumyss.



During my journey through the Kirghiz country I was accompanied by

a Russian gentleman, who had provided himself with a circular

letter from the hereditary chieftain of the Horde, a personage who

rejoiced in the imposing name of Genghis Khan,* and claimed to be a

descendant of the great Mongol conqueror.  This document assured us

a good reception in the aouls through which we passed.  Every

Kirghis who saw it treated it with profound respect, and professed

to put all his goods and chattels at our service.  But in spite of

this powerful recommendation we met with none of the friendly

cordiality and communicativeness which I had found among the

Bashkirs.  A tent with an unlimited quantity of cushions was always

set apart for our accommodation; the sheep were killed and boiled

for our dinner, and the pails of kumyss were regularly brought for

our refreshment; but all this was evidently done as a matter of

duty and not as a spontaneous expression of hospitality.  When we

determined once or twice to prolong our visit beyond the term

originally announced, I could perceive that our host was not at all

delighted by the change of our plans.  The only consolation we had

was that those who entertained us made no scruples about accepting

payment for the food and shelter supplied.





* I have adopted the ordinary English spelling of this name.  The

Kirghiz and the Russians pronounce it "Tchinghiz."





From all this I have no intention of drawing the conclusion that

the Kirghiz are, as a people, inhospitable or unfriendly to

strangers.  My experience of them is too limited to warrant any

such inference.  The letter of Genghis Khan insured us all the

accommodation we required, but it at the same time gave us a

certain official character not at all favourable to the

establishment of friendly relations.  Those with whom we came in

contact regarded us as Russian officials, and suspected us of

having some secret designs.  As I endeavoured to discover the

number of their cattle, and to form an approximate estimate of

their annual revenue, they naturally feared--having no conception

of disinterested scientific curiosity--that these data were being

collected for the purpose of increasing the taxes, or with some

similar intention of a sinister kind.  Very soon I perceived

clearly that any information we might here collect regarding the

economic conditions of pastoral life would not be of much value,

and I postponed my proposed studies to a more convenient season.



The Kirghiz are, ethnographically speaking, closely allied to the

Bashkirs, but differ from them both in physiognomy and language.

Their features approach much nearer the pure Mongol type, and their

language is a distinct dialect, which a Bashkir or a Tartar of

Kazan has some difficulty in understanding.  They are professedly

Mahometans, but their Mahometanism is not of a rigid kind, as may

be seen by the fact that their women do not veil their faces even

in the presence of Ghiaours--a laxness of which the Ghiaour will

certainly not approve if he happen to be sensitive to female beauty

and ugliness.  Their mode of life differs from that of the

Bashkirs, but they have proportionately more land and are

consequently still able to lead a purely pastoral life.  Near their

western frontier, it is true, they annually let patches of land to

the Russian peasants for the purpose of raising crops; but these

encroachments can never advance very far, for the greater part of

their territory is unsuited to agriculture, on account of a large

admixture of salt in the soil.  This fact will have an important

influence on their future.  Unlike the Bashkirs, who possess good

arable land, and are consequently on the road to become

agriculturists, they will in all probability continue to live

exclusively by their flocks and herds.



To the southwest of the Lower Volga, in the flat region lying to

the north of the Caucasus, we find another pastoral tribe, the

Kalmyks, differing widely from the two former in language, in

physiognomy, and in religion.  Their language, a dialect of the

Mongolian, has no close affinity with any other language in this

part of the world.  In respect of religion they are likewise

isolated, for they are Buddhists, and have consequently no co-

religionists nearer than Mongolia or Thibet.  But it is their

physiognomy that most strikingly distinguishes them from the

surrounding peoples, and stamps them as Mongols of the purest

water.  There is something almost infra-human in their ugliness.

They show in an exaggerated degree all those repulsive traits which

we see toned down and refined in the face of an average Chinaman;

and it is difficult, when we meet them for the first time, to

believe that a human soul lurks behind their expressionless,

flattened faces and small, dull, obliquely set eyes.  If the Tartar

and Turkish races are really descended from ancestors of that type,

then we must assume that they have received in the course of time a

large admixture of Aryan or Semitic blood.



But we must not be too hard on the poor Kalmyks, or judge of their

character by their unprepossessing appearance.  They are by no

means so unhuman as they look.  Men who have lived among them have

assured me that they are decidedly intelligent, especially in all

matters relating to cattle, and that they are--though somewhat

addicted to cattle-lifting and other primitive customs not

tolerated in the more advanced stages of civilisation--by no means

wanting in some of the better qualities of human nature.



Formerly there was a fourth pastoral tribe in this region--the

Nogai Tartars.  They occupied the plains to the north of the Sea of

Azof, but they are no longer to be found there.  Shortly after the

Crimean war they emigrated to Turkey, and their lands are now

occupied by Russian, German, Bulgarian, and Montenegrin colonists.



Among the pastoral tribes of this region the Kalmyks are recent

intruders.  They first appeared in the seventeenth century, and

were long formidable on account of their great numbers and compact

organisation; but in 1771 the majority of them suddenly struck

their tents and retreated to their old home in the north of the

Celestial Empire.  Those who remained were easily pacified, and

have long since lost, under the influence of unbroken peace and a

strong Russian administration, their old warlike spirit.  Their

latest military exploits were performed during the last years of

the Napoleonic wars, and were not of a very serious kind; a troop

of them accompanied the Russian army, and astonished Western Europe

by their uncouth features, their strange costume, and their

primitive accoutrements, among which their curious bows and arrows

figured conspicuously.



The other pastoral tribes which I have mentioned--Bashkirs,

Kirghiz, and Nogai Tartars--are the last remnants of the famous

marauders who from time immemorial down to a comparatively recent

period held the vast plains of Southern Russia.  The long struggle

between them and the agricultural colonists from the northwest,

closely resembling the long struggle between the Red-skins and the

white settlers on the prairies of North America, forms an important

page of Russian history.



For centuries the warlike nomads stoutly resisted all encroachments

on their pasture-grounds, and considered cattle-lifting,

kidnapping, and pillage as a legitimate and honorable occupation.

"Their raids," says an old Byzantine writer, "are as flashes of

lightning, and their retreat is at once heavy and light--heavy from

booty and light from the swiftness of their movements.  For them a

peaceful life is a misfortune, and a convenient opportunity for war

is the height of felicity.  Worst of all, they are more numerous

than bees in spring, their numbers are uncountable."  "Having no

fixed place of abode," says another Byzantine authority, "they seek

to conquer all lands and colonise none.  They are flying people,

and therefore cannot be caught.  As they have neither towns nor

villages, they must be hunted like wild beasts, and can be fitly

compared only to griffins, which beneficent Nature has banished to

uninhabited regions."  As a Persian distich, quoted by Vambery, has

it--



     "They came, conquered, burned,

      pillaged, murdered, and went."



Their raids are thus described by an old Russian chronicler: "They

burn the villages, the farmyards, and the churches.  The land is

turned by them into a desert, and the overgrown fields become the

lair of wild beasts.  Many people are led away into slavery; others

are tortured and killed, or die from hunger and thirst.  Sad,

weary, stiff from cold, with faces wan from woe, barefoot or naked,

and torn by the thistles, the Russian prisoners trudge along

through an unknown country, and, weeping, say to one another, 'I am

from such a town, and I from such a village.'"  And in harmony with

the monastic chroniclers we hear the nameless Slavonic Ossian

wailing for the fallen sons of Rus: "In the Russian land is rarely

heard the voice of the husbandman, but often the cry of the

vultures, fighting with each other over the bodies of the slain;

and the ravens scream as they fly to the spoil."



In spite of the stubborn resistance of the nomads the wave of

colonisation moved steadily onwards until the first years of the

thirteenth century, when it was suddenly checked and thrown back.

A great Mongolian horde from Eastern Asia, far more numerous and

better organized than the local nomadic tribes, overran the whole

country, and for more than two centuries Russia was in a certain

sense ruled by Mongol Khans.  As I wish to speak at some length of

this Mongol domination, I shall devote to it a separate chapter.

