




CHAPTER XVI



FOREIGN COLONISTS ON THE STEPPE





The Steppe--Variety of Races, Languages, and Religions--The German

Colonists--In What Sense the Russians are an Imitative People--The

Mennonites--Climate and Arboriculture--Bulgarian Colonists--Tartar-

Speaking Greeks--Jewish Agriculturists--Russification--A Circassian

Scotchman--Numerical Strength of the Foreign Element.





In European Russia the struggle between agriculture and nomadic

barbarism is now a thing of the past, and the fertile Steppe, which

was for centuries a battle-ground of the Aryan and Turanian races,

has been incorporated into the dominions of the Tsar.  The nomadic

tribes have been partly driven out and partly pacified and parked

in "reserves," and the territory which they so long and so

stubbornly defended is now studded with peaceful villages and

tilled by laborious agriculturists.



In traversing this region the ordinary tourist will find little to

interest him.  He will see nothing which he can possibly dignify by

the name of scenery, and he may journey on for many days without

having any occasion to make an entry in his note-book.  If he

should happen, however, to be an ethnologist and linguist, he may

find occupation, for he will here meet with fragments of many

different races and a variety of foreign tongues.



This ethnological variety is the result of a policy inaugurated by

Catherine II.  So long as the southern frontier was pushed forward

slowly, the acquired territory was regularly filled up by Russian

peasants from the central provinces who were anxious to obtain more

land and more liberty than they enjoyed in their native villages;

but during "the glorious age of Catherine" the frontier was pushed

forward so rapidly that the old method of spontaneous emigration no

longer sufficed to people the annexed territory.  The Empress had

recourse, therefore, to organised emigration from foreign

countries.  Her diplomatic representatives in Western Europe tried

to induce artisans and peasants to emigrate to Russia, and special

agents were sent to various countries to supplement the efforts of

the diplomatists.  Thousands accepted the invitation, and were for

the most part settled on the land which had been recently the

pasture-ground of the nomadic hordes.



This policy was adopted by succeeding sovereigns, and the

consequence of it has been that Southern Russia now contains a

variety of races such as is to be found, perhaps, nowhere else in

Europe.  The official statistics of New Russia alone--that is to

say, the provinces of Ekaterinoslaf, Tauride, Kherson, and

Bessarabia--enumerate the following nationalities: Great Russians,

Little Russians, Poles, Servians, Montenegrins, Bulgarians,

Moldavians, Germans, English, Swedes, Swiss, French, Italians,

Greeks, Armenians, Tartars, Mordwa, Jews, and Gypsies.  The

religions are almost equally numerous.  The statistics speak of

Greek Orthodox, Roman Catholics, Gregorians, Lutherans, Calvinists,

Anglicans, Mennonites, Separatists, Pietists, Karaim Jews,

Talmudists, Mahometans, and numerous Russian sects, such as the

Molokanye and the Skoptsi or Eunuchs.  America herself could

scarcely show a more motley list in her statistics of population.



It is but fair to state that the above list, though literally

correct, does not give a true idea of the actual population.  The

great body of the inhabitants are Russian and Orthodox, whilst

several of the nationalities named are represented by a small

number of souls--some of them, such as the French, being found

exclusively in the towns.  Still, the variety even in the rural

population is very great.  Once, in the space of three days, and

using only the most primitive means of conveyance, I visited

colonies of Greeks, Germans, Servians, Bulgarians, Montenegrins,

and Jews.



Of all the foreign colonists the Germans are by far the most

numerous.  The object of the Government in inviting them to settle

in the country was that they should till the unoccupied land and

thereby increase the national wealth, and that they should at the

same time exercise a civilising influence on the Russian peasantry

in their vicinity.  In this latter respect they have totally failed

to fulfil their mission.  A Russian village, situated in the midst

of German colonies, shows generally, so far as I could observe, no

signs of German influence.  Each nationality lives more majorum,

and holds as little communication as possible with the other.  The

muzhik observes carefully--for he is very curious--the mode of life

of his more advanced neighbours, but he never thinks of adopting

it.  He looks upon Germans almost as beings of a different world--

as a wonderfully cunning and ingenious people, who have been

endowed by Providence with peculiar qualities not possessed by

ordinary Orthodox humanity.  To him it seems in the nature of

things that Germans should live in large, clean, well-built houses,

in the same way as it is in the nature of things that birds should

build nests; and as it has probably never occurred to a human being

to build a nest for himself and his family, so it never occurs to a

Russian peasant to build a house on the German model.  Germans are

Germans, and Russians are Russians--and there is nothing more to be

said on the subject.



This stubbornly conservative spirit of the peasantry who live in

the neighbourhood of Germans seems to give the lie direct to the

oft-repeated and universally believed assertion that Russians are

an imitative people strongly disposed to adopt the manners and

customs of any foreigners with whom they may come in contact.  The

Russian, it is said, changes his nationality as easily as he

changes his coat, and derives great satisfaction from wearing some

nationality that does not belong to him; but here we have an

important fact which appears to prove the contrary.



The truth is that in this matter we must distinguish between the

Noblesse and the peasantry.  The nobles are singularly prone to

adopt foreign manners, customs, and institutions; the peasants, on

the contrary, are as a rule decidedly conservative.  It must not,

however, be supposed that this proceeds from a difference of race;

the difference is to be explained by the past history of the two

classes.  Like all other peoples, the Russians are strongly

conservative so long as they remain in what may be termed their

primitive moral habitat--that is to say, so long as external

circumstances do not force them out of their accustomed traditional

groove.  The Noblesse were long ago violently forced out of their

old groove by the reforming Tsars, and since that time they have

been so constantly driven hither and thither by foreign influences

that they have never been able to form a new one.  Thus they easily

enter upon any new path which seems to them profitable or

attractive.  The great mass of the people, on the contrary, too

heavy to be thus lifted out of the guiding influence of custom and

tradition, are still animated with a strongly conservative spirit.



In confirmation of this view I may mention two facts which have

often attracted my attention.  The first is that the Molokanye--a

primitive Evangelical sect of which I shall speak at length in the

next chapter--succumb gradually to German influence; by becoming

heretics in religion they free themselves from one of the strongest

bonds attaching them to the past, and soon become heretics in

things secular.  The second fact is that even the Orthodox peasant,

when placed by circumstances in some new sphere of activity,

readily adopts whatever seems profitable.  Take, for example, the

peasants who abandon agriculture and embark in industrial

enterprises; finding themselves, as it were, in a new world, in

which their old traditional notions are totally inapplicable, they

have no hesitation in adopting foreign ideas and foreign

inventions.  And when once they have chosen this new path, they are

much more "go-ahead" than the Germans.  Freed alike from the

trammels of hereditary conceptions and from the prudence which

experience generates, they often give a loose rein to their

impulsive character, and enter freely on the wildest speculations.



The marked contrast presented by a German colony and a Russian

village in close proximity with each other is often used to

illustrate the superiority of the Teutonic over the Slavonic race,

and in order to make the contrast more striking, the Mennonite

colonies are generally taken as the representatives of the Germans.

Without entering here on the general question, I must say that this

method of argumentation is scarcely fair.  The Mennonites, who

formerly lived in the neighbourhood of Danzig and emigrated from

Prussia in order to escape the military conscription, brought with

them to their new home a large store of useful technical knowledge

and a considerable amount of capital, and they received a quantity

of land very much greater than the Russian peasants possess.

Besides this, they enjoyed until very recently several valuable

privileges.  They were entirely exempted from military service and

almost entirely exempted from taxation.  Altogether their lines

fell in very pleasant places.  In material and moral well-being

they stand as far above the majority of the ordinary German

colonists as these latter do above their Russian neighbours.  Even

in the richest districts of Germany their prosperity would attract

attention.  To compare these rich, privileged, well-educated

farmers with the poor, heavily taxed, uneducated peasantry, and to

draw from the comparison conclusions concerning the capabilities of

the two races, is a proceeding so absurd that it requires no

further comment.



To the wearied traveller who has been living for some time in

Russian villages, one of these Mennonite colonies seems an earthly

paradise.  In a little hollow, perhaps by the side of a

watercourse, he suddenly comes on a long row of high-roofed houses

half concealed in trees.  The trees may be found on closer

inspection to be little better than mere saplings; but after a long

journey on the bare Steppe, where there is neither tree nor bush of

any kind, the foliage, scant as it is, appears singularly inviting.

The houses are large, well arranged, and kept in such thoroughly

good repair that they always appear to be newly built.  The rooms

are plainly furnished, without any pretensions to elegance, but

scrupulously clean.  Adjoining the house are the stable and byre,

which would not disgrace a model farm in Germany or England.  In

front is a spacious courtyard, which has the appearance of being

swept several times a day, and behind there is a garden well

stocked with vegetables.  Fruit trees and flowers are not very

plentiful, for the climate is not favourable to them.



The inhabitants are honest, frugal folk, somewhat sluggish of

intellect and indifferent to things lying beyond the narrow limits

of their own little world, but shrewd enough in all matters which

they deem worthy of their attention.  If you arrive amongst them as

a stranger you may be a little chilled by the welcome you receive,

for they are exclusive, reserved, and distrustful, and do not much

like to associate with those who do not belong to their own sect;

but if you can converse with them in their mother tongue and talk

about religious matters in an evangelical tone, you may easily

overcome their stiffness and exclusiveness.  Altogether such a

village cannot be recommended for a lengthened sojourn, for the

severe order and symmetry which everywhere prevail would soon prove

irksome to any one having no Dutch blood in his veins;* but as a

temporary resting-place during a pilgrimage on the Steppe, when the

pilgrim is longing for a little cleanliness and comfort, it is very

agreeable.





* The Mennonites were originally Dutchmen.  Persecuted for their

religious views in the sixteenth century, a large number of them

accepted an invitation to settle in West Prussia, where they helped

to drain the great marshes between Danzig, Elbing, and Marienburg.

Here in the course of time they forgot their native language.

Their emigration to Russia began in 1789.





The fact that these Mennonites and some other German colonies have

succeeded in rearing a few sickly trees has suggested to some

fertile minds the idea that the prevailing dryness of the climate,

which is the chief difficulty with which the agriculturist of that

region has to contend, might be to some extent counteracted by

arboriculture on a large scale.  This scheme, though it has been

seriously entertained by one of his Majesty's ministers, must seem

hardly practicable to any one who knows how much labour and money

the colonists have expended in creating that agreeable shade which

they love to enjoy in their leisure hours.  If climate is affected

at all by the existence or non-existence of forests--a point on

which scientific men do not seem to be entirely agreed--any

palpable increase of the rainfall can be produced only by forests

of enormous extent, and it is hardly conceivable that these could

be artificially produced in Southern Russia.  It is quite possible,

however, that local ameliorations may be effected.  During a visit

to the province of Voronezh in 1903 I found that comparatively

small plantations diminished the effects of drought in their

immediate vicinity by retaining the moisture for a time in the soil

and the surrounding atmosphere.



After the Mennonites and other Germans, the Bulgarian colonists

deserve a passing notice.  They settled in this region much more

recently, on the land that was left vacant by the exodus of the

Nogai Tartars after the Crimean War.  If I may judge of their

condition by a mere flying visit, I should say that in agriculture

and domestic civilisation they are not very far behind the majority

of German colonists.  Their houses are indeed small--so small that

one of them might almost be put into a single room of a Mennonite's

house; but there is an air of cleanliness and comfort about them

that would do credit to a German housewife.



In spite of all this, these Bulgarians were, I could easily

perceive, by no means delighted with their new home.  The cause of

their discontent, so far as I could gather from the few laconic

remarks which I extracted from them, seemed to be this: Trusting to

the highly coloured descriptions furnished by the emigration agents

who had induced them to change the rule of the Sultan for the

authority of the Tsar, they came to Russia with the expectation of

finding a fertile and beautiful Promised Land.  Instead of a land

flowing with milk and honey, they received a tract of bare Steppe

on which even water could be obtained only with great difficulty--

with no shade to protect them from the heat of summer and nothing

to shelter them from the keen northern blasts that often sweep over

those open plains.  As no adequate arrangements had been made for

their reception, they were quartered during the first winter on the

German colonists, who, being quite innocent of any Slavophil

sympathies, were probably not very hospitable to their uninvited

guests.  To complete their disappointment, they found that they

could not cultivate the vine, and that their mild, fragrant

tobacco, which is for them a necessary of life, could be obtained

only at a very high price.  So disconsolate were they under this

cruel disenchantment that, at the time of my visit, they talked of

returning to their old homes in Turkey.



As an example of the less prosperous colonists, I may mention the

Tartar-speaking Greeks in the neighbourhood of Mariupol, on the

northern shore of the Sea of Azof.  Their ancestors lived in the

Crimea, under the rule of the Tartar Khans, and emigrated to Russia

in the time of Catherine II., before Crim Tartary was annexed to

the Russian Empire.  They have almost entirely forgotten their old

language, but have preserved their old faith.  In adopting the

Tartar language they have adopted something of Tartar indolence and

apathy, and the natural consequence is that they are poor and

ignorant.



But of all the colonists of this region the least prosperous are

the Jews.  The Chosen People are certainly a most intelligent,

industrious, frugal race, and in all matters of buying, selling,

and bartering they are unrivalled among the nations of the earth,

but they have been too long accustomed to town life to be good

tillers of the soil.  These Jewish colonies were founded as an

experiment to see whether the Israelite could be weaned from his

traditionary pursuits and transferred to what some economists call

the productive section of society.  The experiment has failed, and

the cause of the failure is not difficult to find.  One has merely

to look at these men of gaunt visage and shambling gait, with their

loop-holed slippers, and black, threadbare coats reaching down to

their ankles, to understand that they are not in their proper

sphere.  Their houses are in a most dilapidated condition, and

their villages remind one of the abomination of desolation spoken

of by Daniel the Prophet.  A great part of their land is left

uncultivated or let to colonists of a different race.  What little

revenue they have is derived chiefly from trade of a more or less

clandestine nature.*





* Mr. Arnold White, who subsequently visited some of these Jewish

Colonies in connection with Baron Hirsch's colonisation scheme,

assured me that he found them in a much more prosperous condition.





As Scandinavia was formerly called officina gentium--a workshop in

which new nations were made--so we may regard Southern Russia as a

workshop in which fragments of old nations are being melted down to

form a new, composite whole.  It must be confessed, however, that

the melting process has as yet scarcely begun.



National peculiarities are not obliterated so rapidly in Russia as

in America or in British colonies.  Among the German colonists in

Russia the process of assimilation is hardly perceptible.  Though

their fathers and grandfathers may have been born in the new

country, they would consider it an insult to be called Russians.

They look down upon the Russian peasantry as poor, ignorant, lazy,

and dishonest, fear the officials on account of their tyranny and

extortion, preserve jealously their own language and customs,

rarely speak Russian well--sometimes not at all--and never

intermarry with those from whom they are separated by nationality

and religion.  The Russian influence acts, however, more rapidly on

the Slavonic colonists--Servians, Bulgarians, Montenegrins--who

profess the Greek Orthodox faith, learn more easily the Russian

language, which is closely allied to their own, have no

consciousness of belonging to a Culturvolk, and in general possess

a nature much more pliable than the Teutonic.



The Government has recently attempted to accelerate the fusing

process by retracting the privileges granted to the colonists and

abolishing the peculiar administration under which they were

placed.  These measures--especially the universal military service--

may eventually diminish the extreme exclusiveness of the Germans;

the youths, whilst serving in the army, will at least learn the

Russian language, and may possibly imbibe something of the Russian

spirit.  But for the present this new policy has aroused a strong

feeling of hostility and greatly intensified the spirit of

exclusiveness.  In the German colonies I have often overheard

complaints about Russian tyranny and uncomplimentary remarks about

the Russian national character.



The Mennonites consider themselves specially aggrieved by the so-

called reforms.  They came to Russia in order to escape military

service and with the distinct understanding that they should be

exempted from it, and now they are forced to act contrary to the

religious tenets of their sect.  This is the ground of complaint

which they put forward in the petitions addressed to the

Government, but they have at the same time another, and perhaps

more important, objection to the proposed changes.  They feel, as

several of them admitted to me, that if the barrier which separates

them from the rest of the population were in any way broken down,

they could no longer preserve that stern Puritanical discipline

which at present constitutes their force.  Hence, though the

Government was disposed to make important concessions, hundreds of

families sold their property and emigrated to America.  The

movement, however, did not become general.  At present the Russian

Mennonites number, male and female, about 50,000, divided into 160

colonies and possessing over 800,000 acres of land.



It is quite possible that under the new system of administration

the colonists who profess in common with the Russians the Greek

Orthodox faith may be rapidly Russianised; but I am convinced that

the others will long resist assimilation.  Greek orthodoxy and

Protestant sectarianism are so radically different in spirit that

their respective votaries are not likely to intermarry; and without

intermarriage it is impossible that the two nationalities should

blend.



As an instance of the ethnological curiosities which the traveller

may stumble upon unawares in this curious region, I may mention a

strange acquaintance I made when travelling on the great plain

which stretches from the Sea of Azof to the Caspian.  One day I

accidentally noticed on my travelling-map the name "Shotlandskaya

Kol6niya" (Scottish Colony) near the celebrated baths of

Piatigorsk.  I was at that moment in Stavropol, a town about eighty

miles to the north, and could not gain any satisfactory information

as to what this colony was.  Some well-informed people assured me

that it really was what its name implied, whilst others asserted as

confidently that it was simply a small German settlement.  To

decide the matter I determined to visit the place myself, though it

did not lie near my intended route, and I accordingly found myself

one morning in the village in question.  The first inhabitants whom

I encountered were unmistakably German, and they professed to know

nothing about the existence of Scotsmen in the locality either at

the present or in former times.  This was disappointing, and I was

about to turn away and drive off, when a young man, who proved to

be the schoolmaster, came up, and on hearing what I desired,

advised me to consult an old Circassian who lived at the end of the

village and was well acquainted with local antiquities.  On

proceeding to the house indicated, I found a venerable old man,

with fine, regular features of the Circassian type, coal-black

sparkling eyes, and a long grey beard that would have done honour

to a patriarch.  To him I explained briefly, in Russian, the object

of my visit, and asked whether he knew of any Scotsmen in the

district.



"And why do you wish to know?" he replied, in the same language,

fixing me with his keen, sparkling eyes.



"Because I am myself a Scotsman, and hoped to find fellow-

countrymen here."



Let the reader imagine my astonishment when, in reply to this, he

answered, in genuine broad Scotch, "Od, man, I'm a Scotsman tae!

My name is John Abercrombie.  Did ye never hear tell o' John

Abercrombie, the famous Edinburgh doctor?"



I was fairly puzzled by this extraordinary declaration.  Dr.

Abercrombie's name was familiar to me as that of a medical

practitioner and writer on psychology, but I knew that he was long

since dead.  When I had recovered a little from my surprise, I

ventured to remark to the enigmatical personage before me that,

though his tongue was certainly Scotch, his face was as certainly

Circassian.



"Weel, weel," he replied, evidently enjoying my look of

mystification, "you're no' far wrang.  I'm a Circassian Scotsman!"



This extraordinary admission did not diminish my perplexity, so I

begged my new acquaintance to be a little more explicit, and he at

once complied with my request.  His long story may be told in a few

words:



In the first years of the present century a band of Scotch

missionaries came to Russia for the purpose of converting the

Circassian tribes, and received from the Emperor Alexander I. a

large grant of land in this place, which was then on the frontier

of the Empire.  Here they founded a mission, and began the work;

but they soon discovered that the surrounding population were not

idolaters, but Mussulmans, and consequently impervious to

Christianity.  In this difficulty they fell on the happy idea of

buying Circassian children from their parents and bringing them up

as Christians.  One of these children, purchased about the year

1806, was a little boy called Teoona.  As he had been purchased

with money subscribed by Dr. Abercrombie, he had received in

baptism that gentleman's name, and he considered himself the

foster-son of his benefactor.  Here was the explanation of the

mystery.



Teoona, alias Mr. Abercrombie, was a man of more than average

intelligence.  Besides his native tongue, he spoke English, German,

and Russian perfectly; and he assured me that he knew several other

languages equally well.  His life had been devoted to missionary

work, and especially to translating and printing the Scriptures.

He had laboured first in Astrakhan, then for four years and a half

in Persia--in the service of the Bale mission--and afterwards for

six years in Siberia.



The Scottish mission was suppressed by the Emperor Nicholas about

the year 1835, and all the missionaries except two returned home.

The son of one of these two (Galloway) was the only genuine

Scotsman remaining at the time of my visit.  Of the "Circassian

Scotsmen" there were several, most of whom had married Germans.

The other inhabitants were German colonists from the province of

Saratof, and German was the language commonly spoken in the

village.



After hearing so much about foreign colonists, Tartar invaders, and

Finnish aborigines, the reader may naturally desire to know the

numerical strength of this foreign element.  Unfortunately we have

no accurate data on this subject, but from a careful examination of

the available statistics I am inclined to conclude that it

constitutes about one-sixth of the population of European Russia,

including Poland, Finland, and the Caucasus, and nearly a third of

the population of the Empire as a whole.

