





CHAPTER X



FINNISH AND TARTAR VILLAGES





A Finnish Tribe--Finnish Villages--Various Stages of Russification--

Finnish Women--Finnish Religions--Method of "Laying" Ghosts--

Curious Mixture of Christianity and Paganism--Conversion of the

Finns--A Tartar Village--A Russian Peasant's Conception of

Mahometanism--A Mahometan's View of Christianity--Propaganda--The

Russian Colonist--Migrations of Peoples During the Dark Ages.





When talking one day with a landed proprietor who lived near

Ivanofka, I accidentally discovered that in a district at some

distance to the northeast there were certain villages the

inhabitants of which did not understand Russian, and habitually

used a peculiar language of their own.  With an illogical hastiness

worthy of a genuine ethnologist, I at once assumed that these must

be the remnants of some aboriginal race.



"Des aborigenes!" I exclaimed, unable to recall the Russian

equivalent for the term, and knowing that my friend understood

French.  "Doubtless the remains of some ancient race who formerly

held the country, and are now rapidly disappearing.  Have you any

Aborigines Protection Society in this part of the world?"



My friend had evidently great difficulty in imagining what an

Aborigines Protection Society could be, and promptly assured me

that there was nothing of the kind in Russia.  On being told that

such a society might render valuable services by protecting the

weaker against the stronger race, and collecting important

materials for the new science of Social Embryology, he looked

thoroughly mystified.  As to the new science, he had never heard of

it, and as to protection, he thought that the inhabitants of the

villages in question were quite capable of protecting themselves.

"I could invent," he added, with a malicious smile, "a society for

the protection of ALL peasants, but I am quite sure that the

authorities would not allow me to carry out my idea."



My ethnological curiosity was thoroughly aroused, and I endeavoured

to awaken a similar feeling in my friend by hinting that we had at

hand a promising field for discoveries which might immortalise the

fortunate explorers; but my efforts were in vain.  The old

gentleman was a portly, indolent man, of phlegmatic temperament,

who thought more of comfort than of immortality in the terrestrial

sense of the term.  To my proposal that we should start at once on

an exploring expedition, he replied calmly that the distance was

considerable, that the roads were muddy, and that there was nothing

to be learned.  The villages in question were very like other

villages, and their inhabitants lived, to all intents and purposes,

in the same way as their Russian neighbours.  If they had any

secret peculiarities they would certainly not divulge them to a

stranger, for they were notoriously silent, gloomy, morose, and

uncommunicative.  Everything that was known about them, my friend

assured me, might be communicated in a few words.  They belonged to

a Finnish tribe called Korelli, and had been transported to their

present settlements in comparatively recent times.  In answer to my

questions as to how, when, and by whom they had been transported

thither my informant replied that it had been the work of Ivan the

Terrible.



Though I knew at that time little of Russian history, I suspected

that the last assertion was invented on the spur of the moment, in

order to satisfy my troublesome curiosity, and accordingly I

determined not to accept it without verification.  The result

showed how careful the traveller should be in accepting the

testimony of "intelligent, well-informed natives."  On further

investigation I discovered, not only that the story about Ivan the

Terrible was a pure invention--whether of my friend or of the

popular imagination, which always uses heroic names as pegs on

which to hang traditions, I know not--but also that my first theory

was correct.  These Finnish peasants turned out to be a remnant of

the aborigines, or at least of the oldest known inhabitants of the

district.  Men of the same race, but bearing different tribal

names, such as Finns, Korelli, Tcheremiss, Tchuvash, Mordva,

Votyaks, Permyaks, Zyryanye, Voguls, are to be found in

considerable numbers all over the northern provinces, from the Gulf

of Bothnia to Western Siberia, as well as in the provinces

bordering the Middle Volga as far south as Penza, Simbirsk, and

Tamboff.*  The Russian peasants, who now compose the great mass of

the population, are the intruders.





* The semi-official "Statesman's Handbook for Russia," published in

1896, enumerates fourteen different tribes, with an aggregate of

about 4,650,000 souls, but these numbers must not be regarded as

having any pretensions to accuracy.  The best authorities differ

widely in their estimates.





I had long taken a deep interest in what learned Germans call the

Volkerwanderung--that is to say, the migrations of peoples during

the gradual dissolution of the Roman Empire, and it had often

occurred to me that the most approved authorities, who had expended

an infinite amount of learning on the subject, had not always taken

the trouble to investigate the nature of the process.  It is not

enough to know that a race or tribe extended its dominions or

changed its geographical position.  We ought at the same time to

inquire whether it expelled, exterminated, or absorbed the former

inhabitants, and how the expulsion, extermination, or absorption

was effected.  Now of these three processes, absorption may have

been more frequent than is commonly supposed, and it seemed to me

that in Northern Russia this process might be conveniently studied.

A thousand years ago the whole of Northern Russia was peopled by

Finnish pagan tribes, and at the present day the greater part of it

is occupied by peasants who speak the language of Moscow, profess

the Orthodox faith, present in their physiognomy no striking

peculiarities, and appear to the superficial observer pure

Russians.  And we have no reason to suppose that the former

inhabitants were expelled or exterminated, or that they gradually

died out from contact with the civilisation and vices of a higher

race.  History records no wholesale Finnish migrations like that of

the Kalmyks, and no war of extermination; and statistics prove that

among the remnants of those primitive races the population

increases as rapidly as among the Russian peasantry.*  From these

facts I concluded that the Finnish aborigines had been simply

absorbed, or rather, were being absorbed, by the Slavonic

intruders.





* This latter statement is made on the authority of Popoff

("Zyryanye i zyryanski krai," Moscow, 1874) and Tcheremshanski

("Opisanie Orenburgskoi Gubernii," Ufa, 1859).





This conclusion has since been confirmed by observation.  During my

wanderings in these northern provinces I have found villages in

every stage of Russification.  In one, everything seemed thoroughly

Finnish: the inhabitants had a reddish-olive skin, very high cheek-

bones, obliquely set eyes, and a peculiar costume; none of the

women, and very few of the men, could understand Russian, and any

Russian who visited the place was regarded as a foreigner.  In a

second, there were already some Russian inhabitants; the others had

lost something of their pure Finnish type, many of the men had

discarded the old costume and spoke Russian fluently, and a Russian

visitor was no longer shunned.  In a third, the Finnish type was

still further weakened: all the men spoke Russian, and nearly all

the women understood it; the old male costume had entirely

disappeared, and the old female costume was rapidly following it;

while intermarriage with the Russian population was no longer rare.

In a fourth, intermarriage had almost completely done its work, and

the old Finnish element could be detected merely in certain

peculiarities of physiognomy and pronunciation.*





* One of the most common peculiarities of pronunciation is the

substitution of the sound of ts for that of tch, which I found

almost universal over a large area.





The process of Russification may be likewise observed in the manner

of building the houses and in the methods of farming, which show

plainly that the Finnish races did not obtain rudimentary

civilisation from the Slavs.  Whence, then, was it derived?  Was it

obtained from some other race, or is it indigenous?  These are

questions which I have no means of answering.



A Positivist poet--or if that be a contradiction in terms, let us

say a Positivist who wrote verses--once composed an appeal to the

fair sex, beginning with the words:



"Pourquoi, O femmes, restez-vous en arriere?"



The question might have been addressed to the women in these

Finnish villages.  Like their sisters in France, they are much more

conservative than the men, and oppose much more stubbornly the

Russian influence.  On the other hand, like women in general, when

they do begin to change, they change more rapidly.  This is seen

especially in the matter of costume.  The men adopt the Russian

costume very gradually; the women adopt it at once.  As soon as a

single woman gets a gaudy Russian dress, every other woman in the

village feels envious and impatient till she has done likewise.  I

remember once visiting a Mordva village when this critical point

had been reached, and a very characteristic incident occurred.  In

the preceding villages through which I had passed I had tried in

vain to buy a female costume, and I again made the attempt.  This

time the result was very different.  A few minutes after I had

expressed my wish to purchase a costume, the house in which I was

sitting was besieged by a great crowd of women, holding in their

hands articles of wearing apparel.  In order to make a selection I

went out into the crowd, but the desire to find a purchaser was so

general and so ardent that I was regularly mobbed.  The women,

shouting "Kupi! kupi!" ("Buy! buy!"), and struggling with each

other to get near me, were so importunate that I had at last to

take refuge in the house, to prevent my own costume from being torn

to shreds.  But even there I was not safe, for the women followed

at my heels, and a considerable amount of good-natured violence had

to be employed to expel the intruders.



It is especially interesting to observe the transformation of

nationality in the sphere of religious conceptions.  The Finns

remained pagans long after the Russians had become Christians, but

at the present time the whole population, from the eastern boundary

of Finland proper to the Ural Mountains, are officially described

as members of the Greek Orthodox Church.  The manner in which this

change of religion was effected is well worthy of attention.



The old religion of the Finnish tribes, if we may judge from the

fragments which still remain, had, like the people themselves, a

thoroughly practical, prosaic character.  Their theology consisted

not of abstract dogmas, but merely of simple prescriptions for the

ensuring of material welfare.  Even at the present day, in the

districts not completely Russified, their prayers are plain,

unadorned requests for a good harvest, plenty of cattle, and the

like, and are expressed in a tone of childlike familiarity that

sounds strange in our ears.  They make no attempt to veil their

desires with mystic solemnity, but ask, in simple, straightforward

fashion, that God should make the barley ripen and the cow calve

successfully, that He should prevent their horses from being

stolen, and that he should help them to gain money to pay their

taxes.



Their religious ceremonies have, so far as I have been able to

discover, no hidden mystical signification, and are for the most

part rather magical rites for averting the influence of malicious

spirits, or freeing themselves from the unwelcome visits of their

departed relatives.  For this latter purpose many even of those who

are officially Christians proceed at stated seasons to the

graveyards and place an abundant supply of cooked food on the

graves of their relations who have recently died, requesting the

departed to accept this meal, and not to return to their old homes,

where their presence is no longer desired.  Though more of the food

is eaten at night by the village dogs than by the famished spirits,

the custom is believed to have a powerful influence in preventing

the dead from wandering about at night and frightening the living.

If it be true, as I am inclined to believe, that tombstones were

originally used for keeping the dead in their graves, then it must

be admitted that in the matter of "laying" ghosts the Finns have

shown themselves much more humane than other races.  It may,

however, be suggested that in the original home of the Finns--"le

berceau de la race," as French ethnologists say--stones could not

easily be procured, and that the custom of feeding the dead was

adopted as a pis aller.  The decision of the question must be left

to those who know where the original home of the Finns was.



As the Russian peasantry, knowing little or nothing of theology,

and placing implicit confidence in rites and ceremonies, did not

differ very widely from the pagan Finns in the matter of religious

conceptions, the friendly contact of the two races naturally led to

a curious blending of the two religions.  The Russians adopted many

customs from the Finns, and the Finns adopted still more from the

Russians.  When Yumala and the other Finnish deities did not do as

they were desired, their worshippers naturally applied for

protection or assistance to the Madonna and the "Russian God."  If

their own traditional magic rites did not suffice to ward off evil

influences, they naturally tried the effect of crossing themselves,

as the Russians do in moments of danger.  All this may seem strange

to us who have been taught from our earliest years that religion is

something quite different from spells, charms, and incantations,

and that of all the various religions in the world one alone is

true, all the others being false.  But we must remember that the

Finns have had a very different education.  They do not distinguish

religion from magic rites, and they have never been taught that

other religions are less true than their own.  For them the best

religion is the one which contains the most potent spells, and they

see no reason why less powerful religions should not be blended

therewith.  Their deities are not jealous gods, and do not insist

on having a monopoly of devotion; and in any case they cannot do

much injury to those who have placed themselves under the

protection of a more powerful divinity.



This simple-minded eclecticism often produces a singular mixture of

Christianity and paganism.  Thus, for instance, at the harvest

festivals, Tchuvash peasants have been known to pray first to their

own deities, and then to St. Nicholas, the miracle-worker, who is

the favourite saint of the Russian peasantry.  Such dual worship is

sometimes even recommended by the Yomzi--a class of men who

correspond to the medicine-men among the Red Indians--and the

prayers are on these occasions couched in the most familiar terms.

Here is a specimen given by a Russian who has specially studied the

language and customs of this interesting people:* "Look here, O

Nicholas-god!  Perhaps my neighbour, little Michael, has been

slandering me to you, or perhaps he will do so.  If he does, don't

believe him.  I have done him no ill, and wish him none.  He is a

worthless boaster and a babbler.  He does not really honour you,

and merely plays the hypocrite.  But I honour you from my heart;

and, behold, I place a taper before you!"  Sometimes incidents

occur which display a still more curious blending of the two

religions.  Thus a Tcheremiss, on one occasion, in consequence of a

serious illness, sacrificed a young foal to our Lady of Kazan!





* Mr. Zolotnitski, "Tchuvasko-russki slovar," p. 167.





Though the Finnish beliefs affected to some extent the Russian

peasantry, the Russian faith ultimately prevailed.  This can be

explained without taking into consideration the inherent

superiority of Christianity over all forms of paganism.  The Finns

had no organised priesthood, and consequently never offered a

systematic opposition to the new faith; the Russians, on the

contrary, had a regular hierarchy in close alliance with the civil

administration.  In the principal villages Christian churches were

built, and some of the police-officers vied with the ecclesiastical

officials in the work of making converts.  At the same time there

were other influences tending in the same direction.  If a Russian

practised Finnish superstitions he exposed himself to disagreeable

consequences of a temporal kind; if, on the contrary, a Finn

adopted the Christian religion, the temporal consequences that

could result were all advantageous to him.



Many of the Finns gradually became Christians almost unconsciously.

The ecclesiastical authorities were extremely moderate in their

demands.  They insisted on no religious knowledge, and merely

demanded that the converts should be baptised.  The converts,

failing to understand the spiritual significance of the ceremony,

commonly offered no resistance, so long as the immersion was

performed in summer.  So little repugnance, indeed, did they feel,

that on some occasions, when a small reward was given to those who

consented, some of the new converts wished the ceremony to be

repeated several times.  The chief objection to receiving the

Christian faith lay in the long and severe fasts imposed by the

Greek Orthodox Church; but this difficulty was overcome by assuming

that they need not be strictly observed.  At first, in some

districts, it was popularly believed that the Icons informed the

Russian priests against those who did not fast as the Church

prescribed; but experience gradually exploded this theory.  Some of

the more prudent converts, however, to prevent all possible tale-

telling, took the precaution of turning the face of the Icon to the

wall when prohibited meats were about to be eaten!



This gradual conversion of the Finnish tribes, effected without any

intellectual revolution in the minds of the converts, had very

important temporal consequences.  Community of faith led to

intermarriage, and intermarriage led rapidly to the blending of the

two races.



If we compare a Finnish village in any stage of Russification with

a Tartar village, of which the inhabitants are Mahometans, we

cannot fail to be struck by the contrast.  In the latter, though

there may be many Russians, there is no blending of the two races.

Between them religion has raised an impassable barrier.  There are

many villages in the eastern and north-eastern provinces of

European Russia which have been for generations half Tartar and

half Russian, and the amalgamation of the two nationalities has not

yet begun.  Near the one end stands the Christian church, and near

the other stands the little metchet, or Mahometan house of prayer.

The whole village forms one Commune, with one Village Assembly and

one Village Elder; but, socially, it is composed of two distinct

communities, each possessing its peculiar customs and peculiar mode

of life.  The Tartar may learn Russian, but he does not on that

account become Russianised.



It must not, however, be supposed that the two races are imbued

with fanatical hatred towards each other.  On the contrary, they

live in perfect good-fellowship, elect as Village Elder sometimes a

Russian and sometimes a Tartar, and discuss the Communal affairs in

the Village Assembly without reference to religious matters.  I

know one village where the good-fellowship went even a step

farther: the Christians determined to repair their church, and the

Mahometans helped them to transport wood for the purpose!  All this

tends to show that under a tolerably good Government, which does

not favour one race at the expense of the other, Mahometan Tartars

and Christian Slavs can live peaceably together.



The absence of fanaticism and of that proselytising zeal which is

one of the most prolific sources of religious hatred, is to be

explained by the peculiar religious conceptions of these peasants.

In their minds religion and nationality are so closely allied as to

be almost identical.  The Russian is, as it were, by nature a

Christian, and the Tartar a Mahometan; and it never occurs to any

one in these villages to disturb the appointed order of nature.  On

this subject I had once an interesting conversation with a Russian

peasant who had been for some time living among Tartars.  In reply

to my question as to what kind of people the Tartars were, he

replied laconically, "Nitchevo"--that is to say, "nothing in

particular"; and on being pressed for a more definite expression of

opinion, he admitted that they were very good people indeed.



"And what kind of faith have they?" I continued.



"A good enough faith," was the prompt reply.



"Is it better than the faith of the Molokanye?"  The Molokanye are

Russian sectarians--closely resembling Scotch Presbyterians--of

whom I shall have more to say in the sequel.



"Of course it is better than the Molokan faith."



"Indeed!" I exclaimed, endeavouring to conceal my astonishment at

this strange judgment.  "Are the Molokanye, then, very bad people?"



"Not at all.  The Molokanye are good and honest."



"Why, then, do you think their faith is so much worse than that of

the Mahometans?"



"How shall I tell you?"  The peasant here paused as if to collect

his thoughts, and then proceeded slowly, "The Tartars, you see,

received their faith from God as they received the colour of their

skins, but the Molokanye are Russians who have invented a faith out

of their own heads!"



This singular answer scarcely requires a commentary.  As it would

be absurd to try to make Tartars change the colour of their skins,

so it would be absurd to try to make them change their religion.

Besides this, such an attempt would be an unjustifiable

interference with the designs of Providence, for, in the peasant's

opinion, God gave Mahometanism to the Tartars just as he gave the

Orthodox faith to the Russians.



The ecclesiastical authorities do not formally adopt this strange

theory, but they generally act in accordance with it.  There is

little official propaganda among the Mahometan subjects of the

Tsar, and it is well that it is so, for an energetic propaganda

would lead merely to the stirring up of any latent hostility which

may exist deep down in the nature of the two races, and it would

not make any real converts.  The Tartars cannot unconsciously

imbibe Christianity as the Finns have done.  Their religion is not

a rude, simple paganism without theology in the scholastic sense of

the term, but a monotheism as exclusive as Christianity itself.

Enter into conversation with an intelligent man who has no higher

religious belief than a rude sort of paganism, and you may, if you

know him well and make a judicious use of your knowledge, easily

interest him in the touching story of Christ's life and teaching.

And in these unsophisticated natures there is but one step from

interest and sympathy to conversion.



Try the same method with a Mussulman, and you will soon find that

all your efforts are fruitless.  He has already a theology and a

prophet of his own, and sees no reason why he should exchange them

for those which you have to offer.  Perhaps he will show you more

or less openly that he pities your ignorance and wonders that you

have not been able to ADVANCE from Christianity to Mahometanism.

In his opinion--I am supposing that he is a man of education--Moses

and Christ were great prophets in their day, and consequently he is

accustomed to respect their memory; but he is profoundly convinced

that however appropriate they were for their own times, they have

been entirely superseded by Mahomet, precisely as we believe that

Judaism was superseded by Christianity.  Proud of his superior

knowledge, he regards you as a benighted polytheist, and may

perhaps tell you that the Orthodox Christians with whom he comes in

contact have three Gods and a host of lesser deities called saints,

that they pray to idols called Icons, and that they keep their holy

days by getting drunk.  In vain you endeavour to explain to him

that saints and Icons are not essential parts of Christianity, and

that habits of intoxication have no religious significance.  On

these points he may make concessions to you, but the doctrine of

the Trinity remains for him a fatal stumbling-block.  "You

Christians," he will say, "once had a great prophet called Jisous,

who is mentioned with respect in the Koran, but you falsified your

sacred writings and took to worshipping him, and now you declare

that he is the equal of Allah.  Far from us be such blasphemy!

There is but one God, and Mahomet is His prophet."



A worthy Christian missionary, who had laboured long and zealously

among a Mussulman population, once called me sharply to account for

having expressed the opinion that Mahometans are very rarely

converted to Christianity.  When I brought him down from the region

of vague general statements and insisted on knowing how many cases

he had met with in his own personal experience during sixteen years

of missionary work, he was constrained to admit that he had know

only one: and when I pressed him farther as to the disinterested

sincerity of the convert in question his reply was not altogether

satisfactory.



The policy of religious non-intervention has not always been

practised by the Government.  Soon after the conquest of the

Khanate of Kazan in the sixteenth century, the Tsars of Muscovy

attempted to convert their new subjects from Mahometanism to

Christianity.  The means employed were partly spiritual and partly

administrative, but the police-officers seem to have played a more

important part than the clergy.  In this way a certain number of

Tartars were baptised; but the authorities were obliged to admit

that the new converts "shamelessly retain many horrid Tartar

customs, and neither hold nor know the Christian faith."  When

spiritual exhortations failed, the Government ordered its officials

to "pacify, imprison, put in irons, and thereby UNTEACH and

frighten from the Tartar faith those who, though baptised, do not

obey the admonitions of the Metropolitan."  These energetic

measures proved as ineffectual as the spiritual exhortations; and

Catherine II. adopted a new method, highly characteristic of her

system of administration.  The new converts--who, be it remembered,

were unable to read and write--were ordered by Imperial ukaz to

sign a written promise to the effect that "they would completely

forsake their infidel errors, and, avoiding all intercourse with

unbelievers, would hold firmly and unwaveringly the Christian faith

and its dogmas"*--of which latter, we may add, they had not the

slightest knowledge.  The childlike faith in the magical efficacy

of stamped paper here displayed was not justified.  The so-called

"baptised Tartars" are at the present time as far from being

Christians as they were in the sixteenth century.  They cannot

openly profess Mahometanism, because men who have been once

formally admitted into the National Church cannot leave it without

exposing themselves to the severe pains and penalties of the

criminal code, but they strongly object to be Christianised.





* "Ukaz Kazanskoi dukhovnoi Konsistorii."  Anno 1778.





On this subject I have found a remarkable admission in a

semiofficial article, published as recently as 1872.*  "It is a

fact worthy of attention," says the writer, "that a long series of

evident apostasies coincides with the beginning of measures to

confirm the converts in the Christian faith.  There must be,

therefore, some collateral cause producing those cases of apostasy

precisely at the moment when the contrary might be expected."

There is a delightful naivete in this way of stating the fact.  The

mysterious cause vaguely indicated is not difficult to find.  So

long as the Government demanded merely that the supposed converts

should be inscribed as Christians in the official registers, there

was no official apostasy; but as soon as active measures began to

be taken "to confirm the converts," a spirit of hostility and

fanaticism appeared among the Mussulman population, and made those

who were inscribed as Christians resist the propaganda.





* "Zhurnal Ministerstva Narodnago Prosveshtcheniya."  June, 1872.





It may safely be said that Christians are impervious to Islam, and

genuine Mussulmans impervious to Christianity; but between the two

there are certain tribes, or fractions of tribes, which present a

promising field for missionary enterprise.  In this field the

Tartars show much more zeal than the Russians, and possess certain

advantages over their rivals.  The tribes of Northeastern Russia

learn Tartar much more easily than Russian, and their geographical

position and modes of life bring them in contact with Russians much

less than with Tartars.  The consequence is that whole villages of

Tcheremiss and Votiaks, officially inscribed as belonging to the

Greek Orthodox Church, have openly declared themselves Mahometans;

and some of the more remarkable conversions have been commemorated

by popular songs, which are sung by young and old.  Against this

propaganda the Orthodox ecclesiastical authorities do little or

nothing.  Though the criminal code contains severe enactments

against those who fall away from the Orthodox Church, and still

more against those who produce apostasy,* the enactments are rarely

put in force.  Both clergy and laity in the Russian Church are, as

a rule, very tolerant where no political questions are involved.

The parish priest pays attention to apostasy only when it

diminishes his annual revenues, and this can be easily avoided by

the apostate's paying a small yearly sum.  If this precaution be

taken, whole villages may be converted to Islam without the higher

ecclesiastical authorities knowing anything of the matter.





* A person convicted of converting a Christian to Islamism is

sentenced, according to the criminal code (?84), to the loss of

all civil rights, and to imprisonment with hard labour for a term

varying from eight to ten years.





Whether the barrier that separates Christians and Mussulmans in

Russia, as elsewhere, will ever be broken down by education, I do

not know; but I may remark that hitherto the spread of education

among the Tartars has tended rather to imbue them with fanaticism.

If we remember that theological education always produces

intolerance, and that Tartar education is almost exclusively

theological, we shall not be surprised to find that a Tartar's

religious fanaticism is generally in direct proportion to the

amount of his intellectual culture.  The unlettered Tartar,

unspoiled by learning falsely so called, and knowing merely enough

of his religion to perform the customary ordinances prescribed by

the Prophet, is peaceable, kindly, and hospitable towards all men;

but the learned Tartar, who has been taught that the Christian is a

kiafir (infidel) and a mushrik (polytheist), odious in the sight of

Allah, and already condemned to eternal punishment, is as

intolerant and fanatical as the most bigoted Roman Catholic or

Calvinist.  Such fanatics are occasionally to be met with in the

eastern provinces, but they are few in number, and have little

influence on the masses.  From my own experience I can testify that

during the whole course of my wanderings I have nowhere received

more kindness and hospitality than among the uneducated Mussulman

Bashkirs.  Even here, however, Islam opposes a strong barrier to

Russification.



Though no such barrier existed among the pagan Finnish tribes, the

work of Russification among them is still, as I have already

indicated, far from complete.  Not only whole villages, but even

many entire districts, are still very little affected by Russian

influence.  This is to be explained partly by geographical

conditions.  In regions which have a poor soil, and are intersected

by no navigable river, there are few or no Russian settlers, and

consequently the Finns have there preserved intact their language

and customs; whilst in those districts which present more

inducements to colonisation, the Russian population is more

numerous, and the Finns less conservative.  It must, however, be

admitted that geographical conditions do not completely explain the

facts.  The various tribes, even when placed in the same

conditions, are not equally susceptible to foreign influence.  The

Mordva, for instance, are infinitely less conservative than the

Tchuvash.  This I have often noticed, and my impression has been

confirmed by men who have had more opportunities of observation.

For the present we must attribute this to some occult ethnological

peculiarity, but future investigations may some day supply a more

satisfactory explanation.  Already I have obtained some facts which

appear to throw light on the subject.  The Tchuvash have certain

customs which seem to indicate that they were formerly, if not

avowed Mahometans, at least under the influence of Islam, whilst we

have no reason to suppose that the Mordva ever passed through that

school.



The absence of religious fanaticism greatly facilitated Russian

colonisation in these northern regions, and the essentially

peaceful disposition of the Russian peasantry tended in the same

direction.  The Russian peasant is admirably fitted for the work of

peaceful agricultural colonisation.  Among uncivilised tribes he is

good-natured, long-suffering, conciliatory, capable of bearing

extreme hardships, and endowed with a marvellous power of adapting

himself to circumstances.  The haughty consciousness of personal

and national superiority habitually displayed by Englishmen of all

ranks when they are brought in contact with races which they look

upon as lower in the scale of humanity than themselves, is entirely

foreign to his character.  He has no desire to rule, and no wish to

make the natives hewers of wood and drawers of water.  All he

desires is a few acres of land which he and his family can

cultivate; and so long as he is allowed to enjoy these he is not

likely to molest his neighbours.  Had the colonists of the Finnish

country been men of Anglo-Saxon race, they would in all probability

have taken possession of the land and reduced the natives to the

condition of agricultural labourers.  The Russian colonists have

contented themselves with a humbler and less aggressive mode of

action; they have settled peaceably among the native population,

and are rapidly becoming blended with it.  In many districts the

so-called Russians have perhaps more Finnish than Slavonic blood in

their veins.



But what has all this to do, it may be asked, with the

aforementioned Volkerwanderung, or migration of peoples, during the

Dark Ages?  More than may at first sight appear.  Some of the so-

called migrations were, I suspect, not at all migrations in the

ordinary sense of the term, but rather gradual changes, such as

those which have taken place, and are still taking place, in

Northern Russia.  A thousand years ago what is now known as the

province of Yaroslavl was inhabited by Finns, and now it is

occupied by men who are commonly regarded as pure Slays.  But it

would be an utter mistake to suppose that the Finns of this

district migrated to those more distant regions where they are now

to be found.  In reality they formerly occupied, as I have said,

the whole of Northern Russia, and in the province of Yaroslavl they

have been transformed by Slav infiltration.  In Central Europe the

Slavs may be said in a certain sense to have retreated, for in

former times they occupied the whole of Northern Germany as far as

the Elbe.  But what does the word "retreat" mean in this case?  It

means probably that the Slays were gradually Teutonised, and then

absorbed by the Teutonic race.  Some tribes, it is true, swept over

a part of Europe in genuine nomadic fashion, and endeavoured

perhaps to expel or exterminate the actual possessors of the soil.

This kind of migration may likewise be studied in Russia.  But I

must leave the subject till I come to speak of the southern

provinces.


