





CHAPTER XXXII



THE ZEMSTVO AND THE LOCAL SELF-GOVERNMENT





Necessity of Reorganising the Provincial Administration--Zemstvo

Created in 1864--My First Acquaintance with the Institution--

District and Provincial Assemblies--The Leading Members--Great

Expectations Created by the Institution--These Expectations Not

Realised--Suspicions and Hostility of the Bureaucracy--Zemstvo

Brought More Under Control of the Centralised Administration--What

It Has Really Done--Why It Has Not Done More---Rapid Increase of

the Rates--How Far the Expenditure Is Judicious--Why the

Impoverishment of the Peasantry Was Neglected--Unpractical,

Pedantic Spirit--Evil Consequences--Chinese and Russian Formalism--

Local Self-Government of Russia Contrasted with That of England--

Zemstvo Better than Its Predecessors--Its Future.





After the emancipation of the serfs the reform most urgently

required was the improvement of the provincial administration.  In

the time of serfage the Emperor Nicholas, referring to the landed

proprietors, used to say in a jocular tone that he had in his

Empire 50,000 most zealous and efficient hereditary police-masters.

By the Emancipation Law the authority of these hereditary police-

masters was for ever abolished, and it became urgently necessary to

put something else in its place.  Peasant self-government was

accordingly organised on the basis of the rural Commune; but it

fell far short of meeting the requirements of the situation.  Its

largest unit was the Volost, which comprises merely a few

contiguous Communes, and its action is confined exclusively to the

peasantry.  Evidently it was necessary to create a larger

administrative unit, in which the interests of all classes of the

population could be attended to, and for this purpose Alexander II.

in November, 1859, more than a year before the Emancipation Edict,

instructed a special Commission to prepare a project for giving to

the inefficient, dislocated provincial administration greater unity

and independence.  The project was duly prepared, and after being

discussed in the Council of State it received the Imperial sanction

in January, 1864.  It was supposed to give, in the words of an

explanatory memorandum attached to it, "as far as possible a

complete and logical development to the principle of local self-

government."  Thus was created the Zemstvo,* which has recently

attracted considerable attention in Western Europe, and which is

destined, perhaps, to play a great political part in the future.





* The term Zemstvo is derived from the word Zemlya, meaning land,

and might be translated, if a barbarism were permissible, by Land-

dom on the analogy of Kingdom, Dukedom, etc.





My personal acquaintance with this interesting institution dates

from 1870.  Very soon after my arrival at Novgorod in that year, I

made the acquaintance of a gentleman who was described to me as

"the president of the provincial Zemstvo-bureau," and finding him

amiable and communicative, I suggested that he might give me some

information regarding the institution of which he was the chief

local representative.  With the utmost readiness he proposed to be

my Mentor, introduced me to his colleagues, and invited me to come

and see him at his office as often as I felt inclined.  Of this

invitation I made abundant use.  At first my visits were discreetly

few and short, but when I found that my new friend and his

colleagues really wished to instruct me in all the details of

Zemstvo administration, and had arranged a special table in the

president's room for my convenience, I became a regular attendant,

and spent daily several hours in the bureau, studying the current

affairs, and noting down the interesting bits of statistical and

other information which came before the members, as if I had been

one of their number.  When they went to inspect the hospital, the

lunatic asylum, the seminary for the preparation of village

schoolmasters, or any other Zemstvo institution, they invariably

invited me to accompany them, and made no attempt to conceal from

me the defects which they happened to discover.



I mention all this because it illustrates the readiness of most

Russians to afford every possible facility to a foreigner who

wishes seriously to study their country.  They believe that they

have long been misunderstood and systematically calumniated by

foreigners, and they are extremely desirous that the prevalent

misconceptions regarding their country should be removed.  It must

be said to their honour that they have little or none of that false

patriotism which seeks to conceal national defects; and in judging

themselves and their institutions they are inclined to be over-

severe rather than unduly lenient.  In the time of Nicholas I.

those who desired to stand well with the Government proclaimed

loudly that they lived in the happiest and best-governed country of

the world, but this shallow official optimism has long since gone

out of fashion.  During all the years which I spent in Russia I

found everywhere the utmost readiness to assist me in my

investigations, and very rarely noticed that habit of "throwing

dust in the eyes of foreigners," of which some writers have spoken

so much.



The Zemstvo is a kind of local administration which supplements the

action of the rural Communes, and takes cognizance of those higher

public wants which individual Communes cannot possibly satisfy.

Its principal duties are to keep the roads and bridges in proper

repair, to provide means of conveyance for the rural police and

other officials, to look after primary education and sanitary

affairs, to watch the state of the crops and take measures against

approaching famine, and, in short, to undertake, within certain

clearly defined limits, whatever seems likely to increase the

material and moral well-being of the population.  In form the

institution is Parliamentary--that is to say, it consists of an

assembly of deputies which meets regularly once a year, and of a

permanent executive bureau elected by the Assembly from among its

members.  If the Assembly be regarded as a local Parliament, the

bureau corresponds to the Cabinet.  In accordance with this analogy

my friend the president was sometimes jocularly termed the Prime

Minister.  Once every three years the deputies are elected in

certain fixed proportions by the landed proprietors, the rural

Communes, and the municipal corporations.  Every province

(guberniya) and each of the districts (uyezdi) into which the

province is subdivided has such an assembly and such a bureau.



Not long after my arrival in Novgorod I had the opportunity of

being present at a District Assembly.  In the ball-room of the

"Club de la Noblesse" I found thirty or forty men seated round a

long table covered with green cloth.  Before each member lay sheets

of paper for the purpose of taking notes, and before the president--

the Marshal of Noblesse for the district--stood a small hand-bell,

which he rang vigorously at the commencement of the proceedings and

on all the occasions when he wished to obtain silence.  To the

right and left of the president sat the members of the executive

bureau (uprava), armed with piles of written and printed documents,

from which they read long and tedious extracts, till the majority

of the audience took to yawning and one or two of the members

positively went to sleep.  At the close of each of these reports

the president rang his bell--presumably for the purpose of

awakening the sleepers--and inquired whether any one had remarks to

make on what had just been read.  Generally some one had remarks to

make, and not unfrequently a discussion ensued.  When any decided

difference of opinion appeared a vote was taken by handing round a

sheet of paper, or by the simpler method of requesting the Ayes to

stand up and the Noes to sit still.



What surprised me most in this assembly was that it was composed

partly of nobles and partly of peasants--the latter being decidedly

in the majority--and that no trace of antagonism seemed to exist

between the two classes.  Landed proprietors and their ci-devant

serfs, emancipated only ten years before, evidently met for the

moment on a footing of equality.  The discussions were carried on

chiefly by the nobles, but on more than one occasion peasant

members rose to speak, and their remarks, always clear, practical,

and to the point, were invariably listened to with respectful

attention.  Instead of that violent antagonism which might have

been expected, considering the constitution of the Assembly, there

was too much unanimity--a fact indicating plainly that the majority

of the members did not take a very deep interest in the matters

presented to them.



This assembly was held in the month of September.  At the beginning

of December the Assembly for the Province met, and during nearly

three weeks I was daily present at its deliberations.  In general

character and mode of procedure it resembled closely the District

Assembly.  Its chief peculiarities were that its members were

chosen, not by the primary electors, but by the assemblies of the

ten districts which compose the province, and that it took

cognisance merely of those matters which concerned more than one

district.  Besides this, the peasant deputies were very few in

number--a fact which somewhat surprised me, because I was aware

that, according to the law, the peasant members of the District

Assemblies were eligible, like those of the other classes.  The

explanation is that the District Assemblies choose their most

active members to represent them in the Provincial Assemblies, and

consequently the choice generally falls on landed proprietors.  To

this arrangement the peasants make no objection, for attendance at

the Provincial Assemblies demands a considerable pecuniary outlay,

and payment to the deputies is expressly prohibited by law



To give the reader an idea of the elements composing this assembly,

let me introduce him to a few of the members.  A considerable

section of them may be described in a single sentence.  They are

commonplace men, who have spent part of their youth in the public

service as officers in the army, or officials in the civil

administration, and have since retired to their estates, where they

gain a modest competence by farming.  Some of them add to their

agricultural revenue by acting as justices of the peace.*  A few

may be described more particularly.





* That is no longer possible.  The institution of justices elected

and paid by the Zemstvo was abolished in 1889.





You see there, for instance, that fine-looking old general in

uniform, with the St. George's Cross at his button-hole--an order

given only for bravery in the field.  That is Prince Suvorof, a

grandson of the famous general.  He has filled high posts in the

Administration without ever tarnishing his name by a dishonest or

dishonourable action, and has spent a great part of his life at

Court without ceasing to be frank, generous, and truthful.  Though

he has no intimate knowledge of current affairs, and sometimes

gives way a little to drowsiness, his sympathies in disputed points

are always on the right side, and when he gets to his feet he

always speaks in a clear soldierlike fashion.



The tall gaunt man, somewhat over middle age, who sits a little to

the left is Prince Vassiltchikof.  He too, has an historic name,

but he cherishes above all things personal independence, and has

consequently always kept aloof from the Imperial Administration and

the Court.  The leisure thus acquired he has devoted to study, and

he has produced several valuable works on political and social

science.  An enthusiastic but at the same time cool-headed

abolitionist at the time of the Emancipation, he has since

constantly striven to ameliorate the condition of the peasantry by

advocating the spread of primary education, the rural credit

associations in the village, the preservation of the Communal

institutions, and numerous important reforms in the financial

system.  Both of these gentlemen, it is said, generously gave to

their peasants more land than they were obliged to give by the

Emancipation Law.  In the Assembly Prince Vassiltchikof speaks

frequently, and always commands attention; and in all important

committees he is leading member.  Though a warm defender of the

Zemstvo institutions, he thinks that their activity ought to be

confined to a comparatively narrow field, and he thereby differs

from some of his colleagues, who are ready to embark in hazardous,

not to say fanciful, schemes for developing the natural resources

of the province.  His neighbour, Mr. P----, is one of the ablest

and most energetic members of the Assembly.  He is president of the

executive bureau in one of the districts, where he has founded many

primary schools and created several rural credit associations on

the model of those which bear the name of Schultze Delitsch in

Germany.  Mr. S----, who sits beside him, was for some years an

arbiter between the proprietors and emancipated serfs, then a

member of the Provincial Executive Bureau, and is now director of a

bank in St. Petersburg.



To the right and left of the president--who is Marshal of Noblesse

for the province--sit the members of the bureau.  The gentleman who

reads the long reports is my friend "the Prime Minister," who began

life as a cavalry officer, and after a few years of military

service retired to his estate; he is an intelligent, able

administrator, and a man of considerable literary culture.  His

colleague, who assists him in reading the reports, is a merchant,

and director of the municipal bank.  The next member is also a

merchant, and in some respects the most remarkable man in the room.

Though born a serf, he is already, at middle age, an important

personage in the Russian commercial world.  Rumour says that he

laid the foundation of his fortune by one day purchasing a copper

cauldron in a village through which he was passing on his way to

St. Petersburg, where he hoped to gain a little money by the sale

of some calves.  In the course of a few years he amassed an

enormous fortune; but cautious people think that he is too fond of

hazardous speculations, and prophesy that he will end life as poor

as he began it.



All these men belong to what may be called the party of progress,

which anxiously supports all proposals recognised as "liberal," and

especially all measures likely to improve the condition of the

peasantry.  Their chief opponent is that little man with close-

cropped, bullet-shaped head and small piercing eyes, who may be

called the Leader of the opposition.  He condemns many of the

proposed schemes, on the ground that the province is already

overtaxed, and that the expenditure ought to be reduced to the

smallest possible figure.  In the District Assembly he preaches

this doctrine with considerable success, for there the peasantry

form the majority, and he knows how to use that terse, homely

language, interspersed with proverbs, which has far more influence

on the rustic mind than scientific principles and logical

reasoning; but here, in Provincial Assembly, his following composes

only a respectable minority, and he confines himself to a policy of

obstruction.



The Zemstvo of Novgorod had at that time the reputation of being

one of the most enlightened and energetic, and I must say that the

proceedings were conducted in a business-like, satisfactory way.

The reports were carefully considered, and each article of the

annual budget was submitted to minute scrutiny and criticism.  In

several of the provinces which I afterwards visited I found that

affairs were conducted in a very different fashion: quorums were

formed with extreme difficulty, and the proceedings, when they at

last commenced, were treated as mere formalities and despatched as

speedily as possible.  The character of the Assembly depends of

course on the amount of interest taken in local public affairs.  In

some districts this interest is considerable; in others it is very

near zero.



The birth of this new institution was hailed with enthusiasm, and

produced great expectations.  At that time a large section of the

Russian educated classes had a simple, convenient criterion for

institutions of all kinds.  They assumed as a self-evident axiom

that the excellence of an institution must always be in proportion

to its "liberal" and democratic character.  The question as to how

far it might be appropriate to the existing conditions and to the

character of the people, and as to whether it might not, though

admirable in itself, be too expensive for the work to be performed,

was little thought of.  Any organisation which rested on "the

elective principle," and provided an arena for free public

discussion, was sure to be well received, and these conditions were

fulfilled by the Zemstvo.



The expectations excited were of various kinds.  People who thought

more of political than economic progress saw in the Zemstvo the

basis of boundless popular liberty.  Prince Yassiltchikof, for

example, though naturally of a phlegmatic temperament, became for a

moment enthusiastic, and penned the following words: "With a daring

unparalleled in the chronicles of the world, we have entered on the

career of public life."  If local self-government in England had,

in spite of its aristocratic character, created and preserved

political liberty, as had been proved by several learned Germans,

what might be expected from institutions so much more liberal and

democratic?  In England there had never been county parliaments,

and the local administration had always been in the hands of the

great land-owners; whilst in Russia every district would have its

elective assembly, in which the peasant would be on a level with

the richest landed proprietors.  People who were accustomed to

think of social rather than political progress expected that they

would soon see the country provided with good roads, safe bridges,

numerous village schools, well-appointed hospitals, and all the

other requisites of civilisation.  Agriculture would become more

scientific, trade and industry would be rapidly developed, and the

material, intellectual, and moral condition of the peasantry would

be enormously improved.  The listless apathy of provincial life and

the hereditary indifference to local public affairs were now, it

was thought, about to be dispelled; and in view of this change,

patriotic mothers took their children to the annual assemblies in

order to accustom them from their early years to take an interest

in the public welfare.



It is hardly necessary to say that these inordinate expectations

were not realised.  From the very beginning there had been a

misunderstanding regarding the character and functions of the new

institutions.  During the short period of universal enthusiasm for

reform the great officials had used incautiously some of the vague

liberal phrases then in fashion, but they never seriously intended

to confer on the child which they were bringing into the world a

share in the general government of the country; and the rapid

evaporation of their sentimental liberalism, which began as soon as

they undertook practical reforms, made them less and less

conciliatory.  When the vigorous young child, therefore, showed a

natural desire to go beyond the humble functions accorded to it,

the stern parents proceeded to snub it and put it into its proper

place.  The first reprimand was administered publicly in the

capital.  The St. Petersburg Provincial Assembly, having shown a

desire to play a political part, was promptly closed by the

Minister of the Interior, and some of the members were exiled for a

time to their homes in the country.



This warning produced merely a momentary effect.  As the functions

of the Imperial Administration and of the Zemstvo had never been

clearly defined, and as each was inclined to extend the sphere of

its activity, friction became frequent.  The Zemstvo had the right,

for example, to co-operate in the development of education, but as

soon as it organised primary schools and seminaries it came into

contact with the Ministry of Public Instruction.  In other

departments similar conflicts occurred, and the tchinovniks came to

suspect that the Zemstvo had the ambition to play the part of a

parliamentary Opposition.  This suspicion found formal expression

in at least one secret official document, in which the writer

declares that "the Opposition has built itself firmly a nest in the

Zemstvo."  Now, if we mean to be just to both parties in this

little family quarrel, we must admit that the Zemstvo, as I shall

explain in a future chapter, had ambitions of that kind, and it

would have been better perhaps for the country at the present

moment if it had been able to realise them.  But this is a West-

European idea.  In Russia there is, and can be, no such thing as

"His Majesty's Opposition."  To the Russian official mind the three

words seem to contain a logical contradiction.  Opposition to

officials, even within the limits of the law, is equivalent to

opposition to the Autocratic Power, of which they are the incarnate

emanations; and opposition to what they consider the interests of

autocracy comes within measurable distance of high treason.  It was

considered necessary, therefore, to curb and suppress the ambitious

tendencies of the wayward child, and accordingly it was placed more

and more under the tutelage of the provincial Governors.  To show

how the change was effected, let me give an illustration.  In the

older arrangements the Governor could suspend the action of the

Zemstvo only on the ground of its being illegal or ultra vires, and

when there was an irreconcilable difference of opinion between the

two parties the question was decided judicially by the Senate;

under the more recent arrangements his Excellency can interpose his

veto whenever he considers that a decision, though it may be

perfectly legal, is not conducive to the public good, and

differences of opinion are referred, not to the Senate, but to the

Minister of the Interior, who is always naturally disposed to

support the views of his subordinate.



In order to put an end to all this insubordination, Count Tolstoy,

the reactionary Minister of the Interior, prepared a scheme of

reorganisation in accordance with his anti-liberal views, but he

died before he could carry it out, and a much milder reorganisation

was adopted in the law of 12th (24th) June, 1890.  The principal

changes introduced by that law were that the number of delegates in

the Assemblies was reduced by about a fourth, and the relative

strength of the different social classes was altered.  Under the

old law the Noblesse had about 42 per cent., and the peasantry

about 38 per cent, of the seats; by the new electoral arrangements

the former have 57 per cent, and the latter about 30.  It does not

necessarily follow, however, that the Assemblies are more

conservative or more subservient on that account.  Liberalism and

insubordination are much more likely to be found among the nobles

than among the peasants.



In addition to all this, as there was an apprehension in the higher

official spheres of St. Petersburg that the opposition spirit of

the Zemstvo might find public expression in a printed form, the

provincial Governors received extensive rights of preventive

censure with regard to the publication of the minutes of Zemstvo

Assemblies and similar documents.



What the bureaucracy, in its zeal to defend the integrity of the

Autocratic Power, feared most of all was combination for a common

purpose on the part of the Zemstvos of different provinces.  It

vetoed, therefore, all such combinations, even for statistical

purposes; and when it discovered, a few years ago, that leading

members of the Zemstvo from all parts of the country were holding

private meetings in Moscow for the ostensible purpose of discussing

economic questions, it ordered them to return to their homes.



Even within its proper sphere, as defined by law, the Zemstvo has

not accomplished what was expected of it.  The country has not been

covered with a network of macadamised roads, and the bridges are by

no means as safe as could be desired.  Village schools and

infirmaries are still far below the requirements of the population.

Little or nothing has been done for the development of trade or

manufactures; and the villages remain very much what they were

under the old Administration.  Meanwhile the local rates have been

rising with alarming rapidity; and many people draw from all this

the conclusion that the Zemstvo is a worthless institution which

has increased the taxation without conferring any corresponding

benefit on the country.



If we take as our criterion in judging the institution the

exaggerated expectations at first entertained, we may feel inclined

to agree with this conclusion, but this is merely tantamount to

saying that the Zemstvo has performed no miracles.  Russia is much

poorer and much less densely populated than the more advanced

nations which she takes as her model.  To suppose that she could at

once create for herself by means of an administrative reform all

the conveniences which those more advanced nations enjoy, was as

absurd as it would be to imagine that a poor man can at once

construct a magnificent palace because he has received from a

wealthy neighbour the necessary architectural plans.  Not only

years but generations must pass before Russia can assume the

appearance of Germany, France, or England.  The metamorphosis may

be accelerated or retarded by good government, but it could not be

effected at once, even if the combined wisdom of all the

philosophers and statesmen in Europe were employed in legislating

for the purpose.



The Zemstvo has, however, done much more than the majority of its

critics admit.  It fulfils tolerably well, without scandalous

peculation and jobbery, its commonplace, every-day duties, and it

has created a new and more equitable system of rating, by which

landed proprietors and house-owners are made to bear their share of

the public burdens.  It has done a very great deal to provide

medical aid and primary education for the common people, and it has

improved wonderfully the condition of the hospitals, lunatic

asylums, and other benevolent institutions committed to its charge.

In its efforts to aid the peasantry it has helped to improve the

native breeds of horses and cattle, and it has created a system of

obligatory fire-insurance, together with means for preventing and

extinguishing fires in the villages--a most important matter in a

country where the peasants live in wooden houses and big fires are

fearfully frequent.  After neglecting for a good many years the

essential question as to how the peasants' means of subsistence can

be increased, it has latterly, as I have mentioned in a foregoing

chapter, helped them to obtain improved agricultural implements and

better seed, encouraged the formation of small credit associations

and savings banks, and appointed agricultural inspectors to teach

them how they may introduce modest improvements within their

limited means.*  At the same time, in many districts it has

endeavoured to assist the home industries which are threatened with

annihilation by the big factories, and whenever measures have been

proposed for the benefit of the rural population, such as the

lowering of the land-redemption payments and the creation of the

Peasant Land Bank, it has invariably given them its cordial

support.





* The amount expended for these objects in 1897, the latest year

for which I have statistical data, was about a million and a half

of roubles, or, roughly speaking, 150,000 pounds, distributed under

the following heads:--



1. Agricultural tuition                   41,100 pounds.

2. Experimental stations, museums, etc    19,800

3. Scientific agriculturists              17,400

4. Agricultural industries                26,700

5. Improving breeds of horses and cattle  45,300

                                         -------

                                         150,300 pounds.





If you ask a zealous member of the Zemstvo why it has not done more

he will probably tell you that it is because its activity has been

constantly restricted and counteracted by the Government.  The

Assemblies were obliged to accept as presidents the Marshals of

Noblesse, many of whom were men of antiquated ideas and retrograde

principles.  At every turn the more enlightened, more active

members found themselves opposed, thwarted, and finally checkmated

by the Imperial officials.  When a laudable attempt was made to tax

trade and industry more equitably the scheme was vetoed, and

consequently the mercantile class, sure of being always taxed at a

ridiculously low maximum, have lost all interest in the

proceedings.  Even with regard to the rating of landed and house

property a low limit is imposed by the Government, because it is

afraid that if the rates were raised much it would not be able to

collect the heavy Imperial taxation.  The uncontrolled publicity

which was at first enjoyed by the Assemblies was afterwards

curtailed by the bureaucracy.  Under such restrictions all free,

vigorous action became impossible, and the institutions failed to

effect what was reasonably anticipated.



All this is true in a certain sense, but it is not the whole truth.

If we examine some of the definite charges brought against the

institution we shall understand better its real character.



The most common complaint made against it is that it has enormously

increased the rates.  On that point there is no possibility of

dispute.  At first its expenditure in the thirty-four provinces in

which it existed was under six millions of roubles; in two years

(1868) it had jumped up to fifteen millions; in 1875 it was nearly

twenty-eight millions, in 1885 over forty-three millions, and at

the end of the century it had attained the respectable figure of

95,800,000 roubles.  As each province had the right of taxing

itself, the increase varied greatly in different provinces.  In

Smolensk, for example, it was only about thirty per cent., whilst

in Samara it was 436, and in Viatka, where the peasant element

predominates, no less than 1,262 per cent.!  In order to meet this

increase, the rates on land rose from under ten millions in 1868 to

over forty-seven millions in 1900.  No wonder that the landowners

who find it difficult to work their estates at a profit should

complain!



Though this increase is disagreeable to the rate-payers, it does

not follow that it is excessive.  In all countries rates and local

taxation are on the increase, and it is in the backward countries

that they increase most rapidly.  In France, for example, the

average yearly increase has been 2.7 per cent., while in Austria it

has been 5.59.  In Russia it ought to have been more than in

Austria, whereas it has been, in the provinces with Zemstvo

institutions, only about 4 per cent.  In comparison with the

Imperial taxation the local does not seem excessive when compared

with other countries.  In England and Prussia, for instance, the

State taxation as compared with the local is as a hundred to fifty-

four and fifty-one, whilst in Russia it is as a hundred to

sixteen.*  A reduction in the taxation as a whole would certainly

contribute to the material welfare of the rural population, but it

is desirable that it should be made in the Imperial taxes rather

than in the rates, because the latter may be regarded as something

akin to productive investments, whilst the proceeds of the former

are expended largely on objects which have little or nothing to do

with the wants of the common people.  In speaking thus I am

assuming that the local expenditure is made judiciously, and this

is a matter on which, I am bound to confess, there is by no means

unanimity of opinion.





* These figures are taken from the best available authorities,

chiefly Schwanebach and Scalon, but I am not prepared to guarantee

their accuracy.





Hostile critics can point to facts which are, to say the least,

strange and anomalous.  Out of the total of its revenue the Zemstvo

spends about twenty-eight per cent. under the heading of public

health and benevolent institutions; and about fifteen per cent. for

popular education, whilst it devotes only about six per cent. to

roads and bridges, and until lately it neglected, as I have said

above, the means for improving agriculture and directly increasing

the income of the peasantry.



Before passing sentence with regard to these charges we must

remember the circumstances in which the Zemstvo was founded and has

grown up.  In the early times its members were well-meaning men who

had had very little experience in administration or in practical

life of any sort except the old routine in which they had

previously vegetated.  Most of them had lived enough in the country

to know how much the peasants were in need of medical assistance of

the most elementary kind, and to this matter they at once turned

their attention.  They tried to organise a system of doctors,

hospital assistants, and dispensaries by which the peasant would

not have to go more than fifteen or twenty miles to get a wound

dressed or to have a consultation or to obtain a simple remedy for

ordinary ailments.  They felt the necessity, too, of thoroughly

reorganising the hospitals and the lunatic asylums, which were in a

very unsatisfactory condition.  Plainly enough, there was here good

work to be done.  Then there were the higher aims.  In the absence

of practical experience there were enthusiasms and theories.

Amongst these was the enthusiasm for education, and the theory that

the want of it was the chief reason why Russia had remained so far

behind the nations of Western Europe.  Give us education, it was

said, and all other good things will be added thereto.  Liberate

the Russian people from the bonds of ignorance as you have

liberated it from the bonds of serfage, and its wonderful natural

capacities will then be able to create everything that is required

for its material, intellectual, and moral welfare.



If there was any one among the leaders who took a more sober,

prosaic view of things he was denounced as an ignoramus and a

reactionary.  Willingly or unwillingly, everybody had to swim with

the current.  Roads and bridges were not entirely neglected, but

the efforts in that direction were confined to the absolutely

indispensable.  For such prosaic concerns there was no enthusiasm,

and it was universally recognised that in Russia the construction

of good roads, as the term is understood in Western Europe, was far

beyond the resources of any Administration.  Of the necessity for

such roads few were conscious.  All that was required was to make

it possible to get from one place to another in ordinary weather

and ordinary circumstances.  If a stream was too deep to be forded,

a bridge had to be built or a ferry had to be established; and if

the approach to a bridge was so marshy or muddy that vehicles often

sank quite up to the axles and had to be dragged out by ropes, with

the assistance of the neighbouring villagers, repairs had to be

made.  Beyond this the efforts of the Zemstvo rarely went.  Its

road-building ambition remained within very modest bounds.



As for the impoverishment of the peasantry and the necessity of

improving their system of agriculture, that question had hardly

appeared above the horizon.  It might have to be dealt with in the

future, but there was no need for hurry.  Once the rural population

were educated, the question would solve itself.  It was not till

about the year 1885 that it was recognised to be more urgent than

had been supposed, and some Zemstvos perceived that the people

might starve before its preparatory education was completed.

Repeated famines pushed the lesson home, and the landed proprietors

found their revenues diminished by the fall in the price of grain

on the European markets.  Thus was raised the cry: "Agriculture in

Russia is on the decline!  The country has entered on an acute

economic crisis!  If energetic measures be not taken promptly the

people will soon find themselves confronted by starvation!"



To this cry of alarm the Zemstvo was neither deaf nor indifferent.

Recognising that the danger could be averted only by inducing the

peasantry to adopt a more intensive system of agriculture, it

directed more and more of its attention to agricultural

improvements, and tried to get them adopted.*  It did, in short,

all it could, according to its lights and within the limits of its

moderate resources.  Its available resources were small,

unfortunately, for it was forbidden by the Government to increase

the rates, and it could not well dismiss doctors and close

dispensaries and schools when the people were clamouring for more.

So at least the defenders of the Zemstvo maintain, and they go so

far as to contend that it did well not to grapple with the

impoverishment of the peasantry at an earlier period, when the real

conditions of the problem and the means of solving it were only

very imperfectly known: if it had begun at that time it would have

made great blunders and spent much money to little purpose.





* Vide supra, p. 489.





However this may be, it would certainly be unfair to condemn the

Zemstvo for not being greatly in advance of public opinion.  If it

endeavours strenuously to supply all clearly recognised wants, that

is all that can reasonably be expected of it.  What it may be more

justly reproached with is, in my opinion, that it is, to a certain

extent, imbued with that unpractical, pedantic spirit which is

commonly supposed to reside exclusively in the Imperial

Administration.  But here again it simply reflects public opinion

and certain intellectual peculiarities of the educated classes.

When a Russian begins to write on a simple everyday subject, he

likes to connect it with general principles, philosophy, or

history, and begins, perhaps, by expounding his views on the

intellectual and social developments of humanity in general and of

Russia in particular.  If he has sufficient space at his disposal

he may even tell you something about the early period of Russian

history previous to the Mongol invasion before he gets to the

simple matter in hand.  In a previous chapter I have described the

process of "shedding on a subject the light of science" in Imperial

legislation.*  In Zemstvo activity we often meet with pedantry of a

similar kind.





* Vide supra, p. 343.





If this pedantry were confined to the writing of Reports it might

not do much harm.  Unfortunately, it often appears in the sphere of

action.  To illustrate this I take a recent instance from the

province of Nizhni-Novgorod.  The Zemstvo of that province received

from the Central Government in 1895 a certain amount of capital for

road-improvement, with instructions from the Ministry of Interior

that it should classify the roads according to their relative

importance and improve them accordingly.  Any intelligent person

well acquainted with the region might have made, in the course of a

week or two, the required classification accurately enough for all

practical purposes.  Instead of adopting this simple procedure,

what does the Zemstvo do?  It chooses one of the eleven districts

of which the province is composed and instructs its statistical

department to describe all the villages with a view of determining

the amount of traffic which each will probably contribute to the

general movement, and then it verifies its a priori conclusions by

means of a detachment of specially selected "registrars," posted at

all the crossways during six days of each month.  These registrars

doubtless inscribed every peasant cart as it passed and made a

rough estimate of the weight of its load.  When this complicated

and expensive procedure was completed for one district it was

applied to another; but at the end of three years, before all the

villages of this second district had been described and the traffic

estimated, the energy of the statistical department seems to have

flagged, and, like a young author impatient to see himself in

print, it published a volume at the public expense which no one

will ever read.



The cost entailed by this procedure is not known, but we may form

some idea of the amount of time required for the whole operation.

It is a simple rule-of-three sum.  If it took three years for the

preparatory investigation of a district and a half, how many years

will be required for eleven districts?  More than twenty years!

During that period it would seem that the roads are to remain as

they are, and when the moment comes for improving them it will be

found that, unless the province is condemned to economic

stagnation, the "valuable statistical material" collected at such

an expenditure of time and money is in great part antiquated and

useless.  The statistical department will be compelled, therefore,

like another unfortunate Sisyphus, to begin the work anew, and it

is difficult to see how the Zemstvo, unless it becomes a little

more practical, is ever to get out of the vicious circle.



In this case the evil result of pedantry was simply unnecessary

delay, and in the meantime the capital was accumulating, unless the

interest was entirely swallowed up by the statistical researches;

but there are cases in which the consequences are more serious.

Let me take an illustration from the enlightened province of

Moscow.  It was observed that certain villages were particularly

unhealthy, and it was pointed out by a local doctor that the

inhabitants were in the habit of using for domestic purposes the

water of ponds which were in a filthy condition.  What was

evidently wanted was good wells, and a practical man would at once

have taken measures to have them dug.  Not so the District Zemstvo.

It at once transformed the simple fact into a "question" requiring

scientific investigation.  A commission was appointed to study the

problem, and after much deliberation it was decided to make a

geological survey in order to ascertain the depth of good water

throughout the district as a preparatory step towards preparing a

project which will some day be discussed in the District Assembly,

and perhaps in the Assembly of the province.  Whilst all this is

being done according to the strict principles of bureaucratic

procedure, the unfortunate peasants for whose benefit the

investigation was undertaken continue to drink the muddy water of

the dirty ponds.



Incidents of that kind, which I might multiply almost to any

extent, remind one of the proverbial formalism of the Chinese; but

between Chinese and Russian pedantry there is an essential

difference.  In the Middle Kingdom the sacrifice of practical

considerations proceeds from an exaggerated veneration of the

wisdom of ancestors; in the Empire of the Tsars it is due to an

exaggerated adoration of the goddess Nauka (Science) and a habit of

appealing to abstract principles and scientific methods when only a

little plain common-sense is required.



On one occasion, I remember, in a District Assembly of the province

of Riazan, when the subject of primary schools was being discussed,

an influential member started up, and proposed that an obligatory

system of education should at once be introduced throughout the

whole district.  Strange to say, the motion was very nearly

carried, though all the members present knew--or at least might

have known if they had taken the trouble to inquire--that the

actual number of schools would have to be multiplied twenty-fold,

and all were agreed that the local rates must not be increased.  To

preserve his reputation for liberalism, the honourable member

further proposed that, though the system should be obligatory, no

fines, punishments, or other means of compulsion should be

employed.  How a system could be obligatory without using some

means of compulsion, he did not condescend to explain.  To get out

of the difficulty one of his supporters suggested that the peasants

who did not send their children to school should be excluded from

serving as office-bearers in the Communes; but this proposition

merely created a laugh, for many deputies knew that the peasants

would regard this supposed punishment as a valuable privilege.  And

whilst this discussion about the necessity of introducing an ideal

system of obligatory education was being carried on, the street

before the windows of the room was covered with a stratum of mud

nearly two feet in depth!  The other streets were in a similar

condition; and a large number of the members always arrived late,

because it was almost impossible to come on foot, and there was

only one public conveyance in the town.  Many members had,

fortunately, their private conveyances, but even in these

locomotion was by no means easy.  One day, in the principal

thoroughfare, a member had his tarantass overturned, and he himself

was thrown into the mud!



It is hardly fair to compare the Zemstvo with the older

institutions of a similar kind in Western Europe, and especially

with our own local self-government.  Our institutions have all

grown out of real, practical wants keenly felt by a large section

of the population.  Cautious and conservative in all that concerns

the public welfare, we regard change as a necessary evil, and put

off the evil day as long as possible, even when convinced that it

must inevitably come.  Thus our administrative wants are always in

advance of our means of satisfying them, and we use vigorously

those means as soon as they are supplied.  Our method of supplying

the means, too, is peculiar.  Instead of making a tabula rasa, and

beginning from the foundations, we utilise to the utmost what we

happen to possess, and add merely what is absolutely indispensable.

Metaphorically speaking, we repair and extend our political edifice

according to the changing necessities of our mode of life, without

paying much attention to abstract principles or the contingencies

of the distant future.  The building may be an aesthetic

monstrosity, belonging to no recognised style of architecture, and

built in defiance of the principles laid down by philosophical art

critics, but it is well adapted to our requirements, and every hole

and corner of it is sure to be utilised.



Very different has been the political history of Russia during the

last two centuries.  It may be briefly described as a series of

revolutions effected peaceably by the Autocratic Power.  Each young

energetic sovereign has attempted to inaugurate a new epoch by

thoroughly remodelling the Administration according to the most

approved foreign political philosophy of the time.  Institutions

have not been allowed to grow spontaneously out of popular wants,

but have been invented by bureaucratic theorists to satisfy wants

of which the people were still unconscious.  The administrative

machine has therefore derived little or no motive force from the

people, and has always been kept in motion by the unaided energy of

the Central Government.  Under these circumstances it is not

surprising that the repeated attempts of the Government to lighten

the burdens of centralised administration by creating organs of

local self-government should not have been very successful.



The Zemstvo, it is true, offered better chances of success than any

of its predecessors.  A large portion of the nobles had become

alive to the necessity of improving the administration, and the

popular interest in public affairs was much greater than at any

former period.  Hence there was at first a period of enthusiasm,

during which great preparations were made for future activity, and

not a little was actually effected.  The institution had all the

charm of novelty, and the members felt that the eyes of the public

were upon them.  For a time all went well, and the Zemstvo was so

well pleased with its own activity that the satirical journals

compared it to Narcissus admiring his image reflected in the pool.

But when the charm of novelty had passed and the public turned its

attention to other matters, the spasmodic energy evaporated, and

many of the most active members looked about for more lucrative

employment.  Such employment was easily found, for at that time

there was an unusual demand for able, energetic, educated men.

Several branches of the civil service were being reorganised, and

railways, banks, and joint-stock companies were being rapidly

multiplied.  With these the Zemstvo had great difficulty in

competing.  It could not, like the Imperial service, offer

pensions, decorations, and prospects of promotion, nor could it pay

such large salaries as the commercial and industrial enterprises.

In consequence of all this, the quality of the executive bureaux

deteriorated at the same time as the public interest in the

institution diminished.



To be just to the Zemstvo, I must add that, with all its defects

and errors, it is infinitely better than the institutions which it

replaced.  If we compare it with previous attempts to create local

self-government, we must admit that the Russians have made great

progress in their political education.  What its future may be I do

not venture to predict.  From its infancy it has had, as we have

seen, the ambition to play a great political part, and at the

beginning of the recent stirring times in St. Petersburg its

leading representatives in conclave assembled took upon themselves

to express what they considered the national demand for liberal

representative institutions.  The desire, which had previously from

time to time been expressed timidly and vaguely in loyal addresses

to the Tsar, that a central Zemstvo Assembly, bearing the ancient

title of Zemski Sobor, should be convoked in the capital and

endowed with political functions, was now put forward by the

representatives in plain unvarnished form.  Whether this desire is

destined to be realised time will show.
