




CHAPTER XXXVII



THE REVOLUTIONARY MOVEMENT IN ITS LATEST PHASE





Influence of Capitalism and Proletariat on the Revolutionary

Movement--What is to be Done?--Reply of Plekhanof--A New Departure--

Karl Marx's Theories Applied to Russia--Beginnings of a Social

Democratic Movement--The Labour Troubles of 1894-96 in St.

Petersburg--The Social Democrats' Plan of Campaign--Schism in the

Party--Trade-unionism and Political Agitation--The Labour Troubles

of 1902--How the Revolutionary Groups are Differentiated from Each

Other--Social Democracy and Constitutionalism--Terrorism--The

Socialist Revolutionaries--The Militant Organisation--Attitude of

the Government--Factory Legislation--Government's Scheme for

Undermining Social Democracy--Father Gapon and His Labour

Association--The Great Strike in St. Petersburg--Father Gapon goes

over to the Revolutionaries.





The development of manufacturing industry on capitalist lines, and

the consequent formation of a large industrial proletariat,

produced great disappointment in all the theorising sections of the

educated classes.  The thousands of men and women who had, since

the accession of the Tsar-Emancipator in 1855, taken a keen,

enthusiastic interest in the progress of their native country, all

had believed firmly that in some way or other Russia would escape

"the festering sores of Western civilisation."  Now experience had

proved that the belief was an illusion, and those who had tried to

check the natural course of industrial progress were constrained to

confess that their efforts had been futile.  Big factories were

increasing in size and numbers, while cottage industries were

disappearing or falling under the power of middlemen, and the

Artels had not advanced a step in their expected development.  The

factory workers, though all of peasant origin, were losing their

connection with their native villages and abandoning their

allotments of the Communal land.  They were becoming, in short, a

hereditary caste in the town population, and the pleasant Slavophil

dream of every factory worker having a house in the country was

being rudely dispelled.  Nor was there any prospect of a change for

the better in the future.  With the increase of competition among

the manufacturers, the uprooting of the muzhik from the soil must

go on more and more rapidly, because employers must insist more and

more on having thoroughly trained operatives ready to work steadily

all the year round.



This state of things had a curious effect on the course of the

revolutionary movement.



Let me recall very briefly the successive stages through which the

movement had already passed.  It had been inaugurated, as we have

seen, by the Nihilists, the ardent young representatives of a

"storm-and-stress" period, in which the venerable traditions and

respected principles of the past were rejected and ridiculed, and

the newest ideas of Western Europe were eagerly adopted and

distorted.  Like the majority of their educated countrymen, they

believed that in the race of progress Russia was about to overtake

and surpass the nations of the West, and that this desirable result

was to be attained by making a tabula rasa of existing

institutions, and reconstructing society according to the plans of

Proudhon, Fourier, and the other writers of the early Socialist

school.



When the Nihilists had expended their energies and exhausted the

patience of the public in theorising, talking, and writing, a party

of action came upon the scene.  Like the Nihilists, they desired

political, social, and economic reforms of the most thorough-going

kind, but they believed that such things could not be effected by

the educated classes alone, and they determined to call in the co-

operation of the people.  For this purpose they tried to convert

the masses to the gospel of Socialism.  Hundreds of them became

missionaries and "went in among the people."  But the gospel of

Socialism proved unintelligible to the uneducated, and the more

ardent, incautious missionaries fell into the hands of the police.

Those of them who escaped, perceiving the error of their ways, but

still clinging to the hope of bringing about a political, social,

and economic revolution, determined to change their tactics.  The

emancipated serf had shown himself incapable of "prolonged

revolutionary activity," but there was reason to believe that he

was, like his forefathers in the time of Stenka Razin and

Pugatcheff, capable of rising and murdering his oppressors.  He

must be used, therefore, for the destruction of the Autocratic

Power and the bureaucracy, and then it would be easy to reorganise

society on a basis of universal equality, and to take permanent

precautions against capitalism and the creation of a proletariat.



The hopes of the agitators proved as delusive as those of the

propagandists.  The muzhik turned a deaf ear to their instigations,

and the police soon prevented their further activity.  Thus the

would-be root-and-branch reforms found themselves in a dilemma.

Either they must abandon their schemes for the moment or they must

strike immediately at their persecutors.  They chose, as we have

seen, the latter alternative, and after vain attempts to frighten

the Government by acts of terrorism against zealous officials, they

assassinated the Tsar himself; but before they had time to think of

the constructive part of their task, their organisation was

destroyed by the Autocratic Power and the bureaucracy, and those of

them who escaped arrest had to seek safety in emigration to

Switzerland and Paris.



Then arose, all along the line of the defeated, decimated

revolutionists, the cry, "What is to be done?"  Some replied that

the shattered organisation should be reconstructed, and a number of

secret agents were sent successively from Switzerland for this

purpose.  But their efforts, as they themselves confessed, were

fruitless, and despondency seemed to be settling down permanently

on all, except a few fanatics, when a voice was heard calling on

the fugitives to rally round a new banner and carry on the struggle

by entirely new methods.  The voice came from a revolutionologist

(if I may use such a term) of remarkable talent, called M.

Plekhanof, who had settled in Geneva with a little circle of

friends, calling themselves the "Labour Emancipation Group."  His

views were expounded in a series of interesting publications, the

first of which was a brochure entitled "Socialism and the Political

Struggle," published in 1883.



According to M. Plekhanof and his group the revolutionary movement

had been conducted up to that moment on altogether wrong lines.

All previous revolutionary groups had acted on the assumption that

the political revolution and the economic reorganisation of society

must be effected simultaneously, and consequently they had rejected

contemptuously all proposals for reforms, however radical, of a

merely political kind.  These had been considered, as I have

mentioned in a previous chapter, not only as worthless, but as

positively prejudicial to the interests of the working classes,

because so-called political liberties and parliamentary government

would be sure to consolidate the domination of the bourgeoisie.

That such has generally been the immediate effect of parliamentary

institutions is undeniable, but it did not follow that the creation

of such institutions should be opposed.  On the contrary, they

ought to be welcomed, not merely because, as some revolutionists

had already pointed out, propaganda and agitation could be more

easily carried on under a constitutional regime, but because

constitutionalism is certainly the most convenient, and perhaps the

only, road by which the socialistic ideal can ultimately be

attained.  This is a dark saying, but it will become clearer when I

have explained, according to the new apostles, a second error into

which their predecessors had fallen.



That second error was the assumption that all true friends of the

people, whether Conservatives, Liberals, or revolutionaries, ought

to oppose to the utmost the development of capitalism.  In the

light of Karl Marx's discoveries in economic science every one must

recognise this to be an egregious mistake.  That great authority,

it was said, had proved that the development of capitalism was

irresistible, and his conclusions had been confirmed by the recent

history of Russia, for all the economic progress made during the

last half century had been on capitalist lines.



Even if it were possible to arrest the capitalist movement, it is

not desirable from the revolutionary point of view.  In support of

this thesis Karl Marx is again cited.  He has shown that

capitalism, though an evil in itself, is a necessary stage of

economic and social progress.  At first it is prejudicial to the

interests of the working classes, but in the long run it benefits

them, because the ever-growing proletariat must, whether it desires

it or not, become a political party, and as a political party it

must one day break the domination of the bourgeoisie.  As soon as

it has obtained the predominant political power, it will

confiscate, for the public good, the instruments of production--

factories, foundries, machines, etc.--by expropriating the

capitalist.  In this way all the profits which accrue from

production on a large scale, and which at present go into the

pockets of the capitalists, will be distributed equally among the

workmen.



Thus began a new phase of the revolutionary movement, and, like all

previous phases, it remained for some years in the academic stage,

during which there were endless discussions on theoretical and

practical questions.  Lavroff, the prophet of the old propaganda,

treated the new ideas "with grandfatherly severity," and

Tikhomirof, the leading representative of the moribund Narodnaya

Volya, which had prepared the acts of terrorism, maintained stoutly

that the West European methods recommended by Plekhanof were

inapplicable to Russia.  The Plekhanof group replied in a long

series of publications, partly original and partly translations

from Marx and Engels, explaining the doctrines and aims of the

Social Democrats.



Seven years were spent in this academic literary activity--a period

of comparative repose for the Russian secret police--and about 1890

the propagandists of the new school began to work cautiously in St.

Petersburg.  At first they confined themselves to forming little

secret circles for making converts, and they found that the ground

had been to some extent prepared for the seed which they had to

sow.  The workmen were discontented, and some of the more

intelligent amongst them who had formerly been in touch with the

propagandists of the older generation had learned that there was an

ingenious and effective means of getting their grievances

redressed.  How was that possible?  By combination and strikes.

For the uneducated workers this was an important discovery, and

they soon began to put the suggested remedy to a practical test.

In the autumn of 1894 labour troubles broke out in the Nevski

engineering works and the arsenal, and in the following year in the

Thornton factory and the cigarette works.  In all these strikes the

Social Democratic agents took part behind the scenes.  Avoiding the

main errors of the old propagandists, who had offered the workmen

merely abstract Socialist theories which no uneducated person could

reasonably be expected to understand, they adopted a more rational

method.  Though impervious to abstract theories, the Russian

workman is not at all insensible to the prospect of bettering his

material condition and getting his everyday grievances redressed.

Of these grievances the ones he felt most keenly were the long

hours, the low wages, the fines arbitrarily imposed by the

managers, and the brutual severity of the foreman.  By helping him

to have these grievances removed the Social Democratic agents might

gain his confidence, and when they had come to be regarded by him

as his real friends they might widen his sympathies and teach him

to feel that his personal interests were identical with the

interests of the working classes as a whole.  In this way it would

be possible to awaken in the industrial proletariat generally a

sort of esprit de corps, which is the first condition of political

organisation.



On these lines the agents set to work.  Having formed themselves

into a secret association called the "Union for the Emancipation of

the Working Classes," they gradually abandoned the narrow limits of

coterie-propaganda, and prepared the way for agitation on a larger

scale.  Among the discontented workmen they distributed a large

number of carefully written tracts, in which the material

grievances were formulated, and the whole political system, with

its police, gendarmes, Cossacks, and tax-gathers, was criticised in

no friendly spirit, but without violent language.  In introducing

into the programme this political element, great caution had to be

exercised, because the workmen did not yet perceive clearly any

close connection between their grievances and the existing

political institutions, and those of them who belonged to the older

generation regarded the Tsar as the incarnation of disinterested

benevolence.  Bearing this in mind, the Union circulated a pamphlet

for the enlightenment of the labouring population, in which the

writer refrained from all reference to the Autocratic Power, and

described simply the condition of the labouring classes, the heavy

burdens they had to bear, the abuses of which they were the

victims, and the inconsiderate way in which they were treated by

their employers.  This pamphlet was eagerly read, and from that

moment whenever labour troubles arose the men applied to the Social

Democratic agents to assist them in formulating their grievances.



Of course, the assistance had to be given secretly, because there

were always police spies in the factories, and all persons

suspected of aiding the labour movement were liable to be arrested

and exiled.  In spite of this danger the work was carried on with

great energy, and in the summer of 1896 the field of operations was

extended.  During the coronation ceremonies of that year the

factories and workshops in St. Petersburg were closed, and the men

considered that for these days they ought to receive wages as

usual.  When their demand was refused, 40,000 of them went out on

strike.  The Social Democratic Union seized the opportunity and

distributed tracts in large quantities.  For the first time such

tracts were read aloud at workmen's meetings and applauded by the

audience.  The Union encouraged the workmen in their resistance,

but advised them to refrain from violence, so as not to provoke the

intervention of the police and the military, as they had

imprudently done on some previous occasions.  When the police did

intervene and expelled some of the strike-leaders from St.

Petersburg, the agitators had an excellent opportunity of

explaining that the authorities were the protectors of the

employers and the enemies of the working classes.  These

explanations counteracted the effect of an official proclamation to

the workmen, in which M. Witte tried to convince them that the Tsar

was constantly striving to improve their condition.  The struggle

was decided, not by arguments and exhortations, but by a more

potent force; having no funds for continuing the strike, the men

were compelled by starvation to resume work.



This is the point at which the labour movement began to be

conducted on a large scale and by more systematic methods.  In the

earlier labour troubles the strikers had not understood that the

best means of bringing pressure on employers was simply to refuse

to work, and they had often proceeded to show their dissatisfaction

by ruthlessly destroying their employers' property.  This had

brought the police, and sometimes the military, on the scene, and

numerous arrests had followed.  Another mistake made by the

inexperienced strikers was that they had neglected to create a

reserve fund from which they could draw the means of subsistence

when they no longer received wages and could no longer obtain

credit at the factory provision store.  Efforts were now made to

correct these two mistakes, and with regard to the former they were

fairly successful, for wanton destruction of property ceased to be

a prominent feature of labour troubles; but strong reserve funds

have not yet been created, so that the strikes have never been of

long duration.



Though the strikes had led, so far, to no great practical, tangible

results, the new ideas and aspirations were spreading rapidly in

the factories and workshops, and they had already struck such deep

root that some of the genuine workmen wished to have a voice in the

managing committee of the Union, which was composed exclusively of

educated men.  When a request to that effect was rejected by the

committee a lengthy discussion took place, and it soon became

evident that underneath the question of organisation lay a most

important question of principle.  The workmen wished to concentrate

their efforts on the improvement of their material condition, and

to proceed on what we should call trade-unionist lines, whereas the

committee wished them to aim also at the acquisition of political

rights.  Great determination was shown on both sides.  An attempt

of the workmen to maintain a secret organ of their own with the

view of emancipating themselves from the "Politicals" ended in

failure; but they received sympathy and support from some of the

educated members of the party, and in this way a schism took place

in the Social Democrat camp.  After repeated ineffectual attempts

to find a satisfactory compromise, the question was submitted to a

Congress which was held in Switzerland in 1900; but the discussions

merely accentuated the differences of opinion, and the two parties

constituted themselves into separate independent groups.  The one

under the leadership of Plekhanof, and calling itself the

Revolutionary Social Democrats, held to the Marx doctrines in all

their extent and purity, and maintained the necessity of constant

agitation in the political sense.  The other, calling itself the

Union of Foreign Social Democrats, inclined to the trade-unionism

programme, and proclaimed the necessity of being guided by

political expediency rather than inflexible dogmas.  Between the

two a wordy warfare was carried on for some time in pedantic,

technical language; but though habitually brandishing their weapons

and denouncing their antagonists in true Homeric style, they were

really allies, struggling towards a common end--two sections of the

Social Democratic party differing from each other on questions of

tactics.



The two divergent tendencies have often reappeared in the

subsequent history of the movement.  During ordinary peaceful times

the economic or trade-unionist tendency can generally hold its own,

but as soon as disturbances occur and the authorities have to

intervene, the political current quickly gains the upper hand.

This was exemplified in the labour troubles which took place at

Rostoff-on-the-Don in 1902.  During the first two days of the

strike the economic demands alone were put forward, and in the

speeches which were delivered at the meetings of workmen no

reference was made to political grievances.  On the third day one

orator ventured to speak disrespectfully of the Autocratic Power,

but he thereby provoked signs of dissatisfaction in the audiences.

On the fifth and following days, however, several political

speeches were made, ending with the cry of "Down with Tsarism!" and

a crowd of 30,000 workmen agreed with the speakers.  Thereafter

occurred similar strikes in Odessa, the Caucasus, Kief, and Central

Russia, and they had all a political rather than a purely economic

character.



I must now endeavour to explain clearly the point of view and plan

of campaign of this new movement, which I may call the

revolutionary Renaissance.



The ultimate aim of the new reformers was the same as that of all

their predecessors--the thorough reorganisation of Society on

Socialistic principles.  According to their doctrines, Society as

at present constituted consists of two great classes, called

variously the exploiters and the exploited, the shearers and the

shorn, the capitalists and the workers, the employers and the

employed, the tyrants and the oppressed; and this unsatisfactory

state of things must go on so long as the so-called bourgeois or

capitalist regime continues to exist.  In the new heaven and the

new earth of which the Socialist dreams this unjust distinction is

to disappear; all human beings are to be equally free and

independent, all are to cooperate spontaneously with brains and

hands to the common good, and all are to enjoy in equal shares the

natural and artificial good things of this life.



So far there has never been any difference of opinion among the

various groups of Russian thorough-going revolutionists.  All of

them, from the antiquated Nihilist down to the Social Democrat of

the latest type, have held these views.  What has differentiated

them from each other is the greater or less degree of impatience to

realise the ideal.



The most impatient were the Anarchists, who grouped themselves

around Bakunin.  They wished to overthrow immediately by a frontal

attack all existing forms of government and social organisation, in

the hope that chance, or evolution, or natural instinct, or sudden

inspiration or some other mysterious force, would create something

better.  They themselves declined to aid this mysterious force even

by suggestions, on the ground that, as one of them has said, "to

construct is not the business of the generation whose duty is to

destroy."  Notwithstanding the strong impulsive element in the

national character, the reckless, ultra-impatient doctrinaires

never became numerous, and never succeeded in forming an organised

group, probably because the young generation in Russia were too

much occupied with the actual and future condition of their own

country to embark on schemes of cosmopolitan anarchism such as

Bakunin recommended.



Next in the scale of impatience came the group of believers in

Socialist agitation among the masses, with a view to overturning

the existing Government and putting themselves in its place as soon

as the masses were sufficiently organised to play the part destined

for them.  Between them and the Anarchists the essential points of

difference were that they admitted the necessity of some years of

preparation, and they intended, when the Government was overturned,

not to preserve indefinitely the state of anarchy, but to put in

the place of autocracy, limited monarchy, or the republic, a

strong, despotic Government thoroughly imbued with Socialistic

principles.  As soon as it had laid firmly the foundations of the

new order of things it was to call a National Assembly, from which

it was to receive, I presume, a bill of indemnity for the

benevolent tyranny which it had temporarily exercised.



Impatience a few degrees less intense produced the next group, the

partisans of pacific Socialist propaganda.  They maintained that

there was no necessity for overthrowing the old order of things

till the masses had been intellectually prepared for the new, and

they objected to the foundation of the new regime being laid by

despots, however well-intentioned in the Socialist sense.  The

people must be made happy and preserved in a state of happiness by

the people themselves.



In the last place came the least impatient of all, the Social

Democrats, who differ widely from all the preceding categories.



All previous revolutionary groups had systematically rejected the

idea of a gradual transition from the bourgeois to the Socialist

regime.  They would not listen to any suggestion about a

constitutional monarchy or a democratic republic even as a mere

intermediate stage of social development.  All such things, as part

and parcel of the bourgeois system, were anathematised.  There must

be no half-way houses between present misery and future happiness;

for many weary travellers might be tempted to settle there in the

desert, and fail to reach the promised land.  "Ever onward" should

be the watchword, and no time should be wasted on the foolish

struggles of political parties and the empty vanities of political

life.



Not thus thought the Social Democrat.  He was much wiser in his

generation.  Having seen how the attempts of the impatient groups

had ended in disaster, and knowing that, if they had succeeded, the

old effete despotism would probably have been replaced by a young,

vigorous one more objectionable than its predecessor, he determined

to try a more circuitous but surer road to the goal which the

impatient people had in view.  In his opinion the distance from the

present Russian regime protected by autocracy to the future

Socialist paradise was far too great to be traversed in a single

stage, and he knew of one or two comfortable rest-houses on the

way.  First there was the rest-house of Constitutionalism, with

parliamentary institutions.  For some years the bourgeoisie would

doubtless have a parliamentary majority, but gradually, by

persistent effort, the Fourth Estate would gain the upper hand, and

then the Socialist millennium might be proclaimed.  Meanwhile, what

had to be done was to gain the confidence of the masses, especially

of the factory workers, who were more intelligent and less

conservative than the peasantry, and to create powerful labour

organisations as material for a future political party.



This programme implied, of course, a certain unity of action with

the constitutionalists, from whom, as I have said, the

revolutionists of the old school had stood sternly aloof.  There

was now no question of a formal union, and certainly no idea of a

"union of hearts," because the Socialists knew that their ultimate

aim would be strenuously opposed by the Liberals, and the Liberals

knew that an attempt was being made to use them as a cat's-paw; but

there seemed to be no reason why they of the two groups should not

observe towards each other a benevolent neutrality, and march side

by side as far as the half-way house, where they could consider the

conditions of the further advance.



When I first became acquainted with the Russian Social Democrats I

imagined that their plan of campaign was of a purely pacific

character; and that they were, unlike their predecessors, an

evolutionary, as distinguished from a revolutionary, party.

Subsequently I discovered that this conception was not quite

accurate.  In ordinary quiet times they use merely pacific methods,

and they feel that the Proletariat is not yet sufficiently

prepared, intellectually and politically, to assume the great

responsibilities which are reserved for it in the future.

Moreover, when the moment comes for getting rid of the Autocratic

Power, they would prefer a gradual process of liquidation to a

sudden cataclysm.  So far they may be said to be evolutionaries

rather than revolutionaries, but their plan of campaign does not

entirely exclude violence.  They would not consider it their duty

to oppose the use of violence on the part of the more impatient

sections of the revolutionists, and they would have no scruples

about utilising disturbances for the attainment of their own end.

Public agitation, which is always likely in Russia to provoke

violent repression by the authorities, they regard as necessary for

keeping alive and strengthening the spirit of opposition; and when

force is used by the police they approve of the agitators using

force in return.  To acts of terrorism, however, they are opposed

on principle.



Who, then, are the Terrorists, who have assassinated so many great

personages, including the Grand Duke Serge?  In reply to this

question I must introduce the reader to another group of the

revolutionists who have usually been in hostile, rather than

friendly, relations with the Social Democrats, and who call

themselves the Socialist-Revolutionaries (Sotsialisty-

Revolutsionery).



It will be remembered that the terrorist group, commonly called

Narodnaya Volya, or Narodovoltsi, which succeeded in assassinating

Alexander II., were very soon broken up by the police and most of

the leading members were arrested.  A few escaped, of whom some

remained in the country and others emigrated to Switzerland or

Paris, and efforts at reorganisation were made, especially in the

southern and western provinces, but they proved ineffectual.  At

last, sobered by experience and despairing of further success, some

of the prisoners and a few of the exiles--notably Tikhomirof, who

was regarded as the leader--made their peace with the Government,

and for some years terrorism seemed to be a thing of the past.

Passing through Russia on my way home from India and Central Asia

at that time, I came to the conclusion that the young generation

had recovered from its prolonged attack of brain-fever, and had

entered on a more normal, tranquil, and healthy period of

existence.



My expectations proved too optimistic.  About 1894 the Narodnaya

Volya came to life again, with all its terrorist traditions intact;

and shortly afterwards appeared the new group which I have just

mentioned, the Socialist-Revolutionaries, with somewhat similar

principles and a better organisation.  For some seven or eight

years the two groups existed side by side, and then the Narodnaya

Volya disappeared, absorbed probably by its more powerful rival.



During the first years of their existence neither group was strong

enough to cause the Government serious inconvenience, and it was

not till 1897-98 that they found means of issuing manifestos and

programmes.  In these the Narodovoltsi declared that their

immediate aims were the annihilation of Autocracy, the convocation

of a National Assembly and the reorganisation of the Empire on the

principles of federation and local self-government, and that for

the attainment of these objects the means to be employed should

include popular insurrections, military conspiracies, bombs and

dynamite.



Very similar, though ostensibly a little more eclectic, was the

programme of the Socialist-Revolutionaries.  Their ultimate aim was

declared to be the transfer of political authority from the

Autocratic Power to the people, the abolition of private property

in the means of production, and in general the reorganisation of

national life on Socialist principles.  On certain points they were

at one with the Social Democrats.  They recognised, for example,

that the social reorganisation must be preceded by a political

revolution, that much preparatory work was necessary, and that

attention should be directed first to the industrial proletariat as

the most intelligent section of the masses.  On the other hand they

maintained that it was a mistake to confine the revolutionary

activity to the working classes of the towns, who were not strong

enough to overturn the Autocratic Power.  The agitation ought,

therefore, to be extended to the peasantry, who were quite

"developed" enough to understand at least the idea of land-

nationalisation; and for the carrying out of this part of the

programme a special organisation was created.



With so many opinions in common, it seemed at one moment as if the

Social Democrats and the Socialist-Revolutionaries might unite

their forces for a combined attack on the Government; but apart

from the mutual jealousy and hatred which so often characterise

revolutionary as well as religious sects, they were prevented from

coalescing, or even cordially co-operating, by profound differences

both in doctrine and in method.



The Social Democrats are essentially doctrinaires.  Thorough-going

disciples of Karl Marx, they believed in what they consider the

immutable laws of social progress, according to which the

Socialistic ideal can be reached only through capitalism; and the

intermediate political revolution, which is to substitute the will

of the people for the Autocratic Power, must be effected by the

conversion and organisation of the industrial proletariat.  With

the spiritual pride of men who feel themselves to be the

incarnations or avatars of immutable law, they are inclined to look

down with something very like contempt on mere empirics who are

ignorant of scientific principles and are guided by considerations

of practical expediency.  The Social-Revolutionaries seem to them

to be empirics of this kind because they reject the tenets, or at

least deny the infallibility, of the Marx school, cling to the idea

of partially resisting the overwhelming influence of capitalism in

Russia, hope that the peasantry will play at least a secondary part

in bringing about the political revolution, and are profoundly

convinced that the advent of political liberty may be greatly

accelerated by the use of terrorism.  On this last point they

stated their views very frankly in a pamphlet which they published

in 1902 under the title of "Our Task" (Nasha Zadatcha).  It is

there said:





"One of the powerful means of struggle, dictated by our

revolutionary past and present, is political terrorism, consisting

of the annihilation of the most injurious and influential

personages of Russian autocracy in given conditions.  Systematic

terrorism, in conjunction with other forms of open mass-struggle

(industrial riots and agrarian risings, demonstrations, etc.),

which receive from terrorism an enormous, decisive significance,

will lead to the disorganisation of the enemy.  Terrorist activity

will cease only with the victory over autocracy and the complete

attainment of political liberty.  Besides its chief significance as

a means of disorganising, terrorist activity will serve at the same

time as a means of propaganda and agitation, a form of open

struggle taking place before the eyes of the whole people,

undermining the prestige of Government authority, and calling into

life new revolutionary forces, while the oral and literary

propaganda is being continued without interruption.  Lastly, the

terrorist activity serves for the whole secret revolutionary party

as a means of self-defence and of protecting the organisation

against the injurious elements of spies and treachery."





In accordance with this theory a "militant organisation" (Boevaga

Organisatsia) was formed and soon set to work with revolvers and

bombs.  First an attempt was made on the life of Pobedonostsef;

then the Minister of the Interior, Sipiagin, was assassinated; next

attempts were made on the lives of the Governors of Vilna and

Kharkof, and the Kharkof chief of police; and since that time the

Governor of Ufa, the Vice-Governor of Elizabetpol, the Minister of

the Interior, M. Plehve, and the Grand Duke Serge have fallen

victims to the terrorist policy.*





* In this list I have not mentioned the assassination of M.

Bogolyepof, Minister of Public Instruction, in 1901, because I do

not know whether it should be attributed to the Socialist-

Revolutionaries or to the Narodovoltsi, who had not yet amalgamated

with them.





Though the Social Democrats have no sentimental squeamishness about

bloodshed, they objected to this policy on the ground that acts of

terrorism were unnecessary and were apt to prove injurious rather

than beneficial to the revolutionist cause.  One of the main

objects of every intelligent revolutionary party should be to

awaken all classes from their habitual apathy and induce them to

take an active part in the political movement; but terrorism must

have a contrary effect by suggesting that political freedom is to

be attained, not by the steady pressure and persevering cooperation

of the people, but by startling, sensational acts of individual

heroism.



The efforts of these two revolutionary parties, as well as of minor

groups, to get hold of the industrial proletariat did not escape

the notice of the authorities; and during the labour troubles of

1896, on the suggestion of M. Witte, the Government had considered

the question as to what should be done to counteract the influence

of the agitators.  On that question it had no difficulty in coming

to a decision; the condition of the working classes must be

improved.  An expert official was accordingly instructed to write a

report on what had already been done in that direction.  In his

report it was shown that the Government had long been thinking

about the subject.  Not to speak of a still-born law about a ten-

hour day for artisans, dating from the time of Catherine II., an

Imperial commission had been appointed as early as 1859, but

nothing practical came of its deliberations until 1882, when

legislative measures were taken for the protection of women and

children in factories.  A little later (1886) other grievances were

dealt with and partly removed by regulating contracts of hire,

providing that the money derived from deductions and fines should

not be appropriated by the employers, and creating a staff of

factory inspectors who should take care that the benevolent

intentions of the Government were duly carried out.  Having

reviewed all these official efforts in 1896, the Government passed

in the following year a law prohibiting night work and limiting the

working day to eleven and a half hours.



This did not satisfy the workmen.  Their wages were still low, and

it was difficult to get them increased because strikes and all

forms of association were still, as they had always been, criminal

offences.  On this point the Government remained firm so far as the

law was concerned, but it gradually made practical concessions by

allowing the workmen to combine for certain purposes.  In 1898, for

example, in Kharkof, the Engineers' Mutual Aid Society was

sanctioned, and gradually it became customary to allow the workmen

to elect delegates for the discussion of their grievances with the

employers and inspectors.



Finding that these concessions did not check the growing influence

of the Social Democratic agitators among the operatives, the

Government resolved to go a step further; it would organise the

workers on purely trade-unionist lines, and would thereby combat

the Social Democrats, who always advised the strikers to mix up

political demands with their material grievances.  The project

seemed to have a good prospect of success, because there were many

workmen, especially of the older generation, who did not at all

like the mixing up of politics, which so often led to arrest,

imprisonment and exile, with the practical concerns of every day

life.



The first attempt of the kind was made in Moscow under the

direction of a certain Zubatof, chief of the secret police, who had

been himself a revolutionary in his youth, and afterwards an agent

provocateur.  Aided by Tikhomirof, the repentant terrorist whom I

have already mentioned, Zubatof organised a large workmen's

association, with reading-rooms, lectures, discussions and other

attractions, and sought to convince the members that they should

turn a deaf ear to the Social Democratic agents, and look only to

the Government for the improvement of their condition.  In order to

gain their sympathy and confidence, he instructed his subordinates

to take the side of the workmen in all labour disputes, while he

himself brought official pressure to bear on the employers.  By

this means he made a considerable number of converts, and for a

time the association seemed to prosper, but he did not possess the

extraordinary ability and tact required to play the complicated

game successfully, and he committed the fatal mistake of using the

office-bearers of the association as detectives for the discovery

of the "evil-intentioned."  This tactical error had its natural

consequences.  As soon as the workmen perceived that their

professed benefactors were police spies, who did not obtain for

them any real improvement of their condition, the popularity of the

association rapidly declined.  At the same time, the factory owners

complained to the Minister of Finance that the police, who ought to

be guardians of public order, and who had accused the factory

inspectors of stirring up discontent in the labouring population,

were themselves creating troubles by inciting the workmen to make

inordinate demands.  The Minister of Finance at the moment was M.

Witte, and the Minister of Interior, responsible for the acts of

the police, was M. Plehve, and between these two official

dignitaries, who were already in very strained relations, Zubatof's

activity formed a new base of contention.  In these circumstances

it is not surprising that the very risky experiment came to an

untimely end.



In St. Petersburg a similar experiment was made, and it ended much

more tragically.  There the chief rôle was played by a mysterious

personage called Father Gapon, who acquired great momentary

notoriety.  Though a genuine priest, he did not belong by birth, as

most Russian priests do, to the ecclesiastical caste.  The son of a

peasant in Little Russia, where the ranks of the clergy are not

hermetically sealed against the other social classes, he aspired to

take orders, and after being rusticated from a seminary for

supposed sympathy with revolutionary ideas, he contrived to finish

his studies and obtain ordination.  During a residence in Moscow he

took part in the Zubatof experiment, and when that badly conducted

scheme collapsed he was transferred to St. Petersburg and appointed

chaplain to a large convict prison.  His new professional duties

did not prevent him from continuing to take a keen interest in the

welfare of the working classes, and in the summer of 1904 he

became, with the approval of the police authorities, president of a

large labour union called the Society of Russian Workmen, which had

eleven sections in the various industrial suburbs of the capital.

Under his guidance the experiment proceeded for some months very

successfully.  He gained the sympathy and confidence of the

workmen, and so long as no serious questions arose he kept his hold

on them; but a storm was brewing and he proved unequal to the

occasion.



In the first days of 1905, when the economic consequences of the

war had come to be keenly felt, a spirit of discontent appeared

among the labouring population of St. Petersburg, and on Sunday,

January 15th--exactly a week before the famous Sunday when the

troops were called into play--a strike began in the Putilof

ironworks and spread like wildfire to the other big works in the

neighbourhood.  The immediate cause of the disturbance was the

dismissal of some workmen and a demand on the part of the labour

union that they should be reinstated.  A deputation, composed

partly of genuine workmen and partly of Social Democratic

agitators, and led by Gapon, negotiated with the managers of the

Putilof works, and failed to effect an arrangement.  At this moment

Gapon tried hard to confine the negotiations to the points in

dispute, whereas the agitators put forward demands of a wider kind,

such as the eight-hour working day, and they gradually obtained his

concurrence on condition that no political demands should be

introduced into the programme.  In defending this condition he was

supported by the workmen, so that when agitators tried to make

political speeches at the meetings they were unceremoniously

expelled.



A similar struggle between the "Economists" and the "Politicals"

was going on in the other industrial suburbs, notably in the Nevski

quarter, where 45,000 operatives had struck work, and the Social

Democrats were particularly active.  In this section of the Labour

Union the most influential member was a young workman called

Petroff, who was a staunch Gaponist in the sense that he wished the

workers to confine themselves to their own grievances and to resist

the introduction of political demands.  At first he succeeded in

preventing the agitators from speaking at the meetings, but they

soon proved too much for him.  At one of the meetings on Tuesday,

when he happened to be absent, a Social Democrat contrived to get

himself elected chairman, and from that moment the political

agitators had a free hand.  They had a regular organisation

composed of an organiser, three "oratorical agitators," and several

assistant-organisers who attended the small meetings in the

operatives' sleeping-quarters.  Besides these there were a certain

number of workmen already converted to Social Democratic principles

who had learned the art of making political speeches.



The reports of the agitators to the central organisation, written

hurriedly during this eventful week, are extremely graphic and

interesting.  They declared that there is a frightful amount of

work to be done and very few to do it.  Their stock of Social

Democratic pamphlets is exhausted and they are hoarse from speech-

making.  In spite of their superhuman efforts the masses remain

frightfully "undeveloped."  The men willingly collect to hear the

orators, listen to them attentively, express approval or dissent,

and even put questions; but with all this they remain obstinately

on the ground of their own immediate wants, such as the increase of

wages and protection against brutal foremen, and they only hint

vaguely at more serious demands.  The agitators, however, are

equally obstinate, and they make a few converts.  To illustrate how

conversions are made, the following incident is related.  At one

meeting the cry of "Stop the war!" is raised by an orator without

sufficient preparation, and at once a voice is heard in the

audience saying.  "No, no!  The little Japs (Yaposhki) must be

beaten!"  Thereupon a more experienced orator comes forward and a

characteristic conversation takes place:



"Have we much land of our own, my friends?" asks the orator.



"Much!" replies the crowd.



"Do we require Manchuria?"



"No!"



"Who pays for the war?"



"We do!"



"Are our brothers dying, and do your wives and children remain

without a bit of bread?"



"So it is!" say many, with a significant shake of the head.



Having succeeded so far, the orator tries to turn the popular

indignation against the Tsar by explaining that he is to blame for

all this misery and suffering, but Petroff suddenly appears on the

scene and maintains that for the misery and suffering the Tsar is

not at all to blame, for he knows nothing about it.  It is all the

fault of his servants, the tchinovniks.



By this device Petroff suppresses the seditious cry of "Down with

autocracy!" which the Social Democrats were anxious to make the

watchword of the movement, but he has thereby been drawn from his

strong position of "No politics," and he is standing, as we shall

see presently, on a slippery incline.



On Thursday and Friday the activity of the leaders and the

excitement of the masses increase.  While the Gaponists speak

merely of local grievances and material wants, the Social Democrats

incite their hearers to a political struggle, advising them to

demand a Constituent Assembly, and explaining the necessity for all

workmen to draw together and form a powerful political party.  The

haranguing goes on from morning to night, and agitators drive about

from one factory to another to keep the excitement at fever-heat.

The police, usually so active on such occasions, do not put in an

appearance.  Prince Sviatopolk Mirski, the honest, well-

intentioned, liberal Minister of the Interior, cannot make up his

mind to act with energy, and lets things drift.  The agitators

themselves are astonished at this extraordinary inactivity.  One of

them, writing a few days afterwards, says: "The police was

paralysed.  It would have been easy to arrest Gapon, and discover

the orators.  On Friday the clubs might have been surrounded and

the orators arrested. . . .  In a word, decided measures might have

been taken, but they were not."



It is not only Petroff that has abandoned his strong position of

"No politics"; Gapon is doing likewise.  The movement has spread

far beyond what he expected, and he is being carried away by the

prevailing excitement.  With all his benevolent intentions, he is

of a nervous, excitable nature, and his besetting sin is vanity.

He perceives that by resisting the Social Democrats he is losing

his hold on the masses.  Early in the week, as we have seen, he

began to widen his programme in the Social Democratic sense, and

every day he makes new concessions.  Before the week is finished a

Social Democratic orator can write triumphantly: "In three days we

have transformed the Gaponist assemblies into political meetings!"

Like Petroff, Gapon seeks to defend the Tsar, and he falls into

Petroff's strategical mistake of pretending that the Tsar knows

nothing of the sufferings of his people.  From that admission to

the resolution that the Tsar must somehow be informed personally

and directly, by some means outside of the regular official

channel, there is but one step, and that step is quickly taken.  On

Friday morning Gapon has determined to present with his own hands a

petition to his Majesty, and the petition is already drafted,

containing demands which go far beyond workmen's grievances.  After

resisting the Social Democratic agitators so stoutly, he is now

going over, bag and baggage, to the Social Democratic camp.



This wonderful change was consummated on Friday evening at a

conference which he held with some delegates of the Social

Democrats.  From an account written by one of these delegates

immediately after the meeting we get an insight into the worthy

priest's character and motives.  In the morning he had written to

them: "I have 100,000 workmen, and I am going with them to the

Palace to present a petition.  If it is not granted, we shall make

a revolution.  Do you agree?"  They did not like the idea, because

the Social Democratic policy is to extort concessions, not to ask

favours, and to refrain from anything that might increase the

prestige of the Autocratic Power.  In their reply, therefore, they

consented simply to discuss the matter.  I proceed now to quote

from the delegate's account of what took place at the conference:





"The company consisted of Gapon, with two adherents, and five

Social Democrats.  All sat round a table, and the conversation

began.  Gapon is a good-looking man, with dark complexion and

thoughtful, sympathetic face.  He is evidently very tired, and,

like the other orators, he is hoarse.  To the questions addressed

to him, he replies: 'The masses are at present so electrified that

you may lead them wherever you like.  We shall go on Sunday to the

Palace, and present a petition.  If we are allowed to pass without

hindrance, we shall march to the Palace Square, and summon the Tsar

from Tsarskoe Selo.  We shall wait for him till the evening.  When

he arrives, I shall go to him with a deputation, and in presenting

to him the petition, I shall say: "Your Majesty!  Things cannot go

on like this; it is time to give the people liberty."  (Tak nelzya!

Para dat' narodu svobodu.)  If he consents, we shall insist that he

take an oath before the people.  Only then we shall come away, and

when we begin to work, it will only be for eight hours a day.  If,

on the other hand, we are prevented from entering the city, we

shall request and beg, and if they do not let us pass, we shall

force our way.  In the Palace Square we shall find troops, and we

shall entreat them to come over to our side.  If they beat us, we

shall strike back.  There will be sacrifices, but part of the

troops will come over to us, and then, being ourselves strong in

numbers, we shall make a revolution.  We shall construct

barricades, pillage the armourers' shops, break open the prisons,

and seize the telephones and telegraphs.  The Socialist-

Revolutionaries have promised us bombs, and the Democrats money:

and we shall be victorious!*





* This confirms the information which comes to me from other

quarters that Gapon was already in friendly relations with other

revolutionary groups.





"Such, in a few words, were the ideas which Gapon expounded.  The

impression he made on us was that he did not clearly realise where

he was going.  Acting with sincerity, he was ready to die, but he

was convinced that the troops would not fire, and that the

deputation would be received by the Emperor.  He did not

distinguish between different methods.  Though not at all a

partisan of violent means, he had become infuriated against

autocracy and the Tsar, as was shown by his language when he said:

'If that blockhead of a Tsar comes out' (Yesli etot durak Tsar

vuidet) . . .  Burning with the desire to attain his object, he

looked on revolution like a child, as if it could be accomplished

in a day with empty hands!"





Knowing that no previous preparations had been made for a

revolution such as Gapon talked of, the Social Democratic agents

tried to dissuade him from carrying out his idea on Sunday, but he

stood firm.  He had already committed himself publicly to the

project.  At a workmen's meeting in another quarter (Vassiliostrof)

earlier in the day he had explained the petition, and said: "Let us

go to the Winter Palace and summon the Emperor, and let us tell him

our wants; if he does not listen to us we do not require him any

longer."  To a Social Democrat who shook him warmly by the hand and

expressed his astonishment that there should be such a man among

the clergy, he replied: "I am no longer a priest; I am a fighter

for liberty!  They want to exile me, and for some nights I have not

slept at home."  When offered assistance to escape arrest, he

answered laconically: "Thanks; I have already a place of refuge."

After his departure from the meeting one of his friends, to whom he

had confided a copy of the petition, rose and said: "Now has

arrived the great historical moment!  Now we can and must demand

rights and liberty!"  After hearing the petition read the meeting

decided that if the Tsar did not come out at the demand of the

people strong measures should be taken, and one orator indicated

pretty plainly what they should be: "We don't require a Tsar who is

deaf to the woes of the people; we shall perish ourselves, but we

shall kill him.  Swear that you will all come to the Palace on

Sunday at twelve o'clock!"  The audience raised their hands in

token of assent.



Finding it impossible to dissuade Gapon from his purpose, the

Social Democrats told him that they would take advantage of the

circumstances independently, and that if he was allowed to enter

the city with his deputation they would organise monster meetings

in the Palace Square.



The imperious tone used by Gapon at the public meetings and private

consultations was adopted by him also in his letters to the

Minister of the Interior and to the Emperor.  To the former he

wrote:





"The workmen and inhabitants of St. Petersburg of various classes

desire to see the Tsar at two o'clock on Sunday in the Winter

Palace Square, in order to lay before him personally their needs

and those of the whole Russian people. . . .  Tell the Tsar that I

and the workmen, many thousands in number, have peacefully, with

confidence in him, but irrevocably, resolved to proceed to the

Winter Palace.  Let him show his confidence by deeds, and not by

manifestos."





To the Tsar himself his language was not more respectful:





"Sovereign,--I fear the Ministers have not told you the truth about

the situation.  The whole people, trusting in you, has resolved to

appear at the Winter Palace at two o'clock in the afternoon, in

order to inform you of its needs.  If you hesitate, and do not

appear before the people, then you tear the moral bonds between you

and them.  Trust in you will disappear, because innocent blood will

flow.  Appear to-morrow before your people and receive our address

of devotion in a courageous spirit! I and the labour

representatives, my brave comrades, guarantee the inviolability of

your person."





Gapon was no longer merely the president of the Workmen's Union:

inebriated with the excitement he had done so much to create, he

now imagined himself the representative of the oppressed Russian

people, and the heroic leader of a great political revolution.  In

the petition which he had prepared he said little about the

grievances of the St. Petersburg workmen whose interests he had a

right to advocate, and preferred to soar into much higher regions:





"The bureaucracy has brought the country to the verge of ruin, and,

by a shameful war, is bringing it to its downfall.  We have no

voice in the heavy burdens imposed on us; we do not even know for

whom or why this money is wrung from the impoverished people, and

we do not know how it is expended.  This state of things is

contrary to the Divine laws, and renders life unbearable.

Assembled before your palace, we plead for our salvation.  Refuse

not your aid; raise your people from the tomb, and give them the

means of working out their own destiny.  Rescue them from the

intolerable yoke of officialdom; throw down the wall that separates

you from them, in order that they may rule with you the country

that was created for their happiness--a happiness which is being

wrenched from us, leaving nothing but sorrow and humiliation."





With an innate sentiment of autocratic dignity the Emperor declined

to obey the imperious summons, and he thereby avoided an unseemly

altercation with the excited priest, as well as the boisterous

public meetings which the Social Democrats were preparing to hold

in the Palace Square.  Orders were given to the police and the

troops to prevent the crowds of workmen from penetrating into the

centre of the city from the industrial suburbs.  The rest need not

be described in detail.  On Sunday the crowds tried to force their

way, the troops fired, and many of the demonstrators were killed or

wounded.  How many it is impossible to say; between the various

estimates there is an enormous discrepancy.  At one of the first

volleys Father Gapon fell, but he turned out to be quite unhurt,

and was spirited away to his place of refuge, whence he escaped

across the frontier.



As soon as he had an opportunity of giving public expression to his

feelings, he indulged in very strong language.  In his letters and

proclamations the Tsar is called a miscreant and an assassin, and

is described as traitorous, bloodthirsty, and bestial.  To the

ministers he is equally uncomplimentary.  They appear to him an

accursed band of brigands, Mamelukes, jackals, monsters.  Against

the Tsar, "with his reptilian brood," and the ministers alike, he

vows vengeance--"death to them all!"  As for the means for

realising his sacred mission, he recommends bombs, dynamite,

individual and wholesale terrorism, popular insurrection, and

paralysing the life of the cities by destroying the water-mains,

the gas-pipes, the telegraph and telephone wires, the railways and

tram-ways, the Government buildings and the prisons.  At some

moments he seems to imagine himself invested with papal powers, for

he anathematises the soldiers who did their duty on the eventful

day, whilst he blesses and absolves from their oath of allegiance

those who help the nation to win liberty.



So far I have spoken merely of the main currents in the

revolutionary movement.  Of the minor currents--particularly those

in the outlying provinces, where the Socialist tendencies were

mingled with nationalist feeling--I shall have occasion to speak

when I come to deal with the present political situation as a

whole.  Meanwhile, I wish to sketch in outline the foreign policy

which has powerfully contributed to bring about the present crisis.


