





CHAPTER V



A MEDICAL CONSULTATION





Unexpected Illness--A Village Doctor--Siberian Plague--My Studies--

Russian Historians--A Russian Imitator of Dickens--A ci-devant

Domestic Serf--Medicine and Witchcraft--A Remnant of Paganism--

Credulity of the Peasantry--Absurd Rumours--A Mysterious Visit from

St. Barbara--Cholera on Board a Steamer--Hospitals--Lunatic

Asylums--Amongst Maniacs.





In enumerating the requisites for travelling in the less frequented

parts of Russia, I omitted to mention one important condition: the

traveller should be always in good health, and in case of illness

be ready to dispense with regular medical attendance.  This I

learned by experience during my stay at Ivanofka.



A man who is accustomed to be always well, and has consequently

cause to believe himself exempt from the ordinary ills that flesh

is heir to, naturally feels aggrieved--as if some one had inflicted

upon him an undeserved injury--when he suddenly finds himself ill.

At first he refuses to believe the fact, and, as far as possible,

takes no notice of the disagreeable symptoms.



Such was my state of mind on being awakened early one morning by

peculiar symptoms which I had never before experienced.  Unwilling

to admit to myself the possibility of being ill, I got up, and

endeavoured to dress as usual, but very soon discovered that I was

unable to stand.  There was no denying the fact; not only was I

ill, but the malady, whatever it was, surpassed my powers of

diagnosis; and when the symptoms increased steadily all that day

and the following night, I was constrained to take the humiliating

decision of asking for medical advice.  To my inquiries whether

there was a doctor in the neighbourhood, the old servant replied,

"There is not exactly a doctor, but there is a Feldsher in the

village."



"And what is a Feldsher?"



"A Feldsher is . . . . is a Feldsher."



"I am quite aware of that, but I would like to know what you mean

by the word.  What is this Feldsher?"



"He's an old soldier who dresses wounds and gives physic."



The definition did not predispose me in favour of the mysterious

personage, but as there was nothing better to be had I ordered him

to be sent for, notwithstanding the strenuous opposition of the old

servant, who evidently did not believe in feldshers.



In about half an hour a tall, broad-shouldered man entered, and

stood bolt upright in the middle of the room in the attitude which

is designated in military language by the word "Attention."  His

clean-shaven chin, long moustache, and closely-cropped hair

confirmed one part of the old servant's definition; he was

unmistakably an old soldier.



"You are a Feldsher," I said, making use of the word which I had

recently added to my vocabulary.



"Exactly so, your Nobility!"  These words, the ordinary form of

affirmation used by soldiers to their officers, were pronounced in

a loud, metallic, monotonous tone, as if the speaker had been an

automaton conversing with a brother automaton at a distance of

twenty yards.  As soon as the words were pronounced the mouth of

the machine closed spasmodically, and the head, which had been

momentarily turned towards me, reverted to its former position with

a jerk as if it had received the order "Eyes front!"



"Then please to sit down here, and I'll tell you about my ailment."

Upon this the figure took three paces to the front, wheeled to the

right-about, and sat down on the edge of the chair, retaining the

position of "Attention" as nearly as the sitting posture would

allow.  When the symptoms had been carefully described, he knitted

his brows, and after some reflection remarked, "I can give you a

dose of . . . ."  Here followed a long word which I did not

understand.



"I don't wish you to give me a dose of anything till I know what is

the matter with me.  Though a bit of a doctor myself, I have no

idea what it is, and, pardon me, I think you are in the same

position."  Noticing a look of ruffled professional dignity on his

face, I added, as a sedative, "It is evidently something very

peculiar, so that if the first medical practitioner in the country

were present he would probably be as much puzzled as ourselves."



The sedative had the desired effect.  "Well, sir, to tell you the

truth," he said, in a more human tone of voice, "I do not clearly

understand what it is."



"Exactly; and therefore I think we had better leave the cure to

Nature, and not interfere with her mode of treatment."



"Perhaps it would be better."



"No doubt.  And now, since I have to lie here on my back, and feel

rather lonely, I should like to have a talk with you.  You are not

in a hurry, I hope?"



"Not at all.  My assistant knows where I am, and will send for me

if I am required."



"So you have an assistant, have you?"



"Oh, yes; a very sharp young fellow, who has been two years in the

Feldsher school, and has now come here to help me and learn more by

practice.  That is a new way.  I never was at a school of the kind

myself, and had to pick up what I could when a servant in the

hospital.  There were, I believe, no such schools in my time.  The

one where my assistant learned was opened by the Zemstvo."



"The Zemstvo is the new local administration, is it not?"



"Exactly so.  And I could not do without the assistant," continued

my new acquaintance, gradually losing his rigidity, and showing

himself, what he really was, a kindly, talkative man.  "I have

often to go to other villages, and almost every day a number of

peasants come here.  At first I had very little to do, for the

people thought I was an official, and would make them pay dearly

for what I should give them; but now they know that they don't

require to pay, and come in great numbers.  And everything I give

them--though sometimes I don't clearly understand what the matter

is--seems to do them good.  I believe that faith does as much as

physic."



"In my country," I remarked, "there is a sect of doctors who get

the benefit of that principle.  They give their patients two or

three little balls no bigger than a pin's head, or a few drops of

tasteless liquid, and they sometimes work wonderful cures."



"That system would not do for us.  The Russian muzhik would have no

faith if he swallowed merely things of that kind.  What he believes

in is something with a very bad taste, and lots of it.  That is his

idea of a medicine; and he thinks that the more he takes of a

medicine the better chance he has of getting well.  When I wish to

give a peasant several doses I make him come for each separate

dose, for I know that if I did not he would probably swallow the

whole as soon as he was out of sight.  But there is not much

serious disease here--not like what I used to see on the Sheksna.

You have been on the Sheksna?"



"Not yet, but I intend going there."  The Sheksna is a river which

falls into the Volga, and forms part of the great system of water-

communication connecting the Volga with the Neva.



"When you go there you will see lots of diseases.  If there is a

hot summer, and plenty of barges passing, something is sure to

break out--typhus, or black small-pox, or Siberian plague, or

something of the kind.  That Siberian plague is a curious thing.

Whether it really comes from Siberia, God only knows.  So soon as

it breaks out the horses die by dozens, and sometimes men and women

are attacked, though it is not properly a human disease.  They say

that flies carry the poison from the dead horses to the people.

The sign of it is a thing like a boil, with a dark-coloured rim.

If this is cut open in time the person may recover, but if it is

not, the person dies.  There is cholera, too, sometimes."



"What a delightful country," I said to myself, "for a young doctor

who wishes to make discoveries in the science of disease!"



The catalogue of diseases inhabiting this favoured region was

apparently not yet complete, but it was cut short for the moment by

the arrival of the assistant, with the announcement that his

superior was wanted.



This first interview with the feldsher was, on the whole,

satisfactory.  He had not rendered me any medical assistance, but

he had helped me to pass an hour pleasantly, and had given me a

little information of the kind I desired.  My later interviews with

him were equally agreeable.  He was naturally an intelligent,

observant man, who had seen a great deal of the Russian world, and

could describe graphically what he had seen.  Unfortunately the

horizontal position to which I was condemned prevented me from

noting down at the time the interesting things which he related to

me.  His visits, together with those of Karl Karl'itch and of the

priest, who kindly spent a great part of his time with me, helped

me to while away many an hour which would otherwise have been

dreary enough.



During the intervals when I was alone I devoted myself to reading--

sometimes Russian history and sometimes works of fiction.  The

history was that of Karamzin, who may fairly be called the Russian

Livy.  It interested me much by the facts which it contained, but

irritated me not a little by the rhetorical style in which it is

written.  Afterwards, when I had waded through some twenty volumes

of the gigantic work of Solovyoff--or Solovief, as the name is

sometimes unphonetically written--which is simply a vast collection

of valuable but undigested material, I was much less severe on the

picturesque descriptions and ornate style of his illustrious

predecessor.  The first work of fiction which I read was a

collection of tales by Grigorovitch, which had been given to me by

the author on my departure from St. Petersburg.  These tales,

descriptive of rural life in Russia, had been written, as the

author afterwards admitted to me, under the influence of Dickens.

Many of the little tricks and affectations which became painfully

obtrusive in Dickens's later works I had no difficulty in

recognising under their Russian garb.  In spite of these I found

the book very pleasant reading, and received from it some new

notions--to be afterwards verified, of course--about Russian

peasant life.



One of these tales made a deep impression upon me, and I still

remember the chief incidents.  The story opens with the description

of a village in late autumn.  It has been raining for some time

heavily, and the road has become covered with a deep layer of black

mud.  An old woman--a small proprietor--is sitting at home with a

friend, drinking tea and trying to read the future by means of a

pack of cards.  This occupation is suddenly interrupted by the

entrance of a female servant, who announces that she has discovered

an old man, apparently very ill, lying in one of the outhouses.

The old woman goes out to see her uninvited guest, and, being of a

kindly nature, prepares to have him removed to a more comfortable

place, and properly attended to; but her servant whispers to her

that perhaps he is a vagrant, and the generous impulse is thereby

checked.  When it is discovered that the suspicion is only too well

founded, and that the man has no passport, the old woman becomes

thoroughly alarmed.  Her imagination pictures to her the terrible

consequences that would ensue if the police should discover that

she had harboured a vagrant.  All her little fortune might be

extorted from her.  And if the old man should happen to die in her

house or farmyard!  The consequences in that case might be very

serious.  Not only might she lose everything, but she might even be

dragged to prison.  At the sight of these dangers the old woman

forgets her tender-heartedness, and becomes inexorable.  The old

man, sick unto death though he be, must leave the premises

instantly.  Knowing full well that he will nowhere find a refuge,

he walks forth into the cold, dark, stormy night, and next morning

a dead body is found at a short distance from the village.



Why this story, which was not strikingly remarkable for artistic

merit, impressed me so deeply I cannot say.  Perhaps it was because

I was myself ill at the time, and imagined how terrible it would be

to be turned out on the muddy road on a cold, wet October night.

Besides this, the story interested me as illustrating the terror

which the police inspired during the reign of Nicholas I.  The

ingenious devices which they employed for extorting money formed

the subject of another sketch, which I read shortly afterwards, and

which has likewise remained in my memory.  The facts were as

follows: An officer of rural police, when driving on a country

road, finds a dead body by the wayside.  Congratulating himself on

this bit of good luck, he proceeds to the nearest village, and lets

the inhabitants know that all manner of legal proceedings will be

taken against them, so that the supposed murderer may be

discovered.  The peasants are of course frightened, and give him a

considerable sum of money in order that he may hush up the affair.

An ordinary officer of police would have been quite satisfied with

this ransom, but this officer is not an ordinary man, and is very

much in need of money; he conceives, therefore, the brilliant idea

of repeating the experiment.  Taking up the dead body, he takes it

away in his tarantass, and a few hours later declares to the

inhabitants of a village some miles off that some of them have been

guilty of murder, and that he intends to investigate the matter

thoroughly.  The peasants of course pay liberally in order to

escape the investigation, and the rascally officer, emboldened by

success, repeats the trick in different villages until he has

gathered a large sum.



Tales and sketches of this kind were very much in fashion during

the years which followed the death of the great autocrat, Nicholas

I., when the long-pent-up indignation against his severe,

repressive regime was suddenly allowed free expression, and they

were still much read during the first years of my stay in the

country.  Now the public taste has changed.  The reform enthusiast

has evaporated, and the existing administrative abuses, more

refined and less comical than their predecessors, receive

comparatively little attention from the satirists.



When I did not feel disposed to read, and had none of my regular

visitors with me, I sometimes spent an hour or two in talking with

the old man-servant who attended me.  Anton was decidedly an old

man, but what his age precisely was I never could discover; either

he did not know himself, or he did not wish to tell me.  In

appearance he seemed about sixty, but from certain remarks which he

made I concluded that he must be nearer seventy, though he had

scarcely a grey hair on his head.  As to who his father was he

seemed, like the famous Topsy, to have no very clear ideas, but he

had an advantage over Topsy with regard to his maternal ancestry.

His mother had been a serf who had fulfilled for some time the

functions of a lady's maid, and after the death of her mistress had

been promoted to a not very clearly defined position of

responsibility in the household.  Anton, too, had been promoted in

his time.  His first function in the household had been that of

assistant-keeper of the tobacco-pipes, from which humble office he

had gradually risen to a position which may be roughly designated

as that of butler.  All this time he had been, of course, a serf,

as his mother had been before him; but being naturally a man of

sluggish intellect, he had never thoroughly realised the fact, and

had certainly never conceived the possibility of being anything

different from what he was.  His master was master, and he himself

was Anton, obliged to obey his master, or at least conceal

disobedience--these were long the main facts in his conception of

the universe, and, as philosophers generally do with regard to

fundamental facts or axioms, he had accepted them without

examination.  By means of these simple postulates he had led a

tranquil life, untroubled by doubts, until the year 1861, when the

so-called freedom was brought to Ivanofka.  He himself had not gone

to the church to hear Batushka read the Tsar's manifesto, but his

master, on returning from the ceremony, had called him and said,

"Anton, you are free now, but the Tsar says you are to serve as you

have done for two years longer."



To this startling announcement Anton had replied coolly,

"Slushayus," or, as we would say, "Yes, sir," and without further

comment had gone to fetch his master's breakfast; but what he saw

and heard during the next few weeks greatly troubled his old

conceptions of human society and the fitness of things.  From that

time must be dated, I suppose, the expression of mental confusion

which his face habitually wore.



The first thing that roused his indignation was the conduct of his

fellow-servants.  Nearly all the unmarried ones seemed to be

suddenly attacked by a peculiar matrimonial mania.  The reason of

this was that the new law expressly gave permission to the

emancipated serfs to marry as they chose without the consent of

their masters, and nearly all the unmarried adults hastened to take

advantage of their newly-acquired privilege, though many of them

had great difficulty in raising the capital necessary to pay the

priest's fees.  Then came disorders among the peasantry, the death

of the old master, and the removal of the family first to St.

Petersburg, and afterwards to Germany.  Anton's mind had never been

of a very powerful order, and these great events had exercised a

deleterious influence upon it.  When Karl Karl'itch, at the expiry

of the two years, informed him that he might now go where he chose,

he replied, with a look of blank, unfeigned astonishment, "Where

can I go to?"  He had never conceived the possibility of being

forced to earn his bread in some new way, and begged Karl Karl'itch

to let him remain where he was.  This request was readily granted,

for Anton was an honest, faithful servant, and sincerely attached

to the family, and it was accordingly arranged that he should

receive a small monthly salary, and occupy an intermediate position

between those of major-domo and head watch-dog.



Had Anton been transformed into a real watch-dog he could scarcely

have slept more than he did.  His power of sleeping, and his

somnolence when he imagined he was awake, were his two most

prominent characteristics.  Out of consideration for his years and

his love of repose, I troubled him as little as possible; but even

the small amount of service which I demanded he contrived to

curtail in an ingenious way.  The time and exertion required for

traversing the intervening space between his own room and mine

might, he thought, be more profitably employed; and accordingly he

extemporised a bed in a small ante-chamber, close to my door, and

took up there his permanent abode.  If sonorous snoring be

sufficient proof that the performer is asleep, then I must conclude

that Anton devoted about three-fourths of his time to sleeping and

a large part of the remaining fourth to yawning and elongated

guttural ejaculations.  At first this little arrangement

considerably annoyed me, but I bore it patiently, and afterwards

received my reward, for during my illness I found it very

convenient to have an attendant within call.  And I must do Anton

the justice to say that he served me well in his own somnolent

fashion.  He seemed to have the faculty of hearing when asleep, and

generally appeared in my room before he had succeeded in getting

his eyes completely open.



Anton had never found time, during his long life, to form many

opinions, but he had somehow imbibed or inhaled a few convictions,

all of a decidedly conservative kind, and one of these was that

feldshers were useless and dangerous members of society.  Again and

again he had advised me to have nothing to do with the one who

visited me, and more than once he recommended to me an old woman of

the name of Masha, who lived in a village a few miles off.  Masha

was what is known in Russia as a znakharka--that is to say, a woman

who is half witch, half medical practitioner--the whole permeated

with a strong leaven of knavery.  According to Anton, she could

effect by means of herbs and charms every possible cure short of

raising from the dead, and even with regard to this last operation

he cautiously refrained from expressing an opinion.



The idea of being subjected to a course of herbs and charms by an

old woman who probably knew very little about the hidden properties

of either, did not seem to me inviting, and more than once I flatly

refused to have recourse to such unhallowed means.  On due

consideration, however, I thought that a professional interview

with the old witch would be rather amusing, and then a brilliant

idea occurred to me!  I would bring together the feldsher and the

znakharka, who no doubt hated each other with a Kilkenny-cat

hatred, and let them fight out their differences before me for the

benefit of science and my own delectation.



The more I thought of my project, the more I congratulated myself

on having conceived such a scheme; but, alas! in this very

imperfectly organised world of ours brilliant ideas are seldom

realised, and in this case I was destined to be disappointed.  Did

the old woman's black art warn her of approaching danger, or was

she simply actuated by a feeling of professional jealousy and

considerations of professional etiquette?  To this question I can

give no positive answer, but certain it is that she could not be

induced to pay me a visit, and I was thus balked of my expected

amusement.  I succeeded, however, in learning indirectly something

about the old witch.  She enjoyed among her neighbours that solid,

durable kind of respect which is founded on vague, undefinable

fear, and was believed to have effected many remarkable cures.  In

the treatment of syphilitic diseases, which are fearfully common

among the Russian peasantry, she was supposed to be specially

successful, and I have no doubt, from the vague descriptions which

I received, that the charm which she employed in these cases was of

a mercurial kind.  Some time afterward I saw one of her victims.

Whether she had succeeded in destroying the poison I know not, but

she had at least succeeded in destroying most completely the

patient's teeth.  How women of this kind obtain mercury, and how

they have discovered its medicinal properties, I cannot explain.

Neither can I explain how they have come to know the peculiar

properties of ergot of rye, which they frequently employ for

illicit purposes familiar to all students of medical jurisprudence.



The znakharka and the feldsher represent two very different periods

in the history of medical science--the magical and the scientific.

The Russian peasantry have still many conceptions which belong to

the former.  The great majority of them are already quite willing,

under ordinary circumstances, to use the scientific means of

healing; but as soon as a violent epidemic breaks out, and the

scientific means prove unequal to the occasion, the old faith

revives, and recourse is had to magical rites and incantations.  Of

these rites many are very curious.  Here, for instance, is one

which had been performed in a village near which I afterwards lived

for some time.  Cholera had been raging in the district for several

weeks.  In the village in question no case had yet occurred, but

the inhabitants feared that the dreaded visitor would soon arrive,

and the following ingenious contrivance was adopted for warding off

the danger.  At midnight, when the male population was supposed to

be asleep, all the maidens met in nocturnal costume, according to a

preconcerted plan, and formed a procession.  In front marched a

girl, holding an Icon.  Behind her came her companions, dragging a

sokha--the primitive plough commonly used by the peasantry--by

means of a long rope.  In this order the procession made the

circuit of the entire village, and it was confidently believed that

the cholera would not be able to overstep the magical circle thus

described.  Many of the males probably knew, or at least suspected,

what was going on; but they prudently remained within doors,

knowing well that if they should be caught peeping indiscreetly at

the mystic ceremony, they would be unmercifully beaten by those who

were taking part in it.



This custom is doubtless a survival of old pagan superstitions.

The introduction of the Icon is a modern innovation, which

illustrates that curious blending of paganism and Christianity

which is often to be met with in Russia, and of which I shall have

more to say in another chapter.



Sometimes, when an epidemic breaks out, the panic produced takes a

more dangerous form.  The people suspect that it is the work of the

doctors, or that some ill-disposed persons have poisoned the wells,

and no amount of reasoning will convince them that their own

habitual disregard of the most simple sanitary precautions has

something to do with the phenomenon.  I know of one case where an

itinerant photographer was severely maltreated in consequence of

such suspicions; and once, in St. Petersburg, during the reign of

Nicholas I., a serious riot took place.  The excited populace had

already thrown several doctors out of the windows of the hospital,

when the Emperor arrived, unattended, in an open carriage, and

quelled the disturbance by his simple presence, aided by his

stentorian voice.



Of the ignorant credulity of the Russian peasantry I might relate

many curious illustrations.  The most absurd rumours sometimes

awaken consternation throughout a whole district.  One of the most

common reports of this kind is that a female conscription is about

to take place.  About the time of the Duke of Edinburgh's marriage

with the daughter of Alexander II. this report was specially

frequent.  A large number of young girls were to be kidnapped and

sent to England in a red ship.  Why the ship was to be red I can

easily explain, because in the peasants' language the conceptions

of red and beautiful are expressed by the same word (krasny), and

in the popular legends the epithet is indiscriminately applied to

everything connected with princes and great personages; but what

was to be done with the kidnapped maidens when they arrived at

their destination, I never succeeded in discovering.



The most amusing instance of credulity which I can recall was the

following, related to me by a peasant woman who came from the

village where the incident had occurred.  One day in winter, about

the time of sunset, a peasant family was startled by the entrance

of a strange visitor, a female figure, dressed as St. Barbara is

commonly represented in the religious pictures.  All present were

very much astonished by this apparition; but the figure told them,

in a low, soft voice, to be of good cheer, for she was St. Barbara,

and had come to honour the family with a visit as a reward for

their piety.  The peasant thus favoured was not remarkable for his

piety, but he did not consider it necessary to correct the mistake

of his saintly visitor, and requested her to be seated.  With

perfect readiness she accepted the invitation, and began at once to

discourse in an edifying way.



Meanwhile the news of this wonderful apparition spread like

wildfire, and all the inhabitants of the village, as well as those

of a neighbouring village about a mile distant, collected in and

around the house.  Whether the priest was among those who came my

informant did not know.  Many of those who had come could not get

within hearing, but those at the outskirts of the crowd hoped that

the saint might come out before disappearing.  Their hopes were

gratified.  About midnight the mysterious visitor announced that

she would go and bring St. Nicholas, the miracle-worker, and

requested all to remain perfectly still during her absence.  The

crowd respectfully made way for her, and she passed out into the

darkness.  With breathless expectation all awaited the arrival of

St. Nicholas, who is the favourite saint of the Russian peasantry;

but hours passed, and he did not appear.  At last, toward sunrise,

some of the less zealous spectators began to return home, and those

of them who had come from the neighbouring village discovered to

their horror that during their absence their horses had been

stolen!  At once they raised the hue-and-cry; and the peasants

scoured the country in all directions in search of the soi-disant

St. Barbara and her accomplices, but they never recovered the

stolen property.  "And serve them right, the blockheads!" added my

informant, who had herself escaped falling into the trap by being

absent from the village at the time.



It is but fair to add that the ordinary Russian peasant, though in

some respects extremely credulous, and, like all other people,

subject to occasional panics, is by no means easily frightened by

real dangers.  Those who have seen them under fire will readily

credit this statement.  For my own part, I have had opportunities

of observing them merely in dangers of a non-military kind, and

have often admired the perfect coolness displayed.  Even an

epidemic alarms them only when it attains a certain degree of

intensity.  Once I had a good opportunity of observing this on

board a large steamer on the Volga.  It was a very hot day in the

early autumn.  As it was well known that there was a great deal of

Asiatic cholera all over the country, prudent people refrained from

eating much raw fruit; but Russian peasants are not generally

prudent men, and I noticed that those on board were consuming

enormous quantities of raw cucumbers and water-melons.  This

imprudence was soon followed by its natural punishment.  I refrain

from describing the scene that ensued, but I may say that those who

were attacked received from the others every possible assistance.

Had no unforeseen accident happened, we should have arrived at

Kazan on the following morning, and been able to send the patients

to the hospital of that town; but as there was little water in the

river, we had to cast anchor for the night, and next morning we ran

aground and stuck fast.  Here we had to remain patiently till a

smaller steamer hove in sight.  All this time there was not the

slightest symptom of panic, and when the small steamer came

alongside there was no frantic rush to get away from the infected

vessel, though it was quite evident that only a few of the

passengers could be taken off.  Those who were nearest the gangway

went quietly on board the small steamer, and those who were less

fortunate remained patiently till another steamer happened to pass.



The old conceptions of disease, as something that may be most

successfully cured by charms and similar means, are rapidly

disappearing.  The Zemstvo--that is to say, the new local self-

government--has done much towards this end by enabling the people

to procure better medical attendance.  In the towns there are

public hospitals, which generally are--or at least seem to an

unprofessional eye--in a very satisfactory condition.  The resident

doctors are daily besieged by a crowd of peasants, who come from

far and near to ask advice and receive medicines.  Besides this, in

some provinces feldshers are placed in the principal villages, and

the doctor makes frequent tours of inspection.  The doctors are

generally well-educated men, and do a large amount of work for a

very small remuneration.



Of the lunatic asylums, which are generally attached to the larger

hospitals, I cannot speak very favourably.  Some of the great

central ones are all that could be desired, but others are badly

constructed and fearfully overcrowded.  One or two of those I

visited appeared to me to be conducted on very patriarchal

principles, as the following incident may illustrate.



I had been visiting a large hospital, and had remained there so

long that it was already dark before I reached the adjacent lunatic

asylum.  Seeing no lights in the windows, I proposed to my

companion, who was one of the inspectors, that we should delay our

visit till the following morning, but he assured me that by the

regulations the lights ought not to be extinguished till

considerably later, and consequently there was no objection to our

going in at once.  If there was no legal objection, there was at

least a physical obstruction in the form of a large wooden door,

and all our efforts to attract the attention of the porter or some

other inmate were unavailing.  At last, after much ringing,

knocking, and shouting, a voice from within asked us who we were

and what we wanted.  A brief reply from my companion, not couched

in the most polite or amiable terms, made the bolts rattle and the

door open with surprising rapidity, and we saw before us an old man

with long dishevelled hair, who, as far as appearance went, might

have been one of the lunatics, bowing obsequiously and muttering

apologies.



After groping our way along a dark corridor we entered a still

darker room, and the door was closed and locked behind us.  As the

key turned in the rusty lock a wild scream rang through the

darkness!  Then came a yell, then a howl, and then various sounds

which the poverty of the English language prevents me from

designating--the whole blending into a hideous discord that would

have been at home in some of the worst regions of Dante's Inferno.

As to the cause of it I could not even form a conjecture.

Gradually my eyes became accustomed to the darkness, and I could

dimly perceive white figures flitting about the room.  At the same

time I felt something standing near me, and close to my shoulder I

saw a pair of eyes and long streaming hair.  On my other side,

equally close, was something very like a woman's night-cap.  Though

by no means of a nervous temperament, I felt uncomfortable.  To be

shut up in a dark room with an indefinite number of excited maniacs

is not a comfortable position.  How long the imprisonment lasted I

know not--probably not more than two or three minutes, but it

seemed a long time.  At last a light was procured, and the whole

affair was explained.  The guardians, not expecting the visit of an

inspector at so late an hour, had retired for the night much

earlier than usual, and the old porter had put us into the nearest

ward until he could fetch a light--locking the door behind us lest

any of the lunatics should escape.  The noise had awakened one of

the unfortunate inmates of the ward, and her hysterical scream had

terrified the others.



By the influence of asylums, hospitals, and similar institutions,

the old conceptions of disease, as I have said, are gradually dying

out, but the znakharka still finds practice.  The fact that the

znakharka is to be found side by side not only with the feldsher,

but also with the highly trained bacteriologist, is very

characteristic of Russian civilisation, which is a strange

conglomeration of products belonging to very different periods.

The enquirer who undertakes the study of it will sometimes be

scarcely less surprised than would be the naturalist who should

unexpectedly stumble upon antediluvian megatheria grazing

tranquilly in the same field with prize Southdowns.  He will

discover the most primitive institutions side by side with the

latest products of French doctrinairism, and the most childish

superstitions in close proximity with the most advanced free-

thinking.
