





CHAPTER XXXIX



THE PRESENT SITUATION





Reform or Revolution?--Reigns of Alexander II. and Nicholas II.

Compared and Contrasted--The Present Opposition--Various Groups--

The Constitutionalists--Zemski Sobors--The Young Tsar Dispels

Illusions--Liberal Frondeurs--Plehve's Repressive Policy--

Discontent Increased by the War--Relaxation and Wavering under

Prince Mirski--Reform Enthusiasm--The Constitutionalists Formulate

their Demands--The Social Democrats--Father Gapon's Demonstration--

The Socialist-Revolutionaries--The Agrarian Agitators--The Subject-

Nationalities--Numerical Strength of the Various Groups--All United

on One Point--Their Different Aims--Possible Solutions of the

Crisis--Difficulties of Introducing Constitutional Regime--A Strong

Man Wanted--Uncertainty of the Future.





Is history about to repeat itself, or are we on the eve of a

cataclysm?  Is the reign of Nicholas II. to be, in its main lines,

a repetition of the reign of Alexander II., or is Russia about to

enter on an entirely new phase of her political development?



To this momentous question I do not profess to give a categorical

answer.  If it be true, even in ordinary times, that "of all forms

of human folly, prediction is the most gratuitous," it is

especially true at a moment like the present, when we are

constantly reminded of the French proverb that there is nothing

certain but the unforeseen.  All I can hope to do is to throw a

little light on the elements of the problem, and allow the reader

to draw his own conclusions.



Between the present situation and the early part of Alexander II.'s

reign there is undoubtedly a certain analogy.  In both cases we

find in the educated classes a passionate desire for political

liberty, generated by long years of a stern, autocratic regime, and

stimulated by military disasters for which autocracy is held

responsible; and in both cases we find the throne occupied by a

Sovereign of less accentuated political convictions and less

energetic character than his immediate predecessor.  In the earlier

case, the autocrat, showing more perspicacity and energy than were

expected of him, guides and controls the popular enthusiasm, and

postpones the threatened political crisis by effecting a series of

far reaching and beneficent reforms.  In the present case . . . the

description of the result must be left to future historians.  For

the moment, all we can say is that between the two situations there

are as many points of difference as of analogy.  After the Crimean

War the enthusiasm was of a vague, eclectic kind, and consequently

it could find satisfaction in practical administrative reforms not

affecting the essence of the Autocratic Power, the main pivot round

which the Empire has revolved for centuries.  Now, on the contrary,

it is precisely on this pivot that the reform enthusiasm is

concentrated.  Mere bureaucratic reforms can no longer give

satisfaction.  All sections of the educated classes, with the

exception of a small group of Conservative doctrinaires, insist on

obtaining a controlling influence in the government of the country,

and demand that the Autocratic Power, if not abolished, shall be

limited by parliamentary institutions of a democratic type.



Another difference between the present and the past, is that those

who now clamour for radical changes are more numerous, more

courageous, and better organised than their predecessors, and they

are consequently better able to bring pressure to bear on the

Government.  Formerly the would-be reformers were of two

categories; on the one hand, the Constitutionalists, who remained

within the bounds of legality, and confined themselves to inserting

vague hints in loyal addresses to the Tsar and making mild

political demonstrations; and on the other hand, the so-called

Nihilists, who talked about organising society on Socialistic

principles, and who hoped to attain their object by means of secret

associations.  With both of these groups, as soon as they became

aggressive, the Government had no difficulty in dealing

effectually.  The leading Constitutionalists were simply

reprimanded or ordered to remain for a time in their country

houses, while the more active revolutionaries were exiled,

imprisoned, or compelled to take refuge abroad.  All this gave the

police a good deal of trouble, especially when the Nihilists took

to Socialist propaganda among the common people, and to acts of

terrorism against the officials; but the existence of the

Autocratic Power was never seriously endangered.  Nowadays the

Liberals have no fear of official reprimands, and openly disregard

the orders of the authorities about holding meetings and making

speeches, while a large section of the Socialists proclaim

themselves a Social Democratic party, enrol large numbers of

working men, organise formidable strikes, and make monster

demonstrations leading to bloodshed.



Let us now examine this new Opposition a little more closely.  We

can perceive at a glance that it is composed of two sections,

differing widely from each other in character and aims.  On the one

hand, there are the Liberals, who desire merely political reforms

of a more or less democratic type; on the other, there are the

Socialists, who aim at transforming thoroughly the existing

economic organisation of Society, and who, if they desire

parliamentary institutions at all, desire them simply as a stepping

stone to the realisation of the Socialist ideal.  Behind the

Socialists, and to some extent mingling with them, stand a number

of men belonging to the various subject-nationalities, who have

placed themselves under the Socialist banner, but who hold, more or

less concealed, their little national flags, ready to be unfurled

at the proper moment.



Of these three sections of the Opposition, the most numerous and

the best prepared to undertake the functions and responsibilities

of government is that of the Liberals.  The movement which they

represent began immediately after the Crimean War, when the upper

ranks of society, smarting under defeat and looking about for the

cause of the military disasters, came to the conclusion that

Autocracy had been put to a crucial test, and found wanting.  The

outburst of patriotic indignation at that time and the eager desire

for a more liberal regime have been described in previous chapters.

For a moment the more sanguine critics of the Government imagined

that the Autocratic Power, persuaded of its own inefficiency, would

gladly accept the assistance of the educated classes, and would

spontaneously transform itself into a Constitutional Monarchy.  In

reality Alexander II. had no such intentions.  He was resolved to

purify the administration and to reform as far as possible all

existing abuses, and he seemed ready at first to listen to the

advice and accept the co-operation of his faithful subjects; but he

had not the slightest intention of limiting his supreme authority,

which he regarded as essential to the existence of the Empire.  As

soon as the landed proprietors began to complain that the great

question of serf emancipation was being taken out of their hands by

the bureaucracy, he reminded them that "in Russia laws are made by

the Autocratic Power," and when the more courageous Marshals of

Noblesse ventured to protest against the unceremonious manner in

which the nobles were being treated by the tchinovniks, some of

them were officially reprimanded and others were deposed.



The indignation produced by this procedure, in which the Tsar

identified himself with the bureaucracy, was momentarily appeased

by the decision of the Government to entrust to the landed

proprietors the carrying out of the Emancipation law, and by the

confident hope that political rights would be granted them as

compensation for the material sacrifices they had made for the good

of the State; but when they found that this confident hope was an

illusion, the indignation and discontent reappeared.



There was still, however, a ray of hope.  Though the Autocratic

Power was evidently determined not to transform itself at once into

a limited Constitutional Monarchy, it might make concessions in the

sphere of local self-government.  At that moment it was creating

the Zemstvo, and the Constitutionalists hoped that these new

institutions, though restricted legally to the sphere of purely

economic wants, might gradually acquire a considerable political

influence.  Learned Germans had proved that in England, "the mother

of modern Constitutionalism," it was on local self-government that

the political liberties were founded, and the Slavophils now

suggested that by means of an ancient institution called the Zemski

Sobor, the Zemstvo might gradually and naturally acquire a

political character in accordance with Russian historic

development.  As this idea has often been referred to in recent

discussions, I may explain briefly what the ancient institution in

question was.



In the Tsardom of Muscovy during the sixteenth and seventeenth

centuries representative assemblies were occasionally called

together to deal with matters of exceptional importance, such as

the election of a Tsar when the throne became vacant, a declaration

of war, the conclusion of a peace, or the preparation of a new code

of laws.  Some fifteen assemblies of the kind were convoked in the

space of about a century (1550-1653).  They were composed largely

of officials named by the Government, but they contained also some

representatives of the unofficial classes.  Their procedure was

peculiar.  When a speech from the throne had been read by the Tsar

or his representative, explaining the question to be decided, the

assembly transformed itself into a large number of commissions, and

each commission had to give in writing its opinion regarding the

questions submitted to it.  The opinions thus elicited were

codified by the officials and submitted to the Tsar, and he was

free to adopt or reject them, as he thought fit.  We may say,

therefore, that the Zemski Sobor was merely consultative and had no

legislative power; but we must add that it was allowed a certain

initiative, because it was permitted to submit to the Tsar humble

petitions regarding anything which it considered worthy of

attention.



Alexander II. might have adopted this Slavophil idea and used the

Zemski Sobor as a means of transition from pure autocracy to a more

modern system of government, but he had no sooner created the

Zemstvo than he thought it necessary, as we have seen, to clip its

wings, and dispel its political ambition.  By this repressive

policy the frondeur spirit of the Noblesse was revived, and it has

continued to exist down to the present time.  On each occasion when

I revisited Russia and had an opportunity of feeling the pulse of

public opinion, between 1876 and 1903, I noticed that the

dissatisfaction with the traditional methods of government, and the

desire of the educated classes to obtain a share of the political

power, notwithstanding short periods of apparent apathy, were

steadily spreading in area and increasing in intensity, and I often

heard predictions that a disastrous foreign war like the Crimean

campaign would probably bring about the desired changes.  Of those

who made such predictions not a few showed clearly that, though

patriotic enough in a certain sense, they would not regret any

military disaster which would have the effect they anticipated.

Progress in the direction of political emancipation, accompanied by

radical improvements in the administration, was evidently regarded

as much more important and desirable than military prestige or

extension of territory.



During the first part of the Turkish campaign of 1877-78, when the

Russian armies were repulsed in Bulgaria and Asia Minor, the

hostility to autocracy was very strong, and the famous acquittal of

Vera Zasulitch, who had attempted to assassinate General Trepof,

caused widespread satisfaction among people who were not themselves

revolutionaries and who did not approve of such violent methods of

political struggle.  Towards the end of the war, when the tide of

fortune had turned both in Europe and in Asia, and the Russian army

was encamped under the walls of Constantinople, within sight of St.

Sophia, the Chauvinist feelings gained the upper hand, and they

were greatly intensified by the Congress of Berlin, which deprived

Russia of some fruits of her victories.



This change in public feeling and the horror excited by the

assassination of Alexander II. prepared the way for Alexander

III.'s reign (1881-94), which was a period of political stagnation.

He was a man of strong character, and a vigorous ruler who believed

in Autocracy as he did in the dogmas of his Church; and very soon

after his accession he gave it clearly to be understood that he

would permit no limitations of the Autocratic Power.  The men with

Liberal aspirations knew that nothing would make him change his

mind on that subject, and that any Liberal demonstrations would

merely confirm him in his reactionary tendencies.  They accordingly

remained quiet and prudently waited for better times.



The better times were supposed to have come when Nicholas II.

ascended the throne in November, 1894, because it was generally

assumed that the young Tsar, who was known to be humane and well-

intentioned, would inaugurate a more liberal policy.  Before he had

been three months on the throne he summarily destroyed these

illusions.  On 17th (29th) January, 1895, when receiving deputies

from the Noblesse, the Zemstvo, and the municipalities, who had

come to St. Petersburg to congratulate him on his marriage, he

declared his confidence in the sincerity of the loyal feelings

which the delegates expressed; and then, to the astonishment of all

present, he added: "It is known to me that recently, in some

Zemstvo assemblies, were heard the voices of people who had let

themselves be carried away by absurd dreams of the Zemstvo

representatives taking part in the affairs of internal

administration; let them know that I, devoting all my efforts to

the prosperity of the nation, will preserve the principles of

autocracy as firmly and unswervingly as my late father of

imperishable memory."



These words, pronounced by the young ruler at the commencement of

his reign, produced profound disappointment and dissatisfaction in

all sections of the educated classes, and from that moment the

frondeur spirit began to show itself more openly than at any

previous period.  In the case of some people of good social

position it took the unusual form of speaking disrespectfully of

his Majesty.  Others supposed that the Emperor had simply repeated

words prepared for him by the Minister of the Interior, and this

idea spread rapidly, till hostility to the bureaucracy became

universal.



This feeling reached its climax when the Ministry of the Interior

was confided to M. Plehve.  His immediate predecessors, though

sincere believers in autocracy and very hostile to Liberalism of

all kinds, considered that the Liberal ideas might be rendered

harmless by firm passive resistance and mild reactionary measures.

He, on the contrary, took a more alarmist view of the situation.

His appointment coincided with the revival of terrorism, and he

believed that autocracy was in danger.  To save it, the only means

was, in his opinion, a vigorous, repressive police administration,

and as he was a man of strong convictions and exceptional energy,

he screwed up his system of police supervision to the sticking-

point and applied it to the Liberals as well as to the terrorists.

In the year 1903, if we may credit information which comes from an

apparently trustworthy source, no less than 1,988 political affairs

were initiated by the police, and 4,867 persons were condemned

inquisitorially to various punishments without any regular trial.



Whilst this unpopular rigorism was in full force the war

unexpectedly broke out, and added greatly to the existing

discontent.



Very few people in Russia had been following closely the recent

developments of the Far Eastern Question, and still fewer

understood their importance.  There seemed to be nothing abnormal

in what was taking place.  Russia was expanding, and would continue

to expand indefinitely, in that direction, without any strenuous

effort on her part.  Of course the English would try to arrest her

progress as usual by diplomatic notes, but their efforts would be

as futile as they had been on all previous occasions.  They might

incite the Japanese to active resistance, but Japan would not

commit the insane folly of challenging her giant rival to mortal

combat.  The whole question could be settled in accordance with

Russian interests, as so many similar questions had been settled in

the past, by a little skilful diplomacy; and Manchuria could be

absorbed, as the contiguous Chinese provinces had been forty years

ago, without the necessity of going to war.



When these comforting illusions were suddenly destroyed by the

rupture of diplomatic relations and the naval attack on Port

Arthur, there was an outburst of indignant astonishment.  At first

the indignation was directed against Japan and England, but it soon

turned against the home Government, which had made no adequate

preparations for the struggle, and it was intensified by current

rumours that the crisis had been wantonly provoked by certain

influential personages for purely personal reasons.



How far the accounts of the disorders in the military organisation

and the rumours about pilfering in high quarters were true, we need

not inquire.  True or false, they helped greatly to make the war

unpopular, and to stimulate the desire for political changes.

Under a more liberal and enlightened regime such things were

supposed to be impossible, and, as at the time of the Crimean War,

public opinion decided that autocracy was being tried, and found

wanting.



So long as the stern, uncompromising Plehve was at the Ministry of

the Interior, enjoying the Emperor's confidence and directing the

police administration, public opinion was prudent and reserved in

its utterances, but when he was assassinated by a terrorist (July

28th, 1904), and was succeeded by Prince Sviatopolk Mirski, a

humane man of Liberal views, the Constitutionalists thought that

the time had come for making known their grievances and demands,

and for bringing pressure to bear on the Emperor.  First came

forward the leading members of the Zemstvos.  After some

preliminary consultation they assembled in St. Petersburg, with the

consent of the authorities, in the hope that they would be allowed

to discuss publicly the political wants of the country, and prepare

the draft of a Constitution.  Their wishes were only partially

acceded to.  They were informed semi-officially that their meetings

must be private, but that they might send their resolutions to the

Minister of the Interior for transmission to his Majesty.  A

memorandum was accordingly drawn up and signed on November 21st by

102 out of the 104 representatives present.



This hesitating attitude on the part of the Government encouraged

other sections of the educated classes to give expression to their

long pent-up political aspirations.  On the heels of the Zemstvo

delegates appeared the barristers, who discussed the existing evils

from the juridical point of view, and prescribed what they

considered the necessary remedies.  Then came municipalities of the

large towns, corporations of various kinds, academic leagues,

medical faculties, learned societies, and miscellaneous gatherings,

all demanding reforms.  Great banquets were organised, and very

strong speeches, which would have led in Plehve's time to the

immediate arrest of the orators, were delivered and published

without provoking police intervention.



In the memorandum presented to the Minister of the Interior by the

Zemstvo Congress, and in the resolutions passed by the other

corporate bodies, we see reflected the grievances and aspirations

of the great majority of the educated classes.



The theory propounded in these documents is that a lawless,

arbitrary bureaucracy, which seeks to exclude the people from all

participation in the management of public affairs, has come between

the nation and the Supreme Power, and that it is necessary to

eliminate at once this baneful intermediary and inaugurate the so-

called "reign of law."  For this purpose the petitioners and

orators demanded:



(1) Inviolability of person and domicile, so that no one should be

troubled by the police without a warrant from an independent

magistrate, and no one punished without a regular trial;



(2) Freedom of conscience, of speech, and of the Press, together

with the right of holding public meetings and forming associations;



(3) Greater freedom and increased activity of the local self-

government, rural and municipal;



(4) An assembly of freely elected representatives, who should

participate in the legislative activity and control the

administration in all its branches;



(5) The immediate convocation of a constituent assembly, which

should frame a Constitution on these lines.



Of these requirements the last two are considered by far the most

important.  The truth is that the educated classes have come to be

possessed of an ardent desire for genuine parliamentary

institutions on a broad, democratic basis, and neither improvements

in the bureaucratic organisation, nor even a Zemski Sobor in the

sense of a Consultative Assembly, would satisfy them.  They imagine

that with a full-fledged constitution they would be guaranteed, not

only against administrative oppression, but even against military

reverses such as they have recently experienced in the Far East--an

opinion in which those who know by experience how military

unreadiness and inefficiency can be combined with parliamentary

institutions will hardly feel inclined to concur.



It may surprise English readers to learn that the corruption and

venality of the civil and military administration, of which we have

recently heard so much, are nowhere mentioned in the complaints and

remonstrances; but the fact is easily accounted for.  Though

corrupt practices undoubtedly exist in some branches of the public

service, they are not so universal as is commonly supposed in

Western Europe; and the Russian reformers evidently consider that

the purifying of the administration is less urgent than the

acquisition of political liberties, or that under an enlightened

democratic regime the existing abuses would spontaneously

disappear.



The demands put forward in St. Petersburg did not meet with

universal approval in Moscow.  There they seemed excessive and un-

Russian, and an attempt was made to form a more moderate party.  In

the ancient Capital of the Tsars even among the Liberals there are

not a few who have a sentimental tenderness for the Autocratic

Power, and they argue that parliamentary government would be very

dangerous in a country which is still far from being homogeneous or

compact.  To maintain the integrity of the Empire, and to hold the

balance equally between the various races and social classes of

which the population is composed, it is necessary, they think, to

have some permanent authority above the sphere of party spirit and

electioneering strife.  While admitting that the Government in its

present bureaucratic form is unsatisfactory and stands in need of

being enlightened by the unofficial classes, they think that a

Consultative Assembly on the model of the old Zemski Sobors would

be infinitely better suited to Russian wants than a Parliament such

as that which sits at Westminster.



For a whole month the Government took little notice of the

unprecedented excitement and demonstrations.  It was not till

December 25th that a reply was given to the public demands.  On

that day the Emperor signed an ukaz in which he enumerated the

reforms which he considered most urgent, and instructed the

Committee of Ministers to prepare the requisite legislation.  The

list of reforms coincided to a certain extent with the demands

formulated by the Zemstvos, but the document as a whole produced

profound disappointment, because it contained no mention of a

National Assembly.  To those who could read between the lines the

attitude of the Emperor seemed perfectly clear.  He was evidently

desirous of introducing very considerable reforms, but he was

resolved that they must be effected by the unimpaired Autocratic

Power in the old bureaucratic fashion, without any participation of

the unofficial world.



To obviate any misconception on this point, the Government

published, simultaneously with the ukaz, an official communication

in which it condemned the agitation and excitement, and warned the

Zemstvos, municipalities, and other corporate bodies that in

discussing political questions they were overstepping the limits of

their legally-defined functions and exposing themselves to the

rigours of the law.



As might have been foreseen, the ukaz and the circular had not at

all the desired effect of "introducing the necessary tranquillity

into public life, which has lately been diverted from its normal

course."  On the contrary, they increased the excitement, and

evoked a new series of public demonstrations.  On December 27th,

the very day on which the two official documents were published--

the Provincial Zemstvo of Moscow, openly disregarding the

ministerial warnings, expressed the conviction that the day was

near when the bureaucratic regime, which had so long estranged the

Supreme Power from the people, would be changed, and when freely-

elected representatives of the people would take part in

legislation.  The same evening, at St. Petersburg, a great Liberal

banquet was held, at which a resolution was voted condemning the

war, and declaring that Russia could be extricated from her

difficulties only by the representatives of the nation, freely

elected by secret ballot.  As an encouragement to the organs of

local administration to persevere in their disregard of ministerial

instructions, the St. Petersburg Medical Society, after adopting

the programme of the Zemstvo Congress, sent telegrams of

congratulation to the Mayor of Moscow and the President of the

Tchernigof Zemstvo bureau, both of whom had incurred the

displeasure of the Government.  A similar telegram was sent by a

Congress of 496 engineers to the Moscow Town Council, in which the

burning political questions had been freely discussed.  In other

large towns, when the mayor prevented such discussions, a

considerable number of the town councillors resigned.



From the Zemstvos and municipalities the spirit of opposition

spread to the provincial assemblies of the Noblesse.  The nobles of

the province of St. Petersburg, for example, voted by a large

majority an address to the Tsar recommending the convocation of a

freely-elected National Assembly; and in Moscow, usually regarded

as the fortress of Conservatism, eighty members of the Assembly

entered a formal protest against a patriotic Conservative address

which had been voted two days before.  Even the fair sex considered

it necessary to support the opposition movement.  The matrons of

Moscow, in a humble petition to the Empress, declared that they

could not continue to bring up their children properly in the

existing state of unconstitutional lawlessness, and their view was

endorsed in several provincial towns by the schoolboys, who marched

through the streets in procession, and refused to learn their

lessons until popular liberties had been granted!



Again, for more than a month the Government remained silent on the

fundamental questions which were exercising the public mind.  At

last, on the morning of March 3d, appeared an Imperial manifesto of

a very unexpected kind.  In it the Emperor deplored the outbreak of

internal disturbances at a moment when the glorious sons of Russia

were fighting with self-sacrificing bravery and offering their

lives for the Faith, the Tsar, and the Fatherland; but he drew

consolation and hope from remembering that, with the help of the

prayers of the Holy Orthodox Church, under the banner of the Tsar's

autocratic might, Russia had frequently passed through great wars

and internal troubles, and had always issued from them with fresh

strength.  He appealed, therefore, to all right-minded subjects, to

whatever class they might belong, to join him in the great and

sacred task of overcoming the stubborn foreign foe, and eradicating

revolt at home.  As for the manner in which he hoped this might be

accomplished, he gave a pretty clear indication, at the end of the

document, by praying to God, not only for the welfare of his

subjects, but also for "the consolidation of autocracy."



This extraordinary pronouncement, couched in semi-ecclesiastical

language, produced in the Liberal world feelings of surprise,

disappointment, and dismay.  No one was more astonished and

dismayed than the Ministers, who had known nothing of the manifesto

until they saw it in the official Gazette.  In the course of the

forenoon they paid their usual weekly visit to Tsarskoe Selo, and

respectfully submitted to the Emperor that such a document must

have a deplorable effect on public opinion.  In consequence of

their representations his Majesty consented to supplement the

manifesto by a rescript to the Minister of the Interior, in which

he explained that in carrying out his intentions for the welfare of

his people the Government was to have the co-operation of "the

experienced elements of the community."  Then followed the

memorable words: "I am resolved henceforth, with the help of God,

to convene the most worthy men, possessing the confidence of the

people and elected by them, in order that they may participate in

the preparation and consideration of legislative measures."  For

the carrying out of this resolution a commission, or "special

conference," was to be at once convened, under the presidency of M.

Bulyghin, the Minister of the Interior.



The rescript softened the impression produced by the manifesto, but

it did not give general satisfaction, because it contained

significant indications that the Emperor, while promising to create

an assembly of some kind, was still determined to maintain the

Autocratic Power.  So at least the public interpreted a vague phase

about the difficulty of introducing reforms "while preserving

absolutely the immutability of the fundamental laws of the Empire."

And this impression seemed to be confirmed by the fact that the

task of preparing the future representative institutions was

confided, not to a constituent assembly, but to a small commission

composed chiefly or entirely of officials.



In these circumstances the Liberals determined to continue the

agitation.  The Bulyghin Commission was accordingly inundated with

petitions and addresses explaining the wants of the nation in

general, and of various sections of it in particular; and when the

Minister declined to receive deputations and discuss with them the

aforesaid wants, the reform question was taken up by a new series

of congresses, composed of doctors, lawyers, professors,

journalists, etc.  Even the higher ecclesiastical dignitaries woke

up for a moment from their accustomed lethargy, remembered how they

had lived for so many years under the rod of M. Pobedonostsef,

recognised as uncanonical such subordination to a layman, and

petitioned for the resurrection of the Patriarchate, which had been

abolished by Peter the Great.



On May 9th a new Zemstvo Congress was held in Moscow, and it at

once showed that since their November session in St. Petersburg the

delegates had made a decided movement to the Left.  Those of them

who had then led the movement were now regarded as too

Conservative.  The idea of a Zemski Sobor was discarded as

insufficient for the necessities of the situation, and strong

speeches were made in support of a much more democratic

constitution.



It was thus becoming clearer every day that between the Liberals

and the Government there was an essential difference which could

not be removed by ordinary concessions.  The Emperor proved that he

was in favour of reform by granting a very large measure of

religious toleration, by removing some of the disabilities imposed

on the Poles, and allowing the Polish language to be used in

schools, and by confirming the proposals of the Committee of

Ministers to place the Press censure on a legal basis.  But these

concessions to public opinion did not gain for him the sympathy and

support of his Liberal subjects.  What they insisted on was a

considerable limitation of the Autocratic Power; and on that point

the Emperor has hitherto shown himself inexorable.  His firmness

proceeds not from any wayward desire to be able to do as he

pleases, but from a hereditary respect for a principle.  From his

boyhood he has been taught that Russia owes her greatness and her

security to her autocratic form of government, and that it is the

sacred duty of the Tsar to hand down intact to his successors the

power which he holds in trust for them.



While the Liberals were thus striving to attain their object

without popular disorders, and without any very serious infraction

of the law, Revolutionaries were likewise busy, working on

different but parallel lines.



In the chapter on the present phase of the revolutionary movement I

have sketched briefly the origin and character of the two main

Socialist groups, and I have now merely to convey a general idea of

their attitude during recent events.  And first, of the Social

Democrats.



At the end of 1894 the Social Democrats were in what may be called

their normal condition--that is to say, they were occupied in

organising and developing the Labour Movement.  The removal of

Plehve, who had greatly hampered them by his energetic police

administration, enabled them to work more freely, and they looked

with a friendly eye on the efforts of the Liberal Zemstvo-ists; but

they took no part in the agitation, because the Zemstvo world lay

outside their sphere of action.  In the labour world, to which they

confined their attention, they must have foreseen that a crisis

would sooner or later be produced by the war, and that they would

then have an excellent opportunity of preaching their doctrine that

for all the sufferings of the working classes the Government is

responsible.  What they did not foresee was that serious labour

troubles were so near at hand, and that the conflict with the

authorities would be accelerated by Father Gapon.  Accustomed to

regard him as a persistent opponent, they did not expect him to

become suddenly an energetic, self-willed ally.  Hence they were

taken unawares, and at first the direction of the movement was by

no means entirely in their hands.  Very soon, however, they grasped

the situation, and utilised it for their own ends.  It was in great

measure due to their secret organisation and activity that the

strike in the Putilof Ironworks, which might easily have been

terminated amicably, spread rapidly not only to the other works and

factories in St. Petersburg, but also to those of Moscow, Riga,

Warsaw, Lodz, and other industrial centres.  Though they did not

approve of Father Gapon's idea of presenting a petition to the

Tsar, the loss of life which his demonstration occasioned was very

useful to them in their efforts to propagate the belief that the

Autocratic Power is the ally of the capitalists and hostile to the

claims and aspirations of the working classes.



The other great Socialist group contributed much more largely

towards bringing about the present state of things.  It was their

Militant Organisation that assassinated Plehve, and thereby roused

the Liberals to action.  To them, likewise, is due the subsequent

assassination of the Grand Duke Serge, and it is an open secret

that they are preparing other acts of terrorism of a similar kind.

At the same time they have been very active in creating provincial

revolutionary committees, in printing and distributing

revolutionary literature, and, above all, in organising agrarian

disturbances, which they intend to make a very important factor in

the development of events.  Indeed, it is chiefly by agrarian

disturbances that they hope to overthrow the Autocratic Power and

bring about the great economic and social revolution to which the

political revolution would be merely the prologue.



Therein lies a serious danger.



After the failure of the propaganda and the insurrectionary

agitation in the seventies, it became customary in revolutionary

circles to regard the muzhik as impervious to Socialist ideas and

insurrectionary excitement, but the hope of eventually employing

him in the cause never quite died out, and in recent times, when

his economic condition in many districts has become critical,

attempts have occasionally been made to embarrass the Government by

agrarian disturbances.  The method usually employed is to

disseminate among the peasantry by oral propaganda, by printed or

hectographed leaflets, and by forged Imperial manifestoes, the

belief that the Tsar has ordered the land of the proprietors to be

given to the rural Communes, and that his benevolent wishes are

being frustrated by the land-owners and the officials.  The forged

manifesto is sometimes written in letters of gold as a proof of its

being genuine, and in one case which I heard of in the province of

Poltava, the revolutionary agent, wearing the uniform of an aide-

de-camp of the Emperor, induced the village priest to read the

document in the parish church.



The danger lies in the fact that, quite independent of

revolutionary activity, there has always been, since the time of

the Emancipation, a widespread belief among the peasantry that they

would sooner or later receive the whole of the land.  Successive

Tsars have tried personally to destroy this illusion, but their

efforts have not been successful.  Alexander II., when passing

through a province where the idea was very prevalent, caused a

number of village elders to be brought before him, and told them in

a threatening tone that they must remain satisfied with their

allotments and pay their taxes regularly; but the wily peasants

could not be convinced that the "General" who had talked to them in

this sense was really the Tsar.  Alexander III. made a similar

attempt at the time of his accession.  To the Volost elders

collected together from all parts of the Empire, he said: "Do not

believe the foolish rumours and absurd reports about a

redistribution of the land, and addition to your allotments, and

such like things.  These reports are disseminated by your enemies.

Every kind of property, your own included, must be inviolable."

Recalling these words, Nicholas II. confirmed them at his

accession, and warned the peasants not to be led astray by evil-

disposed persons.



Notwithstanding these repeated warnings, the peasants still cling

to the idea that all the land belongs to them; and the Socialist-

Revolutionaries now announce publicly that they intend to use this

belief for the purpose of carrying out their revolutionary designs.

In a pamphlet entitled "Concerning Liberty and the Means of

Obtaining it," they explain their plan of campaign.  Under the

guidance of the revolutionary agents the peasants of each district

all over the Empire are to make it impossible for the proprietors

to work their estates, and then, after driving away the local

authorities and rural police, they are to take possession of the

estates for their own use.  The Government, in its vain attempts to

dislodge them, will have to employ all the troops at its disposal,

and this will give the working classes of the towns, led by the

revolutionists, an opportunity of destroying the most essential

parts of the administrative mechanism.  Thus a great social

revolution can be successfully accomplished, and any Zemski Sobor

or Parliament which may be convoked will merely have to give a

legislative sanction to accomplished facts.



These three groups--the Liberals, the Social Democrats, and the

Socialist Revolutionaries--constitute what may be called the purely

Russian Opposition.  They found their claims and justify their

action on utilitarian and philosophic grounds, and demand liberty

(in various senses) for themselves and others, independently of

race and creed.  This distinguishes them from the fourth group, who

claim to represent the subject-nationalities, and who mingle

nationalist feelings and aspirations with enthusiasm for liberty

and justice in the abstract.



The policy of Russifying these subject-nationalities, which was

inaugurated by Alexander III. and maintained by his successor, has

failed in its object.  It has increased the use of the Russian

language in official procedure, modified the system of instruction

in the schools and universities, and brought, nominally, a few

schismatic and heretical sheep into the Eastern Orthodox fold, but

it has entirely failed to inspire the subject-populations with

Russian feeling and national patriotism; on the contrary, it has

aroused in them a bitter hostility to Russian nationality, and to

the Central Government.  In such of them as have retained their old

aspirations of political independence--notably the Poles--the semi-

latent disaffection has been stimulated; and in those of them

which, like the Finlanders and the Armenians, desire merely to

preserve the limited autonomy they formerly enjoyed, a sentiment of

disaffection has been created.  All of them know very well that in

an armed struggle with the dominant Russian nationality they would

speedily be crushed, as the Poles were in 1863.  Their disaffection

shows itself, therefore, merely in resistance to the obligatory

military service, and in an undisguised or thinly veiled attitude

of systematic hostility, which causes the Government some anxiety

and prevents it from sending to the Far East a large number of

troops which would otherwise be available.  They hail, however,

with delight the Liberal and revolutionary movements in the hope

that the Russians themselves may undermine, and possibly overthrow,

the tyrannical Autocratic Power.  Towards this end they would

gladly co-operate, and they are endeavouring, therefore, to get

into touch with each other; but they have so little in common, and

so many mutually antagonistic interests, that they are not likely

to succeed in forming a solid coalition.



While sympathising with every form of opposition to the Government,

the men of the subject-nationalities reserve their special

affection for the Socialists, because these not only proclaim, like

the Liberals, the principles of extensive local self-government and

universal equality before the law, but they also speak of replacing

the existing system of coercive centralisation by a voluntary

confederation of heterogeneous units.  This explains why so many

Poles, Armenians and Georgians are to be found in the ranks of the

Social Democrats and the Socialist-Revolutionaries.



Of the recruits from oppressed nationalities the great majority

come from the Jews, who, though they have never dreamed of

political independence, or even of local autonomy, have most reason

to complain of the existing order of things.  At all times they

have furnished a goodly contingent to the revolutionary movement,

and many of them have belied their traditional reputation of

timidity and cowardice by taking part in very dangerous terrorist

enterprises--in some cases ending their career on the scaffold.  In

1897 they created a Social-Democratic organisation of their own,

commonly known as the Bund, which joined, in 1898, the Russian

Social-Democratic Labour Party, on the understanding that it should

retain its independence on all matters affecting exclusively the

Jewish population.*  It now possesses a very ably-conducted weekly

organ, and of all sections of the Social-Democratic group it is

unquestionably the best organised.  This is not surprising, because

the Jews have more business capacity than the Russians, and

centuries of oppression have developed in the race a wonderful

talent for secret illegal activity, and for eluding the vigilance

of the police.





* The official title of this Bund is the "Universal Jewish Labour

Union in Russia and Poland."  Its organ is called Sovremenniya

Izvestiya (Contemporary News).





It would be very interesting to know the numerical strength of

these groups, but we have no materials for forming even an

approximate estimate.  The Liberals are certainly the most

numerous.  They include the great majority of the educated classes,

but they are less persistently energetic than their rivals, and

their methods of action make less impression on the Government.

The two Socialist groups, though communicative enough with regard

to their doctrines and aims, are very reticent with regard to the

number of their adherents, and this naturally awakens a suspicion

that an authoritative statement on the subject would tend to

diminish rather than enhance their importance in the eyes of the

public.  If statistics of the Social Democrats could be obtained,

it would be necessary to distinguish between the three categories

of which the group is composed: (1) The educated active members,

who form the directing, controlling element; (2) the fully

indoctrinated recruits from the working classes; and (3) workmen

who desire merely to better their material condition, but who take

part in political demonstrations in the hope of bringing pressure

to bear on their employers, and inducing the Government to

intervene on their behalf.



The two Socialist groups are not only increasing the number of

their adherents; they are also extending and improving their

organisation, as is proved by the recent strikes, which are the

work of the Social Democrats, and by the increasing rural

disturbances and acts of terrorism, which are the work of the

Socialist-Revolutionaries.



With regard to the unorganised Nationalist group, all I can do

towards conveying a vague, general idea of its numerical strength

is to give the numbers of the populations--men, women, and

children--of which the Nationalist agitators are the self-

constituted representatives, without attempting to estimate the

percentage of the actively disaffected.  The populations in

question are:





Poles          7,900,000

Jews           5,190,000

Finlanders     2,592,000

Armenians      1,200,000

Georgians        408,000

              ----------

              16,495,000





If a National Assembly were created, in which all the nationalities

were represented according to the numbers of the population, the

Poles, roughly speaking, would have 38 members, the Jews 24, the

Finlanders 12, the Armenians 6, and the Georgians 2: whereas the

Russians would have about 400.  The other subject-nationalities in

which symptoms of revolutionary fermentation have appeared are too

insignificant to require special mention.



As the representatives of the various subject-nationalities are

endeavouring to combine, so likewise are the Liberals and the two

Socialist groups trying to form a coalition, and for this purpose

they have already held several conferences.  How far they will

succeed it is impossible to say.  On one point--the necessity of

limiting or abolishing the Autocratic Power--they are unanimous,

and there seems to be a tacit understanding that for the present

they shall work together amicably on parallel lines, each group

reserving its freedom of action for the future, and using meanwhile

its own customary means of putting pressure on the Government.  We

may expect, therefore, that for a time the Liberals will go on

holding conferences and congresses in defiance of the police

authorities, delivering eloquent speeches, discussing thorny

political questions, drafting elaborate constitutions, and making

gentle efforts to clog the wheels of the Administration,* while the

Social Democrats will continue to organise strikes and semi-pacific

demonstrations,** and the Socialist-Revolutionaries will seek to

accelerate the march of events by agrarian disturbances and acts of

terrorism.





* As an illustration of this I may cite the fact that several

Zemstvos have declared themselves unable, under present conditions,

to support the indigent families of soldiers at the front.



** I call them semi-pacific, because on such occasions the

demonstrators are instructed to refrain from violence only so long

as the police do not attempt to stop the proceedings by force.





It is certain, however, that the parting of the ways will be

reached sooner or later, and already there are indications that it

is not very far off.  Liberals and Social Democrats may perhaps

work together for a considerable time, because the latter, though

publicly committed to socialistic schemes which the Liberals must

regard with the strongest antipathy, are willing to accept a

Constitutional regime during the period of transition.  It is

difficult, however, to imagine that the Liberals, of whom a large

proportion are landed proprietors, can long go hand in hand with

the Socialist-Revolutionaries, who propose to bring about the

revolution by inciting the peasants to seize unceremoniously the

estates, live stock, and agricultural implements of the landlords.



Already the Socialist-Revolutionaries have begun to speak publicly

of the inevitable rupture in terms by no means flattering to their

temporary allies.  In a brochure recently issued by their central

committee the following passage occurs:





"If we consider the matter seriously and attentively, it becomes

evident that all the strength of the bourgeoisie lies in its

greater or less capacity for frightening and intimidating the

Government by the fear of a popular rising; but as the bourgeoisie

itself stands in mortal terror of the thing with which it frightens

the Government, its position at the moment of insurrection will be

rather ridiculous and pitiable."





To understand the significance of this passage, the reader must

know that, in the language of the Socialists, bourgeoisie and

Liberals are convertible terms.



The truth is that the Liberals find themselves in an awkward

strategical position.  As quiet, respectable members of society

they dislike violence of every kind, and occasionally in moments of

excitement they believe that they may attain their ends by mere

moral pressure, but when they find that academic protests and

pacific demonstrations make no perceptible impression on the

Government, they become impatient and feel tempted to approve, at

least tacitly, of stronger measures.  Many of them do not profess

to regard with horror and indignation the acts of the terrorists,

and some of them, if I am correctly informed, go so far as to

subscribe to the funds of the Socialist-Revolutionaries without

taking very stringent precautions against the danger of the money

being employed for the preparation of dynamite and hand grenades.



This extraordinary conduct on the part of moderate Liberals may

well surprise Englishmen, but it is easily explained.  The Russians

have a strong vein of recklessness in their character, and many of

them are at present imbued with an unquestioning faith in the

miracle-working power of Constitutionalism.  These seem to imagine

that as soon as the Autocratic Power is limited by parliamentary

institutions the discontented will cease from troubling and the

country will be at rest.



It is hardly necessary to say that such expectations are not likely

to be realised.  All sections of the educated classes may be agreed

in desiring "liberty," but the word has many meanings, and nowhere

more than in Russia at the present day.  For the Liberals it means

simply democratic parliamentary government; for the Social Democrat

it means the undisputed predominance of the Proletariat; for the

Socialist-Revolutionary it means the opportunity of realising

immediately the Socialist ideal; for the representative of a

subject-nationality it means the abolition of racial and religious

disabilities and the attainment of local autonomy or political

independence.  There is no doubt, therefore, that in Russia, as in

other countries, a parliament would develop political parties

bitterly hostile to each other, and its early history might contain

some startling surprises for those who had helped to create it.  If

the Constitution, for example, were made as democratic as the

Liberals and Socialists demand, the elections might possibly result

in an overwhelming Conservative majority ready to re-establish the

Autocratic Power!  This is not at all so absurd as it sounds, for

the peasants, apart from the land question, are thoroughly

Conservative.  The ordinary muzhik can hardly conceive that the

Emperor's power can be limited by a law or an Assembly, and if the

idea were suggested to him, he would certainly not approve.  In his

opinion the Tsar should be omnipotent.  If everything is not

satisfactory in Russia, it is because the Tsar does not know of the

evil, or is prevented from curing it by the tchinovniks and the

landed proprietors.  "More power, therefore, to his elbow!" as an

Irishman might say.  Such is the simple political creed of the

"undeveloped" muzhik, and all the efforts of the revolutionary

groups to develop him have not yet been attended with much success.



How, then, the reader may ask, is an issue to be found out of the

present imbroglio?  I cannot pretend to speak with authority, but

it seems to me that there are only two methods of dealing with the

situation: prompt, energetic repression, or timely, judicious

concessions to popular feeling.  Either of these methods might,

perhaps, have been successful, but the Government adopted neither,

and has halted between the two.  By this policy of drift it has

encouraged the hopes of all, has satisfied nobody, and has

diminished its own prestige.



In defence or extenuation of this attitude it may be said that

there is considerable danger in the adoption of either course.

Vigorous repression means staking all on a single card, and if it

were successful it could not do more than postpone the evil day,

because the present antiquated form of government--suitable enough,

perhaps, for a simply organised peasant-empire vegetating in an

atmosphere of "eternal stillness"--cannot permanently resist the

rising tide of modern ideas and aspirations, and is incapable of

grappling successfully with the complicated problems of economic

and social progress which are already awaiting solution.  Sooner or

later the bureaucratic machine, driven solely by the Autocratic

Power in the teeth of popular apathy or opposition, must inevitably

break down, and the longer the collapse is postponed the more

violent is it likely to be.  On the other hand, it is impossible to

foresee the effects of concessions.  Mere bureaucratic reforms will

satisfy no one; they are indeed not wanted except as a result of

more radical changes.  What all sections of the Opposition demand

is that the people should at least take part in the government of

the country by means of freely elected representatives in

Parliament assembled.  It is useless to argue with them that

Constitutionalism will certainly not work the miracles that are

expected of it, and that in the struggles of political parties

which it is sure to produce the unity and integrity of the Empire

may be endangered.  Lessons of that kind can only be learned by

experience.  Other countries, it is said, have existed and thriven

under free political institutions, and why not Russia?  Why should

she be a pariah among the nations?  She gave parliamentary

institutions to the young nationalities of the Balkan Peninsula as

soon as they were liberated from Turkish bondage, and she has not

yet been allowed such privileges herself!



Let us suppose now that the Autocratic Power has come to feel the

impossibility of remaining isolated as it is at present, and that

it has decided to seek solid support in some section of the

population, what section should it choose?  Practically it has no

choice.  The only way of relieving the pressure is to make

concessions to the Constitutionalists.  That course would

conciliate, not merely the section of the Opposition which calls

itself by that name and represents the majority of the educated

classes, but also, in a lesser degree, all the other sections.  No

doubt these latter would accept the concession only as part payment

of their demands and a means of attaining ulterior aims.  Again and

again the Social Democrats have proclaimed publicly that they

desire parliamentary government, not as an end in itself, but as a

stepping stone towards the realisation of the Socialist ideal.  It

is evident, however, that they would have to remain on this

stepping stone for a long series of years--until the

representatives of the Proletariat obtained an overwhelming

majority in the Chamber.  In like manner the subject-nationalities

would regard a parliamentary regime as a mere temporary expedient--

a means of attaining greater local and national autonomy--and they

would probably show themselves more impatient than the Social

Democrats.  Any inordinate claims, however, which they might put

forward would encounter resistance, as the Poles found in 1863, not

merely from the Autocratic Power, but from the great majority of

the Russian people, who have no sympathy with any efforts tending

to bring about the disruption of the Empire.  In short, as soon as

the Assembly set to work, the delegates would be sobered by a

consciousness of responsibility, differences of opinion and aims

would inevitably appear, and the various groups transformed into

political parties, instead of all endeavouring as at present to

pull down the Autocratic Power, would expend a great part of their

energy in pulling against each other.



In order to reach this haven of safety it is necessary to pass

through a period of transition, in which there are some formidable

difficulties.  One of these I may mention by way of illustration.



In creating parliamentary institutions of any kind the Government

could hardly leave intact the present system of allowing the police

to arrest without a proper warrant, and send into exile without

trial, any one suspected of revolutionary designs.  On this point

all the Opposition groups are agreed, and all consequently put

forward prominently the demand for the inviolability of person and

domicile.  To grant such a concession seems a very simple and easy

matter, but any responsible minister might hesitate to accept such

a restriction of his authority.  We know, he would argue, that the

terrorist section of the Socialist-Revolutionary group, the so-

called Militant Organisation, are very busy preparing bombs, and

the police, even with the extensive, ill-defined powers which they

at present possess, have the greatest difficulty in preventing the

use of such objectionable instruments of political warfare.  Would

not the dynamiters and throwers of hand-grenades utilise a

relaxation of police supervision, as they did in the time of Louis

Melikof,* for carrying out their nefarious designs?





* Vide supra, p. 569.





I have no desire to conceal or minimise such dangers, but I believe

they are temporary and by no means so great as the dangers of the

only other alternatives--energetic repression and listless

inactivity.  Terrorism and similar objectionable methods of

political warfare are symptoms of an abnormal, unhealthy state of

society, and would doubtless disappear in Russia, as they have

disappeared in other countries, with the conditions which produced

them.  If the terrorists continued to exist under a more liberal

regime, they would be much less formidable, because they would lose

the half-concealed sympathy which they at present enjoy.



Political assassinations may occasionally take place under the most

democratic governments, as the history of the United States proves,

but terrorism as a system is to be found only in countries where

the political power is concentrated in the hands of a few

individuals; and it sometimes happens that irresponsible persons

are exposed to terrorist attacks.  We have an instance of this at

present in St. Petersburg.  The reluctance of the Emperor to adopt

at once a Liberal programme is commonly attributed to the influence

of two members of the Imperial family, the Empress Dowager and the

Grand Duke Vladimir.  This is a mistake.  Neither of these

personages is so reactionary as is generally supposed, and their

political views, whatever they may be, have no appreciable

influence on the course of affairs.  If the Empress Dowager had

possessed the influence so often ascribed to her, M. Plehve would

not have remained so long in power.  As for the Grand Duke

Vladimir, he is not in favour, and for nearly two years he has

never been consulted on political matters.  The so-called Grand

Ducal party of which he is supposed to be the leader, is a recently

invented fiction.  When in difficulties the Emperor may consult

individually some of his near relatives, but there is no coherent

group to which the term party could properly be applied.



As soon as the Autocratic Power has decided on a definite line of

action, it is to be hoped that a strong man will be found to take

the direction of affairs.  In Russia, as in other autocratically

governed countries, strong men in the political sense of the term

are extremely rare, and when they do appear as a lusus naturae they

generally take their colour from their surroundings, and are of the

authoritative, dictatorial type.  During recent years only two

strong men have come to the front in the Russian official world.

The one was M. Plehve, who was nothing if not authoritative and

dictatorial, and who is no longer available for experiments in

repression or constitutionalism.  The other is M. Witte.  As an

administrator under an autocratic regime he has displayed immense

ability and energy, but it does not follow that he is a statesman

capable of piloting the ship into calm waters, and he is not likely

to have an opportunity of making the attempt, for he does not--to

state the case mildly--possess the full confidence of his august

master.



Even if a strong man, enjoying fully the Imperial confidence, could

be found, the problem would not be thereby completely and

satisfactorily solved, because an autocrat, who is the Lord's

Anointed, cannot delegate his authority to a simple mortal without

losing something of the semi-religious halo and the prestige on

which his authority rests.  While a roi faineant may fulfil

effectively all the essential duties of sovereignty, an autocrate

faineant is an absurdity.



In these circumstances, it is idle to speculate as to the future.

All we can do is to await patiently the development of events, and

in all probability it is the unexpected that will happen.



The reader doubtless feels that I am offering a very lame and

impotent conclusion, and I must confess that I am conscious of this

feeling myself, but I think I may fairly plead extenuating

circumstances.  Happily for my peace of mind I am a mere observer

who is not called upon to invent a means of extricating Russia from

her difficult position.  For that arduous task there are already

brave volunteers enough in the field.  All I have to do is to

explain as clearly as I can the complicated problem to be solved.

Nor do I feel it any part of my duty to make predictions.  I

believe I am pretty well acquainted with the situation at the

present moment, but what it may be a few weeks hence, when the

words I am now writing issue from the press, I do not profess to

foresee.











End 