





CHAPTER XXV



MOSCOW AND THE SLAVOPHILS





Two Ancient Cities--Kief Not a Good Point for Studying Old Russian

National Life--Great Russians and Little Russians--Moscow--Easter

Eve in the Kremlin--Curious Custom--Anecdote of the Emperor

Nicholas--Domiciliary Visits of the Iberian Madonna--The Streets of

Moscow--Recent Changes in the Character of the City--Vulgar

Conception of the Slavophils--Opinion Founded on Personal

Acquaintance--Slavophil Sentiment a Century Ago--Origin and

Development of the Slavophil Doctrine--Slavophilism Essentially

Muscovite--The Panslavist Element--The Slavophils and the

Emancipation.





In the last chapter, as in many of the preceding ones, the reader

must have observed that at one moment there was a sudden break,

almost a solution of continuity, in Russian national life.  The

Tsardom of Muscovy, with its ancient Oriental costumes and

Byzantine traditions, unexpectedly disappears, and the Russian

Empire, clad in modern garb and animated with the spirit of modern

progress, steps forward uninvited into European history.  Of the

older civilisation, if civilisation it can be called, very little

survived the political transformation, and that little is generally

supposed to hover ghostlike around Kief and Moscow.  To one or

other of these towns, therefore, the student who desires to learn

something of genuine old Russian life, untainted by foreign

influences, naturally wends his way.  For my part I thought first

of settling for a time in Kief, the oldest and most revered of

Russian cities, where missionaries from Byzantium first planted

Christianity on Russian soil, and where thousands of pilgrims still

assemble yearly from far and near to prostrate themselves before

the Holy Icons in the churches and to venerate the relics of the

blessed saints and martyrs in the catacombs of the great monastery.

I soon discovered, however, that Kief, though it represents in a

certain sense the Byzantine traditions so dear to the Russian

people, is not a good point of observation for studying the Russian

character.  It was early exposed to the ravages of the nomadic

tribes of the Steppe, and when it was liberated from those

incursions it was seized by the Poles and Lithuanians, and remained

for centuries under their domination.  Only in comparatively recent

times did it begin to recover its Russian character--a university

having been created there for that purpose after the Polish

insurrection of 1830.  Even now the process of Russification is far

from complete, and the Russian elements in the population are far

from being pure in the nationalist sense.  The city and the

surrounding country are, in fact, Little Russian rather than Great

Russian, and between these two sections of the population there are

profound differences--differences of language, costume, traditions,

popular songs, proverbs, folk-lore, domestic arrangements, mode of

life, and Communal organisation.  In these and other respects the

Little Russians, South Russians, Ruthenes, or Khokhly, as they are

variously designated, differ from the Great Russians of the North,

who form the predominant factor in the Empire, and who have given

to that wonderful structure its essential characteristics.  Indeed,

if I did not fear to ruffle unnecessarily the patriotic

susceptibilities of my Great Russian friends who have a pet theory

on this subject, I should say that we have here two distinct

nationalities, further apart from each other than the English and

the Scotch.  The differences are due, I believe, partly to

ethnographical peculiarities and partly to historic conditions.



As it was the energetic Great Russian empire-builders and not the

half-dreamy, half-astute, sympathetic descendants of the Free

Cossacks that I wanted to study, I soon abandoned my idea of

settling in the Holy City on the Dnieper, and chose Moscow as my

point of observation; and here, during several years, I spent

regularly some of the winter months.



The first few weeks of my stay in the ancient capital of the Tsars

were spent in the ordinary manner of intelligent tourists.  After

mastering the contents of a guide-book I carefully inspected all

the officially recognised objects of interest--the Kremlin, with

its picturesque towers and six centuries of historical

associations; the Cathedrals, containing the venerated tombs of

martyrs, saints, and Tsars; the old churches, with their quaint,

archaic, richly decorated Icons; the "Patriarchs' Treasury," rich

in jewelled ecclesiastical vestments and vessels of silver and

gold; the ancient and the modern palace; the Ethnological Museum,

showing the costumes and physiognomy of all the various races in

the Empire; the archaeological collections, containing many objects

that recall the barbaric splendour of old Muscovy; the picture-

gallery, with Ivanof's gigantic picture, in which patriotic Russian

critics discover occult merits which place it above anything that

Western Europe has yet produced!  Of course I climbed up to the top

of the tall belfry which rejoices in the name of "Ivan the Great,"

and looked down on the "gilded domes"* of the churches, and bright

green roofs of the houses, and far away, beyond these, the gently

undulating country with the "Sparrow Hills," from which Napoleon is

said, in cicerone language, to have "gazed upon the doomed city."

Occasionally I walked about the bazaars in the hope of finding

interesting specimens of genuine native art-industry, and was

urgently invited to purchase every conceivable article which I did

not want.  At midday or in the evening I visited the most noted

traktirs, and made the acquaintance of the caviar, sturgeons,

sterlets, and other native delicacies for which these institutions

are famous--deafened the while by the deep tones of the colossal

barrel-organ, out of all proportion to the size of the room; and in

order to see how the common people spent their evenings I looked in

at some of the more modest traktirs, and gazed with wonder, not

unmixed with fear, at the enormous quantity of weak tea which the

inmates consumed.





* Allowance must be made here for poetical licence.  In reality,

very few of the domes are gilt.  The great majority of them are

painted green, like the roofs of the houses.





Since these first weeks of my sojourn in Moscow more than thirty

years have passed, and many of my early impressions have been

blurred by time, but one scene remains deeply graven on my memory.

It was Easter Eve, and I had gone with a friend to the Kremlin to

witness the customary religious ceremonies.  Though the rain was

falling heavily, an immense number of people had assembled in and

around the Cathedral of the Assumption.  The crowd was of the most

mixed kind.  There stood the patient bearded muzhik in his well-

worn sheepskin; the big, burly, self-satisfied merchant in his long

black glossy kaftan; the noble with fashionable great-coat and

umbrella; thinly clad old women shivering in the cold, and bright-

eyed young damsels with their warm cloaks drawn closely round them;

old men with long beard, wallet, and pilgrim's staff; and

mischievous urchins with faces for the moment preternaturally

demure.  Each right hand, of old and young alike, held a lighted

taper, and these myriads of flickering little flames produced a

curious illumination, giving to the surrounding buildings a weird

picturesqueness which they do not possess in broad daylight.  All

stood patiently waiting for the announcement of the glad tidings:

"He is risen!"  As midnight approached, the hum of voices gradually

ceased, till, as the clock struck twelve, the deep-toned bell on

"Ivan the Great" began to toll, and in answer to this signal all

the bells in Moscow suddenly sent forth a merry peal.  Each bell--

and their name is legion--seemed frantically desirous of drowning

its neighbour's voice, the solemn boom of the great one overhead

mingling curiously with the sharp, fussy "ting-a-ting-ting" of

diminutive rivals.  If demons dwell in Moscow and dislike bell-

ringing, as is generally supposed, then there must have been at

that moment a general stampede of the powers of darkness such as is

described by Milton in his poem on the Nativity, and as if this

deafening din were not enough, big guns were fired in rapid

succession from a battery of artillery close at hand!  The noise

seemed to stimulate the religious enthusiasm, and the general

excitement had a wonderful effect on a Russian friend who

accompanied me.  When in his normal condition that gentleman was a

quiet, undemonstrative person, devoted to science, an ardent

adherent of Western civilisation in general and of Darwinism in

particular, and a thorough sceptic with regard to all forms of

religious belief; but the influence of the surroundings was too

much for his philosophical equanimity.  For a moment his orthodox

Muscovite soul awoke from its sceptical, cosmopolitan lethargy.

After crossing himself repeatedly--an act of devotion which I had

never before seen him perform--he grasped my arm, and, pointing to

the crowd, said in an exultant tone of voice, "Look there!  There

is a sight that you can see nowhere but in the 'White-stone City.'*

Are not the Russians a religious people?"





*Belokamenny, meaning "of white stone," is one of the popular names

of Moscow.





To this unexpected question I gave a monosyllabic assent, and

refrained from disturbing my friend's new-born enthusiasm by any

discordant note; but I must confess that this sudden outburst of

deafening noise and the dazzling light aroused in my heretical

breast feelings of a warlike rather than a religious kind.  For a

moment I could imagine myself in ancient Moscow, and could fancy

the people being called out to repel a Tartar horde already

thundering at the gates!



The service lasted two or three hours, and terminated with the

curious ceremony of blessing the Easter cakes, which were ranged--

each one with a lighted taper stuck in it--in long rows outside of

the cathedral.  A not less curious custom practised at this season

is that of exchanging kisses of fraternal love.  Theoretically one

ought to embrace and be embraced by all present--indicating thereby

that all are brethren in Christ--but the refinements of modern life

have made innovations in the practice, and most people confine

their salutations to their friends and acquaintances.  When two

friends meet during that night or on the following day, the one

says, "Christos voskres!" ("Christ hath risen!"); and the other

replies, "Vo istine voskres!" ("In truth he hath risen!").  They

then kiss each other three times on the right and left cheek

alternately.  The custom is more or less observed in all classes of

society, and the Emperor himself conforms to it.



This reminds me of an anecdote which is related of the Emperor

Nicholas I., tending to show that he was not so devoid of kindly

human feelings as his imperial and imperious exterior suggested.

On coming out of his cabinet one Easter morning he addressed to the

soldier who was mounting guard at the door the ordinary words of

salutation, "Christ hath risen!" and received instead of the

ordinary reply, a flat contradiction--"Not at all, your Imperial

Majesty!"  Astounded by such an unexpected answer--for no one

ventured to dissent from Nicholas even in the most guarded and

respectful terms--he instantly demanded an explanation.  The

soldier, trembling at his own audacity, explained that he was a

Jew, and could not conscientiously admit the fact of the

Resurrection.  This boldness for conscience' sake so pleased the

Tsar that he gave the man a handsome Easter present.



A quarter of a century after the Easter Eve above mentioned--or, to

be quite accurate, on the 26th of May, 1896--I again find myself in

the Kremlin on the occasion of a great religious ceremony--a

ceremony which shows that "the White-stone City" on the Moskva is

still in some respects the capital of Holy Russia.  This time my

post of observation is inside the cathedral, which is artistically


draped with purple hangings and crowded with the most distinguished

personages of the Empire, all arrayed in gorgeous apparel--Grand

Dukes and Grand Duchesses, Imperial Highnesses and High

Excellencies, Metropolitans and Archbishops, Senators and

Councillors of State, Generals and Court dignitaries.  In the

centre of the building, on a high, richly decorated platform, sits

the Emperor with his Imperial Consort, and his mother, the widowed

Consort of Alexander III.  Though Nicholas II. has not the colossal

stature which has distinguished so many of the Romanofs, he is well

built, holds himself erect, and shows a quiet dignity in his

movements; while his face, which resembles that of his cousin, the

Prince of Wales, wears a kindly, sympathetic expression.  The

Empress looks even more than usually beautiful, in a low dress cut

in the ancient fashion, her thick brown hair, dressed most simply

without jewellery or other ornaments, falling in two long ringlets

over her white shoulders.  For the moment, her attire is much

simpler than that of the Empress Dowager, who wears a diamond crown

and a great mantle of gold brocade, lined and edged with ermine,

the long train displaying in bright-coloured embroidery the

heraldic double-headed eagle of the Imperial arms.



Each of these august personages sits on a throne of curious

workmanship, consecrated by ancient historic associations.  That of

the Emperor, the gift of the Shah of Persia to Ivan the Terrible,

and commonly called the Throne of Tsar Michael, the founder of the

Romanof dynasty, is covered with gold plaques, and studded with

hundreds of big, roughly cut precious stones, mostly rubies,

emeralds, and turquoises.  Of still older date is the throne of the

young Empress, for it was given by Pope Paul II. to Tsar Ivan III.,

grandfather of the Terrible, on the occasion of his marriage with a

niece of the last Byzantine Emperor.  More recent but not less

curious is that of the Empress Dowager.  It is the throne of Tsar

Alexis, the father of Peter the Great, covered with countless and

priceless diamonds, rubies, and pearls, and surmounted by an

Imperial eagle of solid gold, together with golden statuettes of

St. Peter and St. Nicholas, the miracle-worker.  Over each throne

is a canopy of purple velvet fringed with gold, out of which rise

stately plumes representing the national colours.



Their Majesties have come hither, in accordance with time-honoured

custom, to be crowned in this old Cathedral of the Assumption, the

central point of the Kremlin, within a stone-throw of the Cathedral

of the Archangel Michael, in which lie the remains of the old Grand

Dukes and Tsars of Muscovy.  Already the Emperor has read aloud, in

a clear, unfaltering voice, from a richly bound parchment folio,

held by the Metropolitan of St. Petersburg, the Orthodox creed; and

his Eminence, after invoking on his Majesty the blessing of the

Holy Spirit, has performed the mystic rite of placing his hands in

the form of a cross on the Imperial forehead.  Thus all is ready

for the most important part of the solemn ceremony.  Standing

erect, the Emperor doffs his small diadem and puts on with his own

hands the great diamond crown, offered respectfully by the

Metropolitan; then he reseats himself on his throne, holding in his

right hand the Sceptre and in his left the Orb of Dominion.  After

sitting thus in state for a few minutes, he stands up and proceeds

to crown his august spouse, kneeling before him.  First he touches

her forehead with his own crown, and then he places on her head a

smaller one, which is immediately attached to her hair by four

ladies-in-waiting, dressed in the old Muscovite Court-costume.  At

the same time her Majesty is invested with a mantle of heavy gold

brocade, similar to those of the Emperor and Empress Dowager, lined

and bordered with ermine.



Thus crowned and robed their Majesties sit in state, while a proto-

deacon reads, in a loud stentorian voice, the long list of sonorous

hereditary titles belonging of right to the Imperator and Autocrat

of all the Russias, and the choir chants a prayer invoking long

life and happiness--"Many years!  Many years!  Many years!"--on the

high and mighty possessor of the titles aforesaid.  And now begins

the Mass, celebrated with a pomp and magnificence that can be

witnessed only once or twice in a generation.  Sixty gorgeously

robed ecclesiastical dignitaries of the highest orders fulfil their

various functions with due solemnity and unction; but the

magnificence of the vestments and the pomp of the ceremonial are

soon forgotten in the exquisite solemnising music, as the deep

double-bass tones of the adult singers in the background--carefully

selected for the occasion in all parts of the Empire--peal forth as

from a great organ, and blend marvellously with the clear, soft,

gentle notes of the red-robed chorister boys in front of the

Iconostase.  Listening with intense emotion, I involuntarily recall

to mind Fra Angelico's pictures of angelic choirs, and cannot help

thinking that the pious old Florentine, whose soul was attuned to

all that was sacred and beautiful, must have heard in imagination

such music as this.  So strong is the impression that the

subsequent details of the long ceremony, including the anointing

with the holy chrism, fail to engrave themselves on my memory.  One

incident, however, remains; and if it had happened in an earlier

and more superstitious age it would doubtless have been chronicled

as an omen full of significance.  As the Emperor is on the point of

descending from the dais, duly crowned and anointed, a staggering

ray of sunshine steals through one of the narrow upper windows and,

traversing the dimly lit edifice, falls full on the Imperial crown,

lighting up for a moment the great mass of diamonds with a

hundredfold brilliance.



In a detailed account of the Coronation which I wrote on leaving

the Kremlin, I find the following: "The magnificent ceremony is at

an end, and now Nicholas II. is the crowned Emperor and anointed

Autocrat of all the Russias.  May the cares of Empire rest lightly

on him!  That must be the earnest prayer of every loyal subject and

every sincere well-wisher, for of all living mortals he is perhaps

the one who has been entrusted by Providence with the greatest

power and the greatest responsibilities."  In writing those words I

did not foresee how heavy his responsibilities would one day weigh

upon him, when his Empire would be sorely tried, by foreign war and

internal discontent.



One more of these old Moscow reminiscences, and I have done.  A day

or two after the Coronation I saw the Khodinskoye Polye, a great

plain in the outskirts of Moscow, strewn with hundreds of corpses!

During the previous night enormous crowds from the city and the

surrounding districts had collected here in order to receive at

sunrise, by the Tsar's command, a little memento of the coronation

ceremony, in the form of a packet containing a metal cup and a few

eatables; and as day dawned, in their anxiety to get near the row

of booths from which the distribution was to be made, about two

thousand had been crushed to death.  It was a sight more horrible

than a battlefield, because among the dead were a large proportion

of women and children, terribly mutilated in the struggle.

Altogether, "a sight to shudder at, not to see!"



To return to the remark of my friend in the Kremlin on Easter Eve,

the Russians in general, and the Muscovites in particular, as the

quintessence of all that is Russian, are certainly a religious

people, but their piety sometimes finds modes of expression which

rather shock the Protestant mind.  As an instance of these, I may

mention the domiciliary visits of the Iberian Madonna.  This

celebrated Icon, for reasons which I have never heard

satisfactorily explained, is held in peculiar veneration by the

Muscovites, and occupies in popular estimation a position analogous

to the tutelary deities of ancient pagan cities.  Thus when

Napoleon was about to enter the city in 1812, the populace

clamorously called upon the Metropolitan to take the Madonna, and

lead them out armed with hatchets against the hosts of the infidel;

and when the Tsar visits Moscow he generally drives straight from

the railway-station to the little chapel where the Icon resides--

near one of the entrances to the Kremlin--and there offers up a

short prayer.  Every Orthodox Russian, as he passes this chapel,

uncovers and crosses himself, and whenever a religious service is

performed in it there is always a considerable group of

worshippers.  Some of the richer inhabitants, however, are not

content with thus performing their devotions in public before the

Icon.  They like to have it from time to time in their houses, and

the ecclesiastical authorities think fit to humour this strange

fancy.  Accordingly every morning the Iberian Madonna may be seen

driving about the city from one house to another in a carriage and

four!  The carriage may be at once recognised, not from any

peculiarity in its structure, for it is an ordinary close carriage

such as may be obtained at livery stables, but by the fact that the

coachman sits bare-headed, and all the people in the street uncover

and cross themselves as it passes.  Arrived at the house to which

it has been invited, the Icon is carried through all the rooms, and

in the principal apartment a short religious service is performed

before it.  As it is being brought in or taken away, female

servants may sometimes be seen to kneel on the floor so that it may

be carried over them.  During its absence from its chapel it is

replaced by a copy not easily distinguishable from the original,

and thus the devotions of the faithful and the flow of pecuniary

contributions do not suffer interruption.  These contributions,

together with the sums paid for the domiciliary visits, amount to a

considerable yearly sum, and go--if I am rightly informed--to swell

the revenues of the Metropolitan.



A single drive or stroll through Moscow will suffice to convince

the traveller, even if he knows nothing of Russian history, that

the city is not, like its modern rival on the Neva, the artificial

creation of a far-seeing, self-willed autocrat, but rather a

natural product which has grown up slowly and been modified

according to the constantly changing wants of the population.  A

few of the streets have been Europeanised--in all except the

paving, which is everywhere execrably Asiatic--to suit the tastes

of those who have adopted European culture, but the great majority

of them still retain much of their ancient character and primitive

irregularity.  As soon as we diverge from the principal

thoroughfares, we find one-storied houses--some of them still of

wood--which appear to have been transported bodily from the

country, with courtyard, garden, stables, and other appurtenances.

The whole is no doubt a little compressed, for land has here a

certain value, but the character is in no way changed, and we have

some difficulty in believing that we are not in the suburbs but

near the centre of a great town.  There is nothing that can by any

possibility be called street architecture.  Though there is

unmistakable evidence of the streets having been laid out according

to a preconceived plan, many of them show clearly that in their

infancy they had a wayward will of their own, and bent to the right

or left without any topographical justification.  The houses, too,

display considerable individuality of character, having evidently

during the course of their construction paid no attention to their

neighbours.  Hence we find no regularly built terraces, crescents,

or squares.  There is, it is true, a double circle of boulevards,

but the houses which flank them have none of that regularity which

we commonly associate with the term.  Dilapidated buildings which

in West-European cities would hide themselves in some narrow lane

or back slum here stand composedly in the face of day by the side

of a palatial residence, without having the least consciousness of

the incongruity of their position, just as the unsophisticated

muzhik, in his unsavoury sheepskin, can stand in the midst of a

crowd of well-dressed people without feeling at all awkward or

uncomfortable.



All this incongruity, however, is speedily disappearing.  Moscow

has become the centre of a great network of railways, and the

commercial and industrial capital of the Empire.  Already her

rapidly increasing population has nearly reached a million.*  The

value of land and property is being doubled and trebled, and

building speculations, with the aid of credit institutions of

various kinds, are being carried on with feverish rapidity.  Well

may the men of the old school complain that the world is turned

upside down, and regret the old times of traditional somnolence and

comfortable routine!  Those good old times are gone now, never to

return.  The ancient capital, which long gloried in its past

historical associations, now glories in its present commercial

prosperity, and looks forward with confidence to the future.  Even

the Slavophils, the obstinate champions of the ultra-Muscovite

spirit, have changed with the times, and descended to the level of

ordinary prosaic life.  These men, who formerly spent years in

seeking to determine the place of Moscow in the past and future

history of humanity, have--to their honour be it said--become in

these latter days town-counsellors, and have devoted much of their

time to devising ways and means of improving the drainage and the

street-paving!  But I am anticipating in a most unjustifiable way.

I ought first to tell the reader who these Slavophils were, and why

they sought to correct the commonly received conceptions of

universal history.





* According to the census of 1897 it was 988,610.





The reader may have heard of the Slavophils as a set of fanatics

who, about half a century ago, were wont to go about in what they

considered the ancient Russian costume, who wore beards in defiance

of Peter the Great's celebrated ukaz and Nicholas's clearly-

expressed wish anent shaving, who gloried in Muscovite barbarism,

and had solemnly "sworn a feud" against European civilisation and

enlightenment.  By the tourists of the time who visited Moscow they

were regarded as among the most noteworthy lions of the place, and

were commonly depicted in not very flattering colours.  At the

beginning of the Crimean War they were among the extreme

Chauvinists who urged the necessity of planting the Greek cross on

the desecrated dome of St. Sophia in Constantinople, and hoped to

see the Emperor proclaimed "Panslavonic Tsar"; and after the

termination of the war they were frequently accused of inventing

Turkish atrocities, stirring up discontent among the Slavonic

subjects of the Sultan, and secretly plotting for the overthrow of

the Ottoman Empire.  All this was known to me before I went to

Russia, and I had consequently invested the Slavophils with a halo

of romance.  Shortly after my arrival in St. Petersburg I heard

something more which tended to increase my interest in them--they

had caused, I was told, great trepidation among the highest

official circles by petitioning the Emperor to resuscitate a

certain ancient institution, called Zemskiye Sobory, which might be

made to serve the purposes of a parliament!  This threw a new light

upon them--under the disguise of archaeological conservatives they

were evidently aiming at important liberal reforms.



As a foreigner and a heretic, I expected a very cold and distant

reception from these uncompromising champions of Russian

nationality and the Orthodox faith; but in this I was agreeably

disappointed.  By all of them I was received in the most amiable

and friendly way, and I soon discovered that my preconceived ideas

of them were very far from the truth.  Instead of wild fanatics I

found quiet, extremely intelligent, highly educated gentlemen,

speaking foreign languages with ease and elegance, and deeply

imbued with that Western culture which they were commonly supposed

to despise.  And this first impression was amply confirmed by

subsequent experience during several years of friendly intercourse.

They always showed themselves men of earnest character and strong

convictions, but they never said or did anything that could justify

the appellation of fanatics.  Like all philosophical theorists,

they often allowed their logic to blind them to facts, but their

reasonings were very plausible--so plausible, indeed, that, had I

been a Russian they would have almost persuaded me to be a

Slavophil, at least during the time they were talking to me.



To understand their doctrine we must know something of its origin

and development.



The origin of the Slavophil sentiment, which must not be confounded

with the Slavophil doctrine, is to be sought in the latter half of

the seventeenth century, when the Tsars of Muscovy were introducing

innovations in Church and State.  These innovations were profoundly

displeasing to the people.  A large portion of the lower classes,

as I have related in a previous chapter, sought refuge in Old

Ritualism or sectarianism, and imagined that Tsar Peter, who called

himself by the heretical title of "Imperator," was an emanation of

the Evil Principle.  The nobles did not go quite so far.  They

remained members of the official Church, and restricted themselves

to hinting that Peter was the son, not of Satan, but of a German

surgeon--a lineage which, according to the conceptions of the time,

was a little less objectionable; but most of them were very hostile

to the changes, and complained bitterly of the new burdens which

these changes entailed.  Under Peter's immediate successors, when

not only the principles of administration but also many of the

administrators were German, this hostility greatly increased.



So long as the innovations appeared only in the official activity

of the Government, the patriotic, conservative spirit was obliged

to keep silence; but when the foreign influence spread to the

social life of the Court aristocracy, the opposition began to find

a literary expression.  In the time of Catherine II., when

Gallomania was at its height in Court circles, comedies and

satirical journals ridiculed those who, "blinded by some externally

brilliant gifts of foreigners, not only prefer foreign countries to

their native land, but even despise their fellow-countrymen, and

think that a Russian ought to borrow all--even personal character.

As if nature arranging all things with such wisdom, and bestowing

on all regions the gifts and customs which are appropriate to the

climate, had been so unjust as to refuse to the Russians a

character of their own!  As if she condemned them to wander over

all regions, and to adopt by bits the various customs of various

nations, in order to compose out of the mixture a new character

appropriate to no nation whatever!"  Numerous passages of this kind

might be quoted, attacking the "monkeyism" and "parrotism" of those

who indiscriminately adopted foreign manners and customs--those who





"Sauntered Europe round,

And gathered ev'ry vice in ev'ry ground."





Sometimes the terms and metaphors employed were more forcible than

refined.  One satirical journal, for instance, relates an amusing

story about certain little Russian pigs that went to foreign lands

to enlighten their understanding, and came back to their country

full-grown swine.  The national pride was wounded by the thought

that Russians could be called "clever apes who feed on foreign

intelligence," and many writers, stung by such reproaches, fell

into the opposite extreme, discovering unheard-of excellences in

the Russian mind and character, and vociferously decrying

everything foreign in order to place these imagined excellences in

a stronger light by contrast.  Even when they recognised that their

country was not quite so advanced in civilisation as certain other

nations, they congratulated themselves on the fact, and invented by

way of justification an ingenious theory, which was afterwards

developed by the Slavophils.  "The nations of the West," they said,

"began to live before us, and are consequently more advanced than

we are; but we have on that account no reason to envy them, for we

can profit by their errors, and avoid those deep-rooted evils from

which they are suffering.  He who has just been born is happier

than he who is dying."



Thus, we see, a patriotic reaction against the introduction of

foreign institutions and the inordinate admiration of foreign

culture already existed in Russia more than a century ago.  It did

not, however, take the form of a philosophical theory till a much

later period, when a similar movement was going on in various

countries of Western Europe.



After the overthrow of the great Napoleonic Empire a reaction

against cosmopolitanism took place and a romantic enthusiasm for

nationality spread over Europe like an epidemic.  Blind,

enthusiastic patriotism became the fashionable sentiment of the

time.  Each nation took to admiring itself complacently, to

praising its own character and achievements, and to idealising its

historical and mythical past.  National peculiarities, "local

colour," ancient customs, traditional superstitions--in short,

everything that a nation believed to be specially and exclusively

its own, now raised an enthusiasm similar to that which had been

formerly excited by cosmopolitan conceptions founded on the law of

nature.  The movement produced good and evil results.  In serious

minds it led to a deep and conscientious study of history, national

literature, popular mythology, and the like; whilst in frivolous,

inflammable spirits it gave birth merely to a torrent of patriotic

fervour and rhetorical exaggeration.  The Slavophils were the

Russian representatives of this nationalistic reaction, and

displayed both its serious and its frivolous elements.



Among the most important products of this movement in Germany was

the Hegelian theory of universal history.  According to Hegel's

views, which were generally accepted by those who occupied

themselves with philosophical questions, universal history was

described as "Progress in the consciousness of freedom"

(Fortschritt im Bewusstsein der Freiheit).  In each period of the

world's history, it was explained, some one nation or race had been

intrusted with the high mission of enabling the Absolute Reason, or

Weltgeist, to express itself in objective existence, while the

other nations and races had for the time no metaphysical

justification for their existence, and no higher duty than to

imitate slavishly the favoured rival in which the Weltgeist had for

the moment chosen to incorporate itself.  The incarnation had taken

place first in the Eastern Monarchies, then in Greece, next in

Rome, and lastly in the Germanic race; and it was generally

assumed, if not openly asserted, that this mystical Metempsychosis

of the Absolute was now at an end.  The cycle of existence was

complete.  In the Germanic peoples the Weltgeist had found its

highest and final expression.



Russians in general knew nothing about German philosophy, and were

consequently not in any way affected by these ideas, but there was

in Moscow a small group of young men who ardently studied German

literature and metaphysics, and they were much shocked by Hegel's

views.  Ever since the brilliant reign of Catherine II., who had

defeated the Turks and had dreamed of resuscitating the Byzantine

Empire, and especially since the memorable events of 1812-15, when

Alexander I. appeared as the liberator of enthralled Europe and the

arbiter of her destinies, Russians were firmly convinced that their

country was destined to play a most important part in human

history.  Already the great Russian historian Karamzin had declared

that henceforth Clio must be silent or accord to Russia a prominent

place in the history of the nations.  Now, by the Hegelian theory,

the whole of the Slav race was left out in the cold, with no high

mission, with no new truths to divulge, with nothing better to do,

in fact, than to imitate the Germans.



The patriotic philosophers of Moscow could not, of course, adopt

this view.  Whilst accepting the fundamental principles, they

declared the theory to be incomplete.  The incompleteness lay in

the assumption that humanity had already entered on the final

stages of its development.  The Teutonic nations were perhaps for

the moment the leaders in the march of civilisation, but there was

no reason to suppose that they would always retain that privileged

position.  On the contrary, there were already symptoms that their

ascendency was drawing to a close.  "Western Europe," it was said,

"presents a strange, saddening spectacle.  Opinion struggles

against opinion, power against power, throne against throne.

Science, Art, and Religion, the three chief motors of social life,

have lost their force.  We venture to make an assertion which to

many at present may seem strange, but which will be in a few years

only too evident: Western Europe is on the highroad to ruin!  We

Russians, on the contrary, are young and fresh, and have taken no

part in the crimes of Europe.  We have a great mission to fulfil.

Our name is already inscribed on the tablets of victory, and now we

have to inscribe our spirit in the history of the human mind.  A

higher kind of victory--the victory of Science, Art and Faith--

awaits us on the ruins of tottering Europe!"*





* These words were written by Prince Odoefski.





This conclusion was supported by arguments drawn from history--or,

at least, what was believed to be history.  The European world was

represented as being composed of two hemispheres--the Eastern or

Graeco-Slavonic on the one hand, and the Western, or Roman Catholic

and Protestant, on the other.  These two hemispheres, it was said,

are distinguished from each other by many fundamental

characteristics.  In both of them Christianity formed originally

the basis of civilisation, but in the West it became distorted and

gave a false direction to the intellectual development.  By placing

the logical reason of the learned above the conscience of the whole

Church, Roman Catholicism produced Protestantism, which proclaimed

the right of private judgment and consequently became split up into

innumerable sects.  The dry, logical spirit which was thus fostered

created a purely intellectual, one-sided philosophy, which must end

in pure scepticism, by blinding men to those great truths which lie

above the sphere of reasoning and logic.  The Graeco-Slavonic

world, on the contrary, having accepted Christianity not from Rome,

but from Byzantium, received pure orthodoxy and true enlightenment,

and was thus saved alike from Papal tyranny and from Protestant

free-thinking.  Hence the Eastern Christians have preserved

faithfully not only the ancient dogmas, but also the ancient spirit

of Christianity--that spirit of pious humility, resignation, and

brotherly love which Christ taught by precept and example.  If they

have not yet a philosophy, they will create one, and it will far

surpass all previous systems; for in the writings of the Greek

Fathers are to be found the germs of a broader, a deeper, and a

truer philosophy than the dry, meagre rationalism of the West--a

philosophy founded not on the logical faculty alone, but on the

broader basis of human nature as a whole.



The fundamental characteristics of the Graeco-Slavonic world--so

runs the Slavophil theory--have been displayed in the history of

Russia.  Throughout Western Christendom the principal of individual

judgment and reckless individual egotism have exhausted the social

forces and brought society to the verge of incurable anarchy and

inevitable dissolution, whereas the social and political history of

Russia has been harmonious and peaceful.  It presents no struggles

between the different social classes, and no conflicts between

Church and State.  All the factors have worked in unison, and the

development has been guided by the spirit of pure orthodoxy.  But

in this harmonious picture there is one big, ugly black spot--

Peter, falsely styled "the Great," and his so-called reforms.

Instead of following the wise policy of his ancestors, Peter

rejected the national traditions and principles, and applied to his

country, which belonged to the Eastern world, the principles of

Western civilisation.  His reforms, conceived in a foreign spirit,

and elaborated by men who did not possess the national instincts,

were forced upon the nation against its will, and the result was

precisely what might have been expected.  The "broad Slavonic

nature" could not be controlled by institutions which had been

invented by narrow-minded, pedantic German bureaucrats, and, like

another Samson, it pulled down the building in which foreign

legislators sought to confine it.  The attempt to introduce foreign

culture had a still worse effect.  The upper classes, charmed and

dazzled by the glare and glitter of Western science, threw

themselves impulsively on the newly found treasures, and thereby

condemned themselves to moral slavery and intellectual sterility.

Fortunately--and herein lay one of the fundamental principles of

the Slavophil doctrine--the imported civilisation had not at all

infected the common people.  Through all the changes which the

administration and the Noblesse underwent the peasantry preserved

religiously in their hearts "the living legacy of antiquity," the

essence of Russian nationality, "a clear spring welling up living

waters, hidden and unknown, but powerful."*  To recover this lost

legacy by studying the character, customs, and institutions of the

peasantry, to lead the educated classes back to the path from which

they had strayed, and to re-establish that intellectual and moral

unity which had been disturbed by the foreign importations--such

was the task which the Slavophils proposed to themselves.





* This was one of the favourite themes of Khomiakof, the Slavophil

poet and theologian.





Deeply imbued with that romantic spirit which distorted all the

intellectual activity of the time, the Slavophils often indulged in

the wildest exaggerations, condemning everything foreign and

praising everything Russian.  When in this mood they saw in the

history of the West nothing but violence, slavery, and egotism, and

in that of their own country free-will, liberty, and peace.  The

fact that Russia did not possess free political institutions was

adduced as a precious fruit of that spirit of Christian resignation

and self-sacrifice which places the Russian at such an immeasurable

height above the proud, selfish European; and because Russia

possessed few of the comforts and conveniences of common life, the

West was accused of having made comfort its God!  We need not,

however, dwell on these puerilities, which only gained for their

authors the reputation of being ignorant, narrow-minded men, imbued

with a hatred of enlightenment and desirous of leading their

country back to its primitive barbarism.  What the Slavophils

really condemned, at least in their calmer moments, was not

European culture, but the uncritical, indiscriminate adoption of it

by their countrymen.  Their tirades against foreign culture must

appear excusable when we remember that many Russians of the upper

ranks could speak and write French more correctly than their native

language, and that even the great national poet Pushkin was not

ashamed to confess--what was not true, and a mere piece of

affectation--that "the language of Europe" was more familiar to him

than his mother-tongue!



The Slavophil doctrine, though it made a great noise in the world,

never found many adherents.  The society of St. Petersburg regarded

it as one of those harmless provincial eccentricities which are

always to be found in Moscow.  In the modern capital, with its

foreign name, its streets and squares on the European model, its

palaces and churches in the Renaissance style, and its passionate

love of everything French, any attempt to resuscitate the old

Boyaric times would have been eminently ridiculous.  Indeed,

hostility to St. Petersburg and to "the Petersburg period of

Russian history" is one of the characteristic traits of genuine

Slavophilism.  In Moscow the doctrine found a more appropriate

home.  There the ancient churches, with the tombs of Grand Princes

and holy martyrs, the palace in which the Tsars of Muscovy had

lived, the Kremlin which had resisted--not always successfully--the

attacks of savage Tartars and heretical Poles, the venerable Icons

that had many a time protected the people from danger, the block of

masonry from which, on solemn occasions, the Tsar and the Patriarch

had addressed the assembled multitude--these, and a hundred other

monuments sanctified by tradition, have kept alive in the popular

memory some vague remembrance of the olden time, and are still

capable of awakening antiquarian patriotism.



The inhabitants, too, have preserved something of the old Muscovite

character.  Whilst successive sovereigns have been striving to make

the country a progressive European empire, Moscow has remained the

home of passive conservatism and an asylum for the discontented,

especially for the disappointed aspirants to Imperial favour.

Abandoned by the modern Emperors, she can glory in her ancient

Tsars.  But even the Muscovites were not prepared to accept the

Slavophil doctrine in the extreme form which it assumed, and were

not a little perplexed by the eccentricities of those who professed

it.  Plain, sensible people, though they might be proud of being

citizens of the ancient capital, and might thoroughly enjoy a joke

at the expense of St. Petersburg, could not understand a little

coterie of enthusiasts who sought neither official rank nor

decorations, who slighted many of the conventionalities of the

higher classes to which by birth and education they belonged, who

loved to fraternise with the common people, and who occasionally

dressed in the national costume which had been discarded by the

nobles since the time of Peter the Great.



The Slavophils thus remained merely a small literary party, which

probably did not count more than a dozen members, but their

influence was out of all proportion to their numbers.  They

preached successfully the doctrine that the historical development

of Russia has been peculiar, that her present social and political

organisation is radically different from that of the countries of

Western Europe, and that consequently the social and political

evils from which she suffers are not to be cured by the remedies

which have proved efficacious in France and Germany.  These truths,

which now appear commonplace, were formerly by no means generally

recognised, and the Slavophils deserve credit for directing

attention to them.  Besides this, they helped to awaken in the

upper classes a lively sympathy with the poor, oppressed, and

despised peasantry.  So long as the Emperor Nicholas lived they had

to confine themselves to a purely literary activity; but during the

great reforms initiated by his successor, Alexander II., they

descended into the arena of practical politics, and played a most

useful and honourable part in the emancipation of the serfs.  In

the new local self-government, too--the Zemstvo and the new

municipal institutions--they laboured energetically and to good

purpose.  Of all this I shall have occasion to speak more fully in

future chapters.



But what of their Panslavist aspirations?  By their theory they

were constrained to pay attention to the Slav race as a whole, but

they were more Russian than Slav, and more Muscovite than Russian.

The Panslavist element consequently occupied a secondary place in

Slavophil doctrine.  Though they did much to stimulate popular

sympathy with the Southern Slavs, and always cherished the hope

that the Serbs, Bulgarians, and cognate Slav nationalities would

one day throw off the bondage of the German and the Turk, they

never proposed any elaborate project for the solution of the

Eastern Question.  So far as I was able to gather from their

conversation, they seemed to favour the idea of a grand Slavonic

Confederation, in which the hegemony would, of course, belong to

Russia.  In ordinary times the only steps which they took for the

realisation of this idea consisted in contributing money for

schools and churches among the Slav population of Austria and

Turkey, and in educating young Bulgarians in Russia.  During the

Cretan insurrection they sympathised warmly with the insurgents as

co-religionists, but afterwards--especially during the crisis of

the Eastern Question which culminated in the Treaty of San Stefano

and the Congress of Berlin (1878)--their Hellenic sympathies

cooled, because the Greeks showed that they had political

aspirations inconsistent with the designs of Russia, and that they

were likely to be the rivals rather than the allies of the Slavs in

the struggle for the Sick Man's inheritance.



Since the time when I was living in Moscow in constant intercourse

with the leading Slavophils more than a quarter of a century has

passed, and of those with whom I spent so many pleasant evenings

discussing the past history and future destinies of the Slav races,

not one remains alive.  All the great prophets of the old Slavophil

doctrine--Jun Samarin, Prince Tcherkaski, Ivan Aksakof, Kosheleff--

have departed without leaving behind them any genuine disciples.

The present generation of Muscovite frondeurs, who continue to rail

against Western Europe and the pedantic officialism of St.

Petersburg, are of a more modern and less academic type.  Their

philippics are directed not against Peter the Great and his

reforms, but rather against recent Ministers of Foreign Affairs who

are thought to have shown themselves too subservient to foreign

Powers, and against M. Witte, the late Minister of Finance, who is

accused of favouring the introduction of foreign capital and

enterprise, and of sacrificing to unhealthy industrial development

the interests of the agricultural classes.  These laments and

diatribes are allowed free expression in private conversation and

in the Press, but they do not influence very deeply the policy of

the Government or the natural course of events; for the Ministry of

Foreign Affairs continues to cultivate friendly relations with the

Cabinets of the West, and Moscow is rapidly becoming, by the force

of economic conditions, the great industrial and commercial centre

of the Empire.



The administrative and bureaucratic centre--if anything on the

frontier of a country can be called its centre--has long been, and

is likely to remain, Peter's stately city at the mouth of the Neva,

to which I now invite the reader to accompany me.


