





CHAPTER IX



HOW THE COMMUNE HAS BEEN PRESERVED, AND WHAT IT IS TO EFFECT IN THE

FUTURE





Sweeping Reforms after the Crimean War--Protest Against the Laissez

Faire Principle--Fear of the Proletariat--English and Russian

Methods of Legislation Contrasted--Sanguine Expectations--Evil

Consequences of the Communal System--The Commune of the Future--

Proletariat of the Towns--The Present State of Things Merely

Temporary.





The reader is probably aware that immediately after the Crimean War

Russia was subjected to a series of sweeping reforms, including the

emancipation of the serfs and the creation of a new system of local

self-government, and he may naturally wonder how it came to pass

that a curious, primitive institution like the rural Commune

succeeded in weathering the bureaucratic hurricane.  This strange

phenomena I now proceed to explain, partly because the subject is

in itself interesting, and partly because I hope thereby to throw

some light on the peculiar intellectual condition of the Russian

educated classes.



When it became evident, in 1857, that the serfs were about to be

emancipated, it was at first pretty generally supposed that the

rural Commune would be entirely abolished, or at least radically

modified.  At that time many Russians were enthusiastic,

indiscriminate admirers of English institutions, and believed, in

common with the orthodox school of political economists, that

England had acquired her commercial and industrial superiority by

adopting the principle of individual liberty and unrestricted

competition, or, as French writers term it, the "laissez faire"

principle.  This principle is plainly inconsistent with the rural

Commune, which compels the peasantry to possess land, prevents an

enterprising peasant from acquiring the land of his less

enterprising neighbours, and places very considerable restrictions

on the freedom of action of the individual members.  Accordingly it

was assumed that the rural Commune, being inconsistent with the

modern spirit of progress, would find no place in the new regime of

liberty which was about to be inaugurated.



No sooner had these ideas been announced in the Press than they

called forth strenuous protests.  In the crowd of protesters were

two well-defined groups.  On the one hand there were the so-called

Slavophils, a small band of patriotic, highly educated Moscovites,

who were strongly disposed to admire everything specifically

Russian, and who habitually refused to bow the knee to the wisdom

of Western Europe.  These gentlemen, in a special organ which they

had recently founded, pointed out to their countrymen that the

Commune was a venerable and peculiarly Russian institution, which

had mitigated in the past the baneful influence of serfage, and

would certainly in the future confer inestimable benefits on the

emancipated peasantry.  The other group was animated by a very

different spirit.  They had no sympathy with national

peculiarities, and no reverence for hoary antiquity.  That the

Commune was specifically Russian or Slavonic, and a remnant of

primitive times, was in their eyes anything but a recommendation in

its favour.  Cosmopolitan in their tendencies, and absolutely free

from all archaeological sentimentality, they regarded the

institution from the purely utilitarian point of view.  They

agreed, however, with the Slavophils in thinking that its

preservation would have a beneficial influence on the material and

moral welfare of the peasantry.



For the sake of convenience it is necessary to designate this

latter group by some definite name, but I confess I have some

difficulty in making a choice.  I do not wish to call these

gentlemen Socialists, because many people habitually and

involuntarily attach a stigma to the word, and believe that all to

whom the term is applied must be first-cousins to the petroleuses.

To avoid misconceptions of this kind, it will be well to designate

them simply by the organ which most ably represented their views,

and to call them the adherents of The Contemporary.



The Slavophils and the adherents of The Contemporary, though

differing widely from each other in many respects, had the same

immediate object in view, and accordingly worked together.  With

great ingenuity they contended that the Communal system of land

tenure had much greater advantages, and was attended with much

fewer inconveniences, than people generally supposed.  But they did

not confine themselves to these immediate practical advantages,

which had very little interest for the general reader.  The writers

in The Contemporary explained that the importance of the rural

Commune lies, not in its actual condition, but in its capabilities

of development, and they drew, with prophetic eye, most attractive

pictures of the happy rural Commune of the future.  Let me give

here, as an illustration, one of these prophetic descriptions:



"Thanks to the spread of primary and technical education the

peasants have become well acquainted with the science of

agriculture, and are always ready to undertake in common the

necessary improvements.  They no longer exhaust the soil by

exporting the grain, but sell merely certain technical products

containing no mineral ingredients.  For this purpose the Communes

possess distilleries, starch-works, and the like, and the soil

thereby retains its original fertility.  The scarcity induced by

the natural increase of the population is counteracted by improved

methods of cultivation.  If the Chinese, who know nothing of

natural science, have succeeded by purely empirical methods in

perfecting agriculture to such an extent that a whole family can

support itself on a few square yards of land, what may not the

European do with the help of chemistry, botanical physiology, and

the other natural sciences?"



Coming back from the possibilities of the future to the actualities

of the present, these ingenious and eloquent writers pointed out

that in the rural Commune, Russia possessed a sure preventive

against the greatest evil of West-European social organisation, the

Proletariat.  Here the Slavophils could strike in with their

favourite refrain about the rotten social condition of Western

Europe; and their temporary allies, though they habitually scoffed

at the Slavophil jeremiads, had no reason for the moment to

contradict them.  Very soon the Proletariat became, for the

educated classes, a species of bugbear, and the reading public were

converted to the doctrine that the Communal institutions should be

preserved as a means of excluding the monster from Russia.



This fear of what is vaguely termed the Proletariat is still

frequently to be met with in Russia, and I have often taken pains

to discover precisely what is meant by the term.  I cannot,

however, say that my efforts have been completely successful.  The

monster seems to be as vague and shadowy as the awful forms which

Milton placed at the gate of the infernal regions.  At one moment

he seems to be simply our old enemy Pauperism, but when we approach

a little nearer we find that he expands to colossal dimensions, so

as to include all who do not possess inalienable landed property.

In short, he turns out to be, on examination, as vague and

undefinable as a good bugbear ought to be; and this vagueness

contributed probably not a little to his success.



The influence which the idea of the Proletariat exercised on the

public mind and on the legislation at the time of the Emancipation

is a very notable fact, and well worthy of attention, because it

helps to illustrate a point of difference between Russians and

Englishmen.



Englishmen are, as a rule, too much occupied with the multifarious

concerns of the present to look much ahead into the distant future.

We profess, indeed, to regard with horror the maxim, Apres nous le

deluge! and we should probably annihilate with our virtuous

indignation any one who should boldly profess the principle.  And

yet we often act almost as if we were really partisans of that

heartless creed.  When called upon to consider the interests of the

future generations, we declared that "sufficient unto the day is

the evil thereof," and stigmatise as visionaries and dreamers all

who seek to withdraw our attention from the present.  A modern

Cassandra who confidently predicts the near exhaustion of our coal-

fields, or graphically describes a crushing national disaster that

must some day overtake us, may attract some public attention; but

when we learn that the misfortune is not to take place in our time,

we placidly remark that future generations must take care of

themselves, and that we cannot reasonably be expected to bear their

burdens.  When we are obliged to legislate, we proceed in a

cautious, tentative way, and are quite satisfied with any homely,

simple remedies that common sense and experience may suggest,

without taking the trouble to inquire whether the remedy adopted is

in accordance with scientific theories.  In short, there is a

certain truth in those "famous prophetick pictures" spoken of by

Stillingfleet, which "represent the fate of England by a mole, a

creature blind and busy, continually working under ground."



In Russia we find the opposite extreme.  There reformers have been

trained, not in the arena of practical politics, but in the school

of political speculation.  As soon, therefore, as they begin to

examine any simple matter with a view to legislation, it at once

becomes a "question," and flies up into the region of political and

social science.  Whilst we have been groping along an unexplored

path, the Russians have--at least in recent times--been constantly

mapping out, with the help of foreign experience, the country that

lay before them, and advancing with gigantic strides according to

the newest political theories.  Men trained in this way cannot rest

satisfied with homely remedies which merely alleviate the evils of

the moment.  They wish to "tear up evil by the roots," and to

legislate for future generations as well as for themselves.



This tendency was peculiarly strong at the time of the

Emancipation.  The educated classes were profoundly convinced that

the system of Nicholas I. had been a mistake, and that a new and

brighter era was about to dawn upon the country.  Everything had to

be reformed.  The whole social and political edifice had to be

reconstructed on entirely new principles.



Let us imagine the position of a man who, having no practical

acquaintance with building, suddenly finds himself called upon to

construct a large house, containing all the newest appliances for

convenience and comfort.  What will his first step be?  Probably he

will proceed at once to study the latest authorities on

architecture and construction, and when he has mastered the general

principles he will come down gradually to the details.  This is

precisely what the Russians did when they found themselves called

upon to reconstruct the political and social edifice.  They eagerly

consulted the most recent English, French, and German writers on

social and political science, and here it was that they made the

acquaintance of the Proletariat.



People who read books of travel without ever leaving their own

country are very apt to acquire exaggerated notions regarding the

hardships and dangers of uncivilised life.  They read about savage

tribes, daring robbers, ferocious wild beasts, poisonous snakes,

deadly fevers, and the like; and they cannot but wonder how a human

being can exist for a week among such dangers.  But if they happen

thereafter to visit the countries described, they discover to their

surprise that, though the descriptions may not have been

exaggerated, life under such conditions is much easier than they

supposed.  Now the Russians who read about the Proletariat were

very much like the people who remain at home and devour books of

travel.  They gained exaggerated notions, and learned to fear the

Proletariat much more than we do, who habitually live in the midst

of it.  Of course it is quite possible that their view of the

subject is truer than ours, and that we may some day, like the

people who live tranquilly on the slopes of a volcano, be rudely

awakened from our fancied security.  But this is an entirely

different question.  I am at present not endeavouring to justify

our habitual callousness with regard to social dangers, but simply

seeking to explain why the Russians, who have little or no

practical acquaintance with pauperism, should have taken such

elaborate precautions against it.



But how can the preservation of the Communal institutions lead to

this "consummation devoutly to be wished," and how far are the

precautions likely to be successful?



Those who have studied the mysteries of social science have

generally come to the conclusion that the Proletariat has been

formed chiefly by the expropriation of the peasantry or small land-

holders, and that its formation might be prevented, or at least

retarded, by any system of legislation which would secure the

possession of land for the peasants and prevent them from being

uprooted from the soil.  Now it must be admitted that the Russian

Communal system is admirably adapted for this purpose.  About one-

half of the arable land has been reserved for the peasantry, and

cannot be encroached on by the great landowners or the capitalists,

and every adult peasant, roughly speaking, has a right to a share

of this land.  When I have said that the peasantry compose about

five-sixths of the population, and that it is extremely difficult

for a peasant to sever his connection with the rural Commune, it

will be at once evident that, if the theories of social

philosophers are correct, and if the sanguine expectations

entertained in many quarters regarding the permanence of the

present Communal institutions are destined to be realised, there is

little or no danger of a numerous Proletariat being formed, and the

Russians are justified in maintaining, as they often do, that they

have successfully solved one of the most important and most

difficult of social problems.



But is there any reasonable chance of these sanguine expectations

being realised?



This is, doubtless, a most complicated and difficult question, but

it cannot be shirked.  However sceptical we may be with regard to

social panaceas of all sorts, we cannot dismiss with a few

hackneyed phrases a gigantic experiment in social science involving

the material and moral welfare of many millions of human beings.

On the other hand, I do not wish to exhaust the reader's patience

by a long series of multifarious details and conflicting arguments.

What I propose to do, therefore, is to state in a few words the

conclusions at which I have arrived, after a careful study of the

question in all its bearings, and to indicate in a general way how

I have arrived at these conclusions.



If Russia were content to remain a purely agricultural country of

the Sleepy Hollow type, and if her Government were to devote all

its energies to maintaining economic and social stagnation, the

rural Commune might perhaps prevent the formation of a large

Proletariat in the future, as it has tended to prevent it for

centuries in the past.  The periodical redistributions of the

Communal land would secure to every family a portion of the soil,

and when the population became too dense, the evils arising from

inordinate subdivision of the land might be obviated by a carefully

regulated system of emigration to the outlying, thinly populated

provinces.  All this sounds very well in theory, but experience is

proving that it cannot be carried out in practice.  In Russia, as

in Western Europe, the struggle for life, even among the

conservative agricultural classes, is becoming yearly more and more

intense, and is producing both the desire and the necessity for

greater freedom of individual character and effort, so that each

man may make his way in the world according to the amount of his

intelligence, energy, spirit of enterprise, and tenacity of

purpose.  Whatever institutions tend to fetter the individual and

maintain a dead level of mediocrity have little chance of

subsisting for any great length of time, and it must be admitted

that among such institutions the rural Commune in its present form

occupies a prominent place.  All its members must possess, in

principle if not always in practice, an equal share of the soil and

must practice the same methods of agriculture, and when a certain

inequality has been created by individual effort it is in great

measure wiped out by a redistribution of the Communal land.



Now, I am well aware that in practice the injustice and

inconveniences of the system, being always tempered and corrected

by ingenious compromises suggested by long experience, are not

nearly so great as the mere theorist might naturally suppose; but

they are, I believe, quite great enough to prevent the permanent

maintenance of the institution, and already there are ominous

indications of the coming change, as I shall explain more fully

when I come to deal with the consequences of serf-emancipation.  On

the other hand there is no danger of a sudden, general abolition of

the old system.  Though the law now permits the transition from

Communal to personal hereditary tenure, even the progressive

enterprising peasants are slow to avail themselves of the

permission; and the reason I once heard given for this conservative

tendency is worth recording.  A well-to-do peasant who had been in

the habit of manuring his land better than his neighbours, and who

was, consequently, a loser by the existing system, said to me: "Of

course I want to keep the allotment I have got.  But if the land is

never again to be divided my grandchildren may be beggars.  We must

not sin against those who are to come after us."  This unexpected

reply gave me food for reflection.  Surely those muzhiks who are so

often accused of being brutally indifferent to moral obligations

must have peculiar deep-rooted moral conceptions of their own which

exercise a great influence on their daily life.  A man who

hesitates to sin against his grandchildren still unborn, though his

conceptions of the meum and the tuum in the present may be

occasionally a little confused, must possess somewhere deep down in

his nature a secret fund of moral feeling of a very respectable

kind.  Even among the educated classes in Russia the way of looking

at these matters is very different from ours.  We should naturally

feel inclined to applaud, encourage, and assist the peasants who

show energy and initiative, and who try to rise above their

fellows.  To the Russian this seems at once inexpedient and

immoral.  The success of the few, he explains, is always obtained

at the expense of the many, and generally by means which the severe

moralist cannot approve of.  The rich peasants, for example, have

gained their fortune and influence by demoralising and exploiting

their weaker brethren, by committing all manner of illegalities,

and by bribing the local authorities.  Hence they are styled

Miroyedy (Commune-devourers) or Kulaki (fists), or something

equally uncomplimentary.  Once this view is adopted, it follows

logically that the Communal institutions, in so far as they form a

barrier to the activity of such persons, ought to be carefully

preserved.  This idea underlies nearly all the arguments in favour

of the Commune, and explains why they are so popular.  Russians of

all classes have, in fact, a leaning towards socialistic notions,

and very little sympathy with our belief in individual initiative

and unrestricted competition.



Even if it be admitted that the Commune may effectually prevent the

formation of an agricultural Proletariat, the question is thereby

only half answered.  Russia aspires to become a great industrial

and commercial country, and accordingly her town population is

rapidly augmenting.  We have still to consider, then, how the

Commune affects the Proletariat of the towns.  In Western Europe

the great centres of industry have uprooted from the soil and

collected in the towns a great part of the rural population.  Those

who yielded to this attractive influence severed all connection

with their native villages, became unfit for field labour, and were

transformed into artisans or factory-workers.  In Russia this

transformation could not easily take place.  The peasant might work

during the greater part of his life in the towns, but he did not

thereby sever his connection with his native village.  He remained,

whether he desired it or not, a member of the Commune, possessing a

share of the Communal land, and liable for a share of the Communal

burdens.  During his residence in the town his wife and family

remained at home, and thither he himself sooner or later returned.

In this way a class of hybrids--half-peasants, half-artisans--has

been created, and the formation of a town Proletariat has been

greatly retarded.



The existence of this hybrid class is commonly cited as a

beneficent result of the Communal institutions.  The artisans and

factory labourers, it is said, have thus always a home to which

they can retire when thrown out of work or overtaken by old age,

and their children are brought up in the country, instead of being

reared among the debilitating influences of overcrowded cities.

Every common labourer has, in short, by this ingenious contrivance,

some small capital and a country residence.



In the present transitional state of Russian society this peculiar

arrangement is at once natural and convenient, but amidst its

advantages it has many serious defects.  The unnatural separation

of the artisan from his wife and family leads to very undesirable

results, well known to all who are familiar with the details of

peasant life in the northern provinces.  And whatever its

advantages and defects may be, it cannot be permanently retained.

At the present time native industry is still in its infancy.

Protected by the tariff from foreign competition, and too few in

number to produce a strong competition among themselves, the

existing factories can give to their owners a large revenue without

any strenuous exertion.  Manufacturers can therefore allow

themselves many little liberties, which would be quite inadmissible

if the price of manufactured goods were lowered by brisk

competition.  Ask a Lancashire manufacturer if he could allow a

large portion of his workers to go yearly to Cornwall or Caithness

to mow a field of hay or reap a few acres of wheat or oats!  And if

Russia is to make great industrial progress, the manufacturers of

Moscow, Lodz, Ivanovo, and Shui will some day be as hard pressed as

are those of Bradford and Manchester.  The invariable tendency of

modern industry, and the secret of its progress, is the ever-

increasing division of labour; and how can this principle be

applied if the artisans insist on remaining agriculturists?



The interests of agriculture, too, are opposed to the old system.

Agriculture cannot be expected to make progress, or even to be

tolerably productive, if it is left in great measure to women and

children.  At present it is not desirable that the link which binds

the factory-worker or artisan with the village should be at once

severed, for in the neighbourhood of the large factories there is

often no proper accommodation for the families of the workers, and

agriculture, as at present practised, can be carried on

successfully though the Head of the Household happens to be absent.

But the system must be regarded as simply temporary, and the

disruption of large families--a phenomenon of which I have already

spoken--renders its application more and more difficult.
