





CHAPTER XXXIII



THE NEW LAW COURTS





Judicial Procedure in the Olden Times--Defects and Abuses--Radical

Reform--The New System--Justices of the Peace and Monthly Sessions--

The Regular Tribunals--Court of Revision--Modification of the

Original Plan--How Does the System Work?--Rapid Acclimatisation--

The Bench--The Jury--Acquittal of Criminals Who Confess Their

Crimes--Peasants, Merchants, and Nobles as Jurymen--Independence

and Political Significance of the New Courts.





After serf-emancipation and local self-government, the subject

which demanded most urgently the attention of reformers was the

judicial organisation, which had sunk to a depth of inefficiency

and corruption difficult to describe.



In early times the dispensation of justice in Russia, as in other

States of a primitive type, had a thoroughly popular character.

The State was still in its infancy, and the duty of defending the

person, the property, and the rights of individuals lay, of

necessity, chiefly on the individuals themselves.  Self-help formed

the basis of the judicial procedure, and the State merely assisted

the individual to protect his rights and to avenge himself on those

who voluntarily infringed them.



By the rapid development of the Autocratic Power all this was

changed.  Autocracy endeavoured to drive and regulate the social

machine by its own unaided force, and regarded with suspicion and

jealousy all spontaneous action in the people.  The dispensation of

justice was accordingly appropriated by the central authority,

absorbed into the Administration, and withdrawn from public

control.  Themis retired from the market-place, shut herself up in

a dark room from which the contending parties and the public gaze

were rigorously excluded, surrounded herself with secretaries and

scribes who put the rights and claims of the litigants into

whatever form they thought proper, weighed according to her own

judgment the arguments presented to her by her own servants, and

came forth from her seclusion merely to present a ready-made

decision or to punish the accused whom she considered guilty.



This change, though perhaps to some extent necessary, was attended

with very bad consequences.  Freed from the control of the

contending parties and of the public, the courts acted as

uncontrolled human nature generally does.  Injustice, extortion,

bribery, and corruption assumed gigantic proportions, and against

these evils the Government found no better remedy than a system of

complicated formalities and ingenious checks.  The judicial

functionaries were hedged in by a multitude of regulations, so

numerous and complicated that it seemed impossible for even the

most unjust judge to swerve from the path of uprightness.

Explicit, minute rules were laid down for investigating facts and

weighing evidence; every scrap of evidence and every legal ground

on which the decision was based were committed to writing; every

act in the complicated process of coming to a decision was made the

subject of a formal document, and duly entered in various

registers; every document and register had to be signed and

countersigned by various officials who were supposed to control

each other; every decision might be carried to a higher court and

made to pass a second time through the bureaucratic machine.  In a

word, the legislature introduced a system of formal written

procedure of the most complicated kind, in the belief that by this

means mistakes and dishonesty would be rendered impossible.



It may be reasonably doubted whether this system of judicial

administration can anywhere give satisfactory results.  It is

everywhere found by experience that in tribunals from which the

healthy atmosphere of publicity is excluded justice languishes, and

a great many ugly plants shoot up with wonderful vitality.  Languid

indifference, an indiscriminating spirit of routine, and unblushing

dishonesty invariably creep in through the little chinks and

crevices of the barrier raised against them, and no method of

hermetically sealing these chinks and crevices has yet been

invented.  The attempt to close them up by increasing the

formalities and multiplying the courts of appeal and revision

merely adds to the tediousness of the procedure, and withdraws the

whole process still more completely from public control.  At the

same time the absence of free discussion between the contending

parties renders the task of the judge enormously difficult.  If the

system is to succeed at all, it must provide a body of able,

intelligent, thoroughly-trained jurists, and must place them beyond

the reach of bribery and other forms of corruption.



In Russia neither of these conditions was fulfilled.  Instead of

endeavouring to create a body of well-trained jurists, the

Government went further and further in the direction of letting the

judges be chosen for a short period by popular election from among

men who had never received a juridical education, or a fair

education of any kind; whilst the place of judge was so poorly

paid, and stood so low in public estimation, that the temptations

to dishonesty were difficult to resist.



The practice of choosing the judges by popular election was an

attempt to restore to the courts something of their old popular

character; but it did not succeed, for very obvious reasons.

Popular election in a judicial organisation is useful only when the

courts are public and the procedure simple; on the contrary, it is

positively prejudicial when the procedure is in writing and

extremely complicated.  And so it proved in Russia.  The elected

judges, unprepared for their work, and liable to be changed at

short intervals, rarely acquired a knowledge of law or procedure.

They were for the most part poor, indolent landed proprietors, who

did little more than sign the decisions prepared for them by the

permanent officials.  Even when a judge happened to have some legal

knowledge he found small scope for its application, for he rarely,

if ever, examined personally the materials out of which a decision

was to be elaborated.  The whole of the preliminary work, which was

in reality the most important, was performed by minor officials

under the direction of the secretary of the court.  In criminal

cases, for instance, the secretary examined the written evidence--

all evidence was taken down in writing--extracted what he

considered the essential points, arranged them as he thought

proper, quoted the laws which ought in his opinion to be applied,

put all this into a report, and read the report to the judges.  Of

course the judges, if they had no personal interest in the

decision, accepted the secretary's view of the case.  If they did

not, all the preliminary work had to be done anew by themselves--a

task that few judges were able, and still fewer willing, to

perform.  Thus the decision lay virtually in the hands of the

secretary and the minor officials, and in general neither the

secretary nor the minor officials were fit persons to have such

power.  There is no need to detail here the ingenious expedients by

which they increased their meagre salaries, and how they generally

contrived to extract money from both parties.*  Suffice it to say

that in general the chancelleries of the courts were dens of

pettifogging rascality, and the habitual, unblushing bribery had a

negative as well as a positive effect.  If a person accused of some

crime had no money wherewith to grease the palm of the secretary he

might remain in prison for years without being brought to trial.  A

well-known Russian writer still living relates that when visiting a

prison in the province of Nizhni-Novgorod he found among the

inmates undergoing preliminary arrest two peasant women, who were

accused of setting fire to a hayrick to revenge themselves on a

landed proprietor, a crime for which the legal punishment was from

four to eight months' imprisonment.  One of them had a son of seven

years of age, and the other a son of twelve, both of whom had been

born in the prison, and had lived there ever since among the

criminals.  Such a long preliminary arrest caused no surprise or

indignation among those who heard of it, because it was quite a

common occurrence.  Every one knew that bribes were taken not only

by the secretary and his scribes, but also by the judges, who were

elected by the local Noblesse from its own ranks.





* Old book-catalogues sometimes mention a play bearing the

significant title, "The Unheard-of Wonder; or, The Honest

Secretary" (Neslykhannoe Dyelo ili Tchestny Sekretar).  I have

never seen this curious production, but I have no doubt that it

referred to the peculiarities of the old judicial procedure.





With regard to the scale of punishments, notwithstanding some

humanitarian principles in the legislation, they were very severe,

and corporal punishment played amongst them a disagreeably

prominent part.  Capital sentences were abolished as early as 1753-

54, but castigation with the knout, which often ended fatally,

continued until 1845, when it was replaced by flogging in the civil

administration, though retained for the military and for

insubordinate convicts.  For the non-privileged classes the knout

or the lash supplemented nearly all punishments of a criminal kind.

When a man was condemned, for example, to penal servitude, he

received publicly from thirty to one hundred lashes, and was then

branded on the forehead and cheeks with the letters K. A. T.--the

first three letters of katorzhnik (convict).  If he appealed he

received his lashes all the same, and if his appeal was rejected by

the Senate he received some more castigation for having troubled

unnecessarily the higher judicial authorities.  For the military

and insubordinate convicts there was a barbarous punishment called

Spitsruten, to the extent of 5,000 or 6,000 blows, which often

ended in the death of the unfortunate.



The use of torture in criminal investigations was formally

abolished in 1801, but if we may believe the testimony of a public

prosecutor, it was occasionally used in Moscow as late as 1850.



The defects and abuses of the old system were so flagrant that they

became known even to the Emperor Nicholas I., and caused him

momentary indignation, but he never attempted seriously to root

them out.  In 1844, for example, he heard of some gross abuses in a

tribunal not far from the Winter Palace, and ordered an

investigation.  Baron Korff, to whom the investigation was

entrusted, brought to light what he called "a yawning abyss of all

possible horrors, which have been accumulating for years," and his

Majesty, after reading the report, wrote upon it with his own hand:

"Unheard-of disgrace!  The carelessness of the authority

immediately concerned is incredible and unpardonable.  I feel

ashamed and sad that such disorder could exist almost under my eyes

and remain unknown to me."  Unfortunately the outburst of Imperial

indignation did not last long enough to produce any desirable

consequences.  The only result was that one member of the tribunal

was dismissed from the service, and the Governor-General of St.

Petersburg had to resign, but the latter subsequently received an

honorary reward, and the Emperor remarked that he was himself to

blame for having kept the Governor-General so long at his post.



When his Majesty's habitual optimism happened to be troubled by

incidents of this sort he probably consoled himself with

remembering that he had ordered some preparatory work, by which the

administration of justice might be improved, and this work was

being diligently carried out in the legislative section of his own

chancery by Count Bludof, one of the ablest Russian lawyers of his

time.  Unfortunately the existing state of things was not thereby

improved, because the preparatory work was not of the kind that was

wanted.  On the assumption that any evil which might exist could be

removed by improving the laws, Count Bludof devoted his efforts

almost entirely to codification.  In reality what was required was

to change radically the organisation of the courts and the

procedure, and above all to let in on their proceedings the

cleansing atmosphere of publicity.  This the Emperor Nicholas could

not understand, and if he had understood it he could not have

brought himself to adopt the appropriate remedies, because radical

reform and control of officials by public opinion were his two pet

bugbears.



Very different was his son and successor, Alexander II., in the

first years of his reign.  In his accession manifesto a prominent

place was given to his desire that justice and mercy should reign

in the courts of law.  Referring to these words in a later

manifesto, he explained his wishes more fully as "the desire to

establish in Russia expeditious, just, merciful, impartial courts

of justice for all our subjects; to raise the judicial authority;

to give it the proper independence, and in general to implant in

the people that respect for the law which ought to be the constant

guide of all and every one from the highest to the lowest."  These

were not mere vain words.  Peremptory orders had been given that

the great work should be undertaken without delay, and when the

Emancipation question was being discussed in the Provincial

Committees, the Council of State examined the question of judicial

reform "from the historical, the theoretical, and the practical

point of view," and came to the conclusion that the existing

organisation must be completely transformed.



The commission appointed to consider this important matter filed a

lengthy indictment against the existing system, and pointed out no

less than twenty-five radical defects.  To remove these it proposed

that the judicial organisation should be completely separated from

all other branches of the Administration; that the most ample

publicity, with trial by jury in criminal cases, should be

introduced into the tribunals; that Justice of Peace Courts should

be created for petty affairs; and that the procedure in the

ordinary courts should be greatly simplified.



These fundamental principles were published by Imperial command on

September 29th, 1862--a year and a half after the publication of

the Emancipation Manifesto--and on November 20th, 1864, the new

legislation founded on these principles received the Imperial

sanction.



Like most institutions erected on a tabula rasa, the new system is

at once simple and symmetrical.  As a whole, the architecture of

the edifice is decidedly French, but here and there we may detect

unmistakable symptoms of English influence.  It is not, however, a

servile copy of any older edifice; and it may be fairly said that,

though every individual part has been fashioned according to a

foreign model, the whole has a certain originality.



The lower part of the building in its original form was composed of

two great sections, distinct from, and independent of, each other--

on the one hand the Justice of Peace Courts, and on the other the

Regular Tribunals.  Both sections contained an Ordinary Court and a

Court of Appeal.  The upper part of the building, covering equally

both sections, was the Senate as Supreme Court of Revision (Cour de

Cassation).



The distinctive character of the two independent sections may be

detected at a glance.  The function of the Justice of Peace Courts

is to decide petty cases that involve no abstruse legal principles,

and to settle, if possible by conciliation, those petty conflicts

and disputes which arise naturally in the relations of everyday

life; the function of the Regular Tribunals is to take cognisance

of those graver affairs in which the fortune or honour of

individuals or families is more or less implicated, or in which the

public tranquillity is seriously endangered.  The two kinds of

courts were organised in accordance with these intended functions.

In the former the procedure is simple and conciliatory, the

jurisdiction is confined to cases of little importance, and the

judges were at first chosen by popular election, generally from

among the local inhabitants.  In the latter there is more of "the

pomp and majesty of the law."  The procedure is more strict and

formal, the jurisdiction is unlimited with regard to the importance

of the cases, and the judges are trained jurists nominated by the

Emperor.



The Justice of Peace Courts received jurisdiction over all

obligations and civil injuries in which the sum at stake was not

more than 500 roubles--about 50 pounds--and all criminal affairs in

which the legal punishment did not exceed 300 roubles--about 30

pounds--or one year of punishment.  When any one had a complaint to

make, he might go to the Justice of the Peace (Mirovoi Sudya) and

explain the affair orally, or in writing, without observing any

formalities; and if the complaint seemed well founded, the Justice

at once fixed a day for hearing the case, and gave the other party

notice to appear at the appointed time.  When the time appointed

arrived, the affair was discussed publicly and orally, either by

the parties themselves, or by any representatives whom they might

appoint.  If it was a civil suit, the Justice began by proposing to

the parties to terminate it at once by a compromise, and indicated

what he considered a fair arrangement.  Many affairs were

terminated in this simple way.  If, however, either of the parties

refused to consent to a compromise, the matter was fully discussed,

and the Justice gave a formal written decision, containing the

grounds on which it was based.  In criminal cases the amount of

punishment was always determined by reference to a special Criminal

Code.



If the sum at issue exceeded thirty roubles--about 3 pounds--or if

the punishment exceeded a fine of fifteen roubles--about 30s.--or

three days of arrest, an appeal might be made to the Assembly of

Justices (Mirovoi Syezd).  This is a point in which English rather

than French institutions were taken as a model.  According to the

French system, all appeals from a Juge de Paix are made to the

"Tribunal d'Arrondissement," and the Justice of Peace Courts are

thereby subordinated to the Regular Tribunals.  According to the

English system, certain cases may be carried on appeal from the

Justice of the Peace to the Quarter Sessions.  This latter

principle was adopted and greatly developed by the Russian

legislation.  The Monthly Sessions, composed of all the Justices of

the District (uyezd), considered appeals against the decisions of

the individual Justices.  The procedure was simple and informal, as

in the lower court, but an assistant of the Procureur was always

present.  This functionary gave his opinion in some civil and in

all criminal cases immediately after the debate, and the Court took

his opinion into consideration in framing its judgment.



In the other great section of the judicial organisation--the

Regular Tribunals--there are likewise Ordinary Courts and Courts of

Appeal, called respectively "Tribunaux d'Arrondissement"

(Okruzhniye Sudy) and "Palais de Justice" (Sudebniya Palaty).  Each

Ordinary Court has jurisdiction over several Districts (uyezdy),

and the jurisdiction of each Court of Appeals comprehends several

Provinces.  All civil cases are subject to appeal, however small

the sum at stake may be, but criminal cases are decided FINALLY by

the lower court with the aid of a jury.  Thus in criminal affairs

the "Palais de Justice" is not at all a court of appeal, but as no

regular criminal prosecution can be raised without its formal

consent, it controls in some measure the action of the lower

courts.



As the general reader cannot be supposed to take an interest in the

details of civil procedure, I shall merely say on this subject that

in both sections of the Regular Tribunals the cases are always

tried by at least three judges, the sittings are public, and oral

debates by officially recognised advocates form an important part

of the proceedings.  I venture, however, to speak a little more at

length regarding the change which has been made in the criminal

procedure--a subject that is less technical and more interesting

for the uninitiated.



Down to the time of the recent judicial reforms the procedure in

criminal cases was secret and inquisitorial.  The accused had

little opportunity of defending himself, but, on the other hand,

the State took endless formal precautions against condemning the

innocent.  The practical consequence of this system was that an

innocent man might remain for years in prison until the authorities

convinced themselves of his innocence, whilst a clever criminal

might indefinitely postpone his condemnation.



In studying the history of criminal procedure in foreign countries,

those who were entrusted with the task of preparing projects of

reform found that nearly every country of Europe had experienced

the evils from which Russia was suffering, and that one country

after another had come to the conviction that the most efficient

means of removing these evils was to replace the inquisitorial by

litigious procedure, to give a fair field and no favour to the

prosecutor and the accused, and allow them to fight out their

battle with whatever legal weapons they might think fit.  Further,

it was discovered that, according to the most competent foreign

authorities, it was well in this modern form of judicial combat to

leave the decision to a jury of respectable citizens.  The steps

which Russia had to take were thus clearly marked out by the

experience of other nations, and it was decided that they should be

taken at once.  The organs for the prosecution of supposed

criminals were carefully separated from the judges on the one hand,

and from the police on the other; oral discussions between the

Public Prosecutor and the prisoner's counsel, together with oral

examination and cross-questioning of witnesses, were introduced

into the procedure; and the jury was made an essential factor in

criminal trials.



When a case, whether civil or criminal, has been decided in the

Regular Tribunals, there is no possibility of appeal in the strict

sense of the term, but an application may be made for a revision of

the case on the ground of technical informality.  To use the French

terms, there cannot be appel, but there may be cassation.  If there

has been any omission or transgression of essential legal

formalities, or if the Court has overstepped the bounds of its

legal authority, the injured party may make an application to have

the case revised and tried again.*  This is not, according to

French juridical conceptions, an appeal.  The Court of Revision**

(Cour de Cassation) does not enter into the material facts of the

case, but merely decides the question as to whether the essential

formalities have been duly observed, and as to whether the law has

been properly interpreted and applied; and if it be found on

examination that there is some ground for invalidating the

decision, it does not decide the case.  According to the new

Russian system, the sole Court of Revision is the Senate.





* This is the procedure referred to by Karl Karl'itch, vide supra,

p 37.



** I am quite aware that the term "Court of Revision" is equivocal,

but I have no better term to propose, and I hope the above

explanations will prevent confusion.





The Senate thus forms the regulator of the whole judicial system,

but its action is merely regulative.  It takes cognisance only of

what is presented to it, and supplies to the machine no motive

power.  If any of the lower courts should work slowly or cease to

work altogether, the Senate might remain ignorant of the fact, and

certainly could take no official notice of it.  It was considered

necessary, therefore, to supplement the spontaneous vitality of the

lower courts, and for this purpose was created a special

centralised judicial administration, at the head of which was

placed the Minister of Justice.  The Minister is "Procureur-

General," and has subordinates in all the courts.  The primary

function of this administration is to preserve the force of the

law, to detect and repair all infractions of judicial order, to

defend the interests of the State and of those persons who are

officially recognised as incapable of taking charge of their own

affairs, and to act in criminal matters as Public Prosecutor.



Viewed as a whole, and from a little distance, this grand judicial

edifice seems perfectly symmetrical, but a closer and more minute

inspection brings to light unmistakable indications of a change of

plan during the process of construction.  Though the work lasted

only about half-a-dozen years, the style of the upper differs from

the style of the lower parts, precisely as in those Gothic

cathedrals which grew up slowly during the course of centuries.

And there is nothing here that need surprise us, for a considerable

change took place in the opinions of the official world during that

short period.  The reform was conceived at a time of uncritical

enthusiasm for advanced liberal ideas, of boundless faith in the

dictates of science, of unquestioning reliance on public spirit,

public control, and public honesty--a time in which it was believed

that the public would spontaneously do everything necessary for the

common weal, if it were only freed from the administrative

swaddling-clothes in which it had been hitherto bound.  Still

smarting from the severe regime of Nicholas, men thought more about

protecting the rights of the individual than about preserving

public order, and under the influence of the socialistic ideas in

vogue malefactors were regarded as the unfortunate, involuntary

victims of social inequality and injustice.



Towards the end of the period in question all this had begun to

change.  Many were beginning to perceive that liberty might easily

turn to license, that the spontaneous public energy was largely

expended in empty words, and that a certain amount of hierarchical

discipline was necessary in order to keep the public administration

in motion.  It was found, therefore, in 1864, that it was

impossible to carry out to their ultimate consequences the general

principles laid down and published in 1862.  Even in those parts of

the legislation which were actually put in force, it was found

necessary to make modifications in an indirect, covert way.  Of

these, one may be cited by way of illustration.  In 1860 criminal

inquiries were taken out of the hands of the police and transferred

to Juges d'instruction (Sudebniye Sledovateli), who were almost

entirely independent of the Public Prosecutor, and could not be

removed unless condemned for some legal transgression by a Regular

Tribunal.  This reform created at first much rejoicing and great

expectations, because it raised a barrier against the tyranny of

the police and against the arbitrary power of the higher officials.

But very soon the defects of the system became apparent.  Many

Juges d'instruction, feeling themselves independent, and knowing

that they would not be prosecuted except for some flagrantly

illegal act, gave way to indolence, and spent their time in

inactivity.*  In such cases it was always difficult, and sometimes

impossible, to procure a condemnation--for indolence must assume

gigantic proportions in order to become a crime--and the minister

had to adopt the practice of appointing, without Imperial

confirmation, temporary Juges d'instruction whom he could remove at

pleasure.





* A flagrant case of this kind came under my own observation.





It is unnecessary, however, to enter into these theoretical

defects.  The important question for the general public is: How do

the institutions work in the local conditions in which they are

placed?



This is a question which has an interest not only for Russians, but

for all students of social science, for it tends to throw light on

the difficult subject as to how far institutions may be

successfully transplanted to a foreign soil.  Many thinkers hold,

and not without reason, that no institution can work well unless it

is the natural product of previous historical development.  Now we

have here an opportunity of testing this theory by experience; we

have even what Bacon terms an experimentum crucis.  This new

judicial system is an artificial creation constructed in accordance

with principles laid down by foreign jurists.  All that the

elaborators of the project said about developing old institutions

was mere talk.  In reality they made a tabula rasa of the existing

organisation.  If the introduction of public oral procedure and

trial by jury was a return to ancient customs, it was a return to

what had been long since forgotten by all except antiquarian

specialists, and no serious attempt was made to develop what

actually existed.  One form, indeed, of oral procedure had been

preserved in the Code, but it had fallen completely into disuse,

and seems to have been overlooked by the elaborators of the new

system.*





* I refer to the so-called Sud po forme established by an ukaz of

Peter the Great, in 1723.  I was much astonished when I

accidentally stumbled upon it in the Code.





Having in general little confidence in institutions which spring

ready-made from the brains of autocratic legislators, I expected to

find that this new judicial organisation, which looks so well on

paper, was well-nigh worthless in reality.  Observation, however,

has not confirmed my pessimistic expectations.  On the contrary, I

have found that these new institutions, though they have not yet

had time to strike deep root, and are very far from being perfect

even in the human sense of the term, work on the whole remarkably

well, and have already conferred immense benefit on the country.



In the course of a few years the Justice of Peace Courts, which may

perhaps be called the newest part of the new institutions, became

thoroughly acclimatised, as if they had existed for generations.

As soon as they were opened they became extremely popular.  In

Moscow the authorities had calculated that under the new system the

number of cases would be more than doubled, and that on an average

each justice would have nearly a thousand cases brought before him

in the course of the year.  The reality far exceeded their

expectations: each justice had on an average 2,800 cases.  In St.

Petersburg and the other large towns the amount of work which the

justices had to get through was equally great.



To understand the popularity of the Justice of Peace Courts, we

must know something of the old police courts which they supplanted.

The nobles, the military, and the small officials had always looked

on the police with contempt, because their position secured them

against interference, and the merchants acquired a similar immunity

by submitting to blackmail, which often took the form of a fixed

subsidy; but the lower classes in town and country stood, in fear

of the humblest policeman, and did not dare to complain of him to

his superiors.  If two workmen brought their differences before a

police court, instead of getting their case decided on grounds of

equity, they were pretty sure to get scolded in language unfit for

ears polite, or to receive still worse treatment.  Even among the

higher officers of the force many became famous for their

brutality.  A Gorodnitchi of the town of Tcherkassy, for example,

made for himself in this respect a considerable reputation.  If any

humble individual ventured to offer an objection to him, he had at

once recourse to his fists, and any reference to the law put him

into a state of frenzy.  "The town," he was wont to say on such

occasions, "has been entrusted to me by his Majesty, and you dare

to talk to me of the law?  There is the law for you!"--the remark

being accompanied with a blow.  Another officer of the same type,

long resident in Kief, had a somewhat different method of

maintaining order.  He habitually drove about the town with a

Cossack escort, and when any one of the lower classes had the

misfortune to displease him, he ordered one of his Cossacks to

apply a little corporal punishment on the spot without any legal

formalities.



In the Justice of Peace Courts things were conducted in a very

different style.  The justice, always scrupulously polite without

distinction of persons, listened patiently to the complaint, tried

to arrange the affairs amicably, and when his efforts failed, gave

his decision at once according to law and common-sense.  No

attention was paid to rank or social position.  A general who would

not attend to the police regulations was fined like an ordinary

workingman, and in a dispute between a great dignitary and a man of

the people the two were treated in precisely the same way.  No

wonder such courts became popular among the masses; and their

popularity was increased when it became known that the affairs were

disposed of expeditiously, without unnecessary formalities and

without any bribes or blackmail.  Many peasants regarded the

justice as they had been wont to regard kindly proprietors of the

old patriarchal type, and brought their griefs and sorrows to him

in the hope that he would somehow alleviate them.  Often they

submitted most intimate domestic and matrimonial concerns of which

no court could possibly take cognisance, and sometimes they

demanded the fulfilment of contracts which were in flagrant

contradiction not only with the written law, but also with ordinary

morality.*





* Many curious instances of this have come to my knowledge, but

they are of such a kind that they cannot be quoted in a work

intended for the general public.





Of course, the courts were not entirely without blemishes.  In the

matter, for example, of making no distinction of persons some of

the early justices, in seeking to avoid Scylla, came dangerously

near to Charybdis.  Imagining that their mission was to eradicate

the conceptions and habits which had been created and fostered by

serfage, they sometimes used their authority for giving lessons in

philanthropic liberalism, and took a malicious delight in wounding

the susceptibilities, and occasionally even the material interests,

of those whom they regarded as enemies to the good cause.  In

disputes between master and servant, or between employer and

workmen, the justice of this type considered it his duty to resist

the tyranny of capital, and was apt to forget his official

character of judge in his assumed character of social reformer.

Happily these aberrations on the part of the justices are already

things of the past, but they helped to bring about a reaction, as

we shall see presently.



The extreme popularity of the Justice of Peace Courts did not last

very long.  Their history resembled that of the Zemstvo and many

other new institutions in Russia--at first, enthusiasm and

inordinate expectations; then consciousness of defects and

practical inconveniences; and, lastly, in an influential section of

the public, the pessimism of shattered illusions, accompanied by

the adoption of a reactionary policy on the part of the Government.

The discontent appeared first among the so-called privileged

classes.  To people who had all their lives enjoyed great social

consideration it seemed monstrous that they should be treated

exactly in the same way as the muzhik; and when a general who was

accustomed to be addressed as "Your Excellency," was accused of

using abusive language to his cook, and found himself seated on the

same bench with the menial, he naturally supposed that the end of

all things was at hand; or perhaps a great civil official, who was

accustomed to regard the police as created merely for the lower

classes, suddenly found himself, to his inexpressible astonishment,

fined for a contravention of police regulations!  Naturally the

justices were accused of dangerous revolutionary tendencies, and

when they happened to bring to light some injustice on the part of

the tchinovnik they were severely condemned for undermining the

prestige of the Imperial authority.



For a time the accusations provoked merely a smile or a caustic

remark among the Liberals, but about the middle of the eighties

criticisms began to appear even in the Liberal Press.  No very

grave allegations were made, but defects in the system and

miscarriages of justice were put forward and severely commented

upon.  Occasionally it happened that a justice was indolent, or

that at the Sessions in a small country town it was impossible to

form a quorum on the appointed day.  Overlooking the good features

of the institution and the good services rendered by it, the

critics began to propose partial reorganisation in the sense of

greater control by central authorities.  It was suggested, for

example, that the President of Sessions should be appointed by the

Government, that the justices should be subordinated to the Regular

Tribunals, and that the principle of election by the Zemstvo should

be abolished.



These complaints were not at all unwelcome to the Government,

because it had embarked on a reactionary policy, and in 1889 it

suddenly granted to the critics a great deal more than they

desired.  In the rural districts of Central Russia the justices

were replaced by the rural supervisors, of whom I have spoken in a

previous chapter, and the part of their functions which could not

well be entrusted to those new officials was transferred to judges

of the Regular Courts.  In some of the larger towns and in the

rural districts of outlying provinces the justices were preserved,

but instead of being elected by the Zemstvo they were nominated by

the Government.



The regular Tribunals likewise became acclimatised in an incredibly

short space of time.  The first judges were not by any means

profound jurists, and were too often deficient in that

dispassionate calmness which we are accustomed to associate with

the Bench; but they were at least honest, educated men, and

generally possessed a fair knowledge of the law.  Their defects

were due to the fact that the demand for trained jurists far

exceeded the supply, and the Government was forced to nominate men

who under ordinary circumstances would never have thought of

presenting themselves as candidates.  At the beginning of 1870, in

the 32 "Tribunaux d'Arrondissement" which then existed, there were

227 judges, of whom 44 had never received a juridical education.

Even the presidents had not all passed through a school of law.  Of

course the courts could not become thoroughly effective until all

the judges were men who had received a good special education and

had a practical acquaintance with judicial matters.  This has now

been effected, and the present generation of judges are better

prepared and more capable than their predecessors.  On the score of

probity I have never heard any complaints.



Of all the judicial innovations, perhaps the most interesting is

the jury.



At the time of the reforms the introduction of the jury into the

judicial organisation awakened among the educated classes a great

amount of sentimental enthusiasm.  The institution had the

reputation of being "liberal," and was known to be approved of by

the latest authorities in criminal jurisprudence.  This was

sufficient to insure it a favourable reception, and to excite most

exaggerated expectations as to its beneficent influence.  Ten years

of experience somewhat cooled this enthusiasm, and voices might be

heard declaring that the introduction of the jury was a mistake.

The Russian people, it was held, was not yet ripe for such an

institution, and numerous anecdotes were related in support of this

opinion.  One jury, for instance, was said to have returned a

verdict of "NOT guilty with extenuating circumstances"; and

another, being unable to come to a decision, was reported to have

cast lots before an Icon, and to have given a verdict in accordance

with the result!  Besides this, juries often gave a verdict of "not

guilty" when the accused made a full and formal confession to the

court.



How far the comic anecdotes are true I do not undertake to decide,

but I venture to assert that such incidents, if they really occur,

are too few to form the basis of a serious indictment.  The fact,

however, that juries often acquit prisoners who openly confess

their crime is beyond all possibility of doubt.



To most Englishmen this fact will probably seem sufficient to prove

that the introduction of the institution was at least premature,

but before adopting this sweeping conclusion it will be well to

examine the phenomenon a little more closely in connection with

Russian criminal procedure as a whole.



In England the Bench is allowed very great latitude in fixing the

amount of punishment.  The jury can therefore confine themselves to

the question of fact and leave to the judge the appreciation of

extenuating circumstances.  In Russia the position of the jury is

different.  The Russian criminal law fixes minutely the punishment

for each category of crimes, and leaves almost no latitude to the

judge.  The jury know that if they give a verdict of guilty, the

prisoner will inevitably be punished according to the Code.  Now

the Code, borrowed in great part from foreign legislation, is

founded on conceptions very different from those of the Russian

people, and in many cases it attaches heavy penalties to acts which

the ordinary Russian is wont to regard as mere peccadilloes, or

positively justifiable.  Even in those matters in which the Code is

in harmony with the popular morality, there are many exceptional

cases in which summum jus is really summa injuria.  Suppose, for

instance--as actually happened in a case which came under my

notice--that a fire breaks out in a village, and that the Village

Elder, driven out of patience by the apathy and laziness of some of

his young fellow-villagers, oversteps the limits of his authority

as defined by law, and accompanies his reproaches and exhortations

with a few lusty blows.  Surely such a man is not guilty of a very

heinous crime--certainly he is not in the opinion of the peasantry--

and yet if he be prosecuted and convicted he inevitably falls into

the jaws of an article of the Code which condemns to transportation

for a long term of years.



In such cases what is the jury to do?  In England they might safely

give a verdict of guilty, and leave the judge to take into

consideration all the extenuating circumstances; but in Russia they

cannot act in this way, for they know that the judge must condemn

the prisoner according to the Criminal Code.  There remains,

therefore, but one issue out of the difficulty--a verdict of

acquittal; and Russian juries--to their honour be it said--

generally adopt this alternative.  Thus the jury, in those cases in

which it is most severely condemned, provides a corrective for the

injustice of the criminal legislation.  Occasionally, it is true,

they go a little too far in this direction and arrogate to

themselves a right of pardon, but cases of that kind are, I

believe, very rare.  I know of only one well-authenticated

instance.  The prisoner had been proved guilty of a serious crime,

but it happened to be the eve of a great religious festival, and

the jury thought that in pardoning the prisoner and giving a

verdict of acquittal they would be acting as good Christians!



The legislation regards, of course, this practice as an abuse, and

has tried to prevent it by concealing as far as possible from the

jury the punishment that awaits the accused if he be condemned.

For this purpose it forbids the counsel for the prisoner to inform

the jury what punishment is prescribed by the Code for the crime in

question.  This ingenious device not only fails in its object, but

has sometimes a directly opposite effect.  Not knowing what the

punishment will be, and fearing that it may be out of all

proportion to the crime, the jury sometimes acquit a criminal whom

they would condemn if they knew what punishment would be inflicted.

And when a jury is, as it were, entrapped, and finds that the

punishment is more severe than it supposed, it can take its revenge

in the succeeding cases.  I know at least of one instance of this

kind.  A jury convicted a prisoner of an offence which it regarded

as very trivial, but which in reality entailed, according to the

Code, seven years of penal servitude!  So surprised and frightened

were the jurymen by this unexpected consequence of their verdict,

that they obstinately acquitted, in the face of the most convincing

evidence, all the other prisoners brought before them.



The most famous case of acquital when there was no conceivable

doubt as to the guilt of the accused was that of Vera Zasulitch,

who shot General Trepof, Prefect of St. Petersburg; but the

circumstances were so peculiar that they will hardly support any

general conclusion.  I happened to be present, and watched the

proceedings closely.  Vera Zasulitch, a young woman who had for

some time taken part in the revolutionary movement, heard that a

young revolutionist called Bogoliubof, imprisoned in St.

Petersburg, had been flogged by orders of General Trepof,* and

though she did not know the victim personally she determined to

avenge the indignity to which he had been subjected.  With this

intention she appeared at the Prefecture, ostensibly for the

purpose of presenting a petition, and when she found herself in the

presence of the Prefect she fired a revolver at him, wounding him

seriously, but not mortally.  At the trial the main facts were not

disputed, and yet the jury brought in a verdict of not guilty.

This unexpected result was due, I believe, partly to a desire to

make a little political demonstration, and partly to a strong

suspicion that the prison authorities, in carrying out the

Prefect's orders, had acted in summary fashion without observing

the tedious formalities prescribed by the law.  Certainly one of

the prison officials, when under cross-examination, made on me, and

on the public generally, the impression that he was prevaricating

in order to shield his superiors.





* The reason alleged by General Trepof for giving these orders was

that, during a visit of inspection, Bogoliubof had behaved

disrespectfully towards him, and had thereby committed an

infraction of prison discipline, for which the law prescribes the

use of corporal punishment.





At the close of the proceedings, which were dexterously conducted

by Counsel in such a way that, as the Emperor is reported to have

said, it was not Vera Zasulitch but General Trepof who was being

tried, an eminent Russian journalist rushed up to me in a state of

intense excitement and said: "Is not this a great day for the cause

of political freedom in Russia?"  I could not agree with him and I

ventured to predict that neither of us would ever again see a

political case tried publicly by jury in an ordinary court.  The

prediction has proved true.  Since that time political offenders

have been tried by special tribunals without a jury or dealt with

"by administrative procedure," that is to say, inquisitorially,

without any regular trial.



The defects, real and supposed, of the present system are commonly

attributed to the predominance of the peasant element in the

juries; and this opinion, founded on a priori reasoning, seems to

many too evident to require verification.  The peasantry are in

many respects the most ignorant class, and therefore, it is

assumed, they are least capable of weighing conflicting evidence.

Plain and conclusive as this reasoning seems, it is in my opinion

erroneous.  The peasants have, indeed, little education, but they

have a large fund of plain common-sense; and experience proves--so

at least I have been informed by many judges and Public

Prosecutors--that, as a general rule, a peasant jury is more to be

relied on than a jury drawn from the educated classes.  It must be

admitted, however, that a peasant jury has certain peculiarities,

and it is not a little interesting to observe what those

peculiarities are.



In the first place, a jury composed of peasants generally acts in a

somewhat patriarchal fashion, and does not always confine its

attention to the evidence and the arguments adduced at the trial.

The members form their judgment as men do in the affairs of

ordinary life, and are sure to be greatly influenced by any jurors

who happen to be personally acquainted with the prisoner.  If

several of the jurors know him to be a bad character, he has little

chance of being acquitted, even though the chain of evidence

against him should not be quite perfect.  Peasants cannot

understand why a notorious scoundrel should be allowed to escape

because a little link in the evidence is wanting, or because some

little judicial formality has not been duly observed.  Indeed,

their ideas of criminal procedure in general are extremely

primitive.  The Communal method of dealing with malefactors is best

in accordance with their conceptions of well-regulated society.

The Mir may, by a Communal decree and without a formal trial, have

any of its unruly members transported to Siberia!  This summary,

informal mode of procedure seems to the peasants very satisfactory.

They are at a loss to understand how a notorious culprit is allowed

to "buy" an advocate to defend him, and are very insensible to the

bought advocate's eloquence.  To many of them, if I may trust to

conversations which I have casually overheard in and around the

courts, "buying an advocate" seems to be very much the same kind of

operation as bribing a judge.



In the second place, the peasants, when acting as jurors, are very

severe with regard to crimes against property.  In this they are

instigated by the simple instinct of self-defence.  They are, in

fact, continually at the mercy of thieves and malefactors.  They

live in wooden houses easily set on fire; their stables might be

broken into by a child; at night the village is guarded merely by

an old man, who cannot be in more than one place at a time, and in

the one place he is apt to go to sleep; a police officer is rarely

seen, except when a crime has actually been committed.  A few

clever horse-stealers may ruin many families, and a fire-raiser, in

his desire to avenge himself on an enemy, may reduce a whole

village to destitution.  These and similar considerations tend to

make the peasants very severe against theft, robbery, and arson;

and a Public Prosecutor who desires to obtain a conviction against

a man charged with one of these crimes endeavours to have a jury in

which the peasant class is largely represented.



With regard to fraud in its various forms, the peasants are much

more lenient, probably because the line of demarcation between

honest and dishonest dealing in commercial affairs is not very

clearly drawn in their minds.  Many, for instance, are convinced

that trade cannot be successfully carried on without a little

clever cheating; and hence cheating is regarded as a venial

offence.  If the money fraudulently acquired be restored to the

owner, the crime is supposed to be completely condoned.  Thus when

a Volost Elder appropriates the public money, and succeeds in

repaying it before the case comes on for trial, he is invariably

acquitted--and sometimes even re-elected!



An equal leniency is generally shown by peasants towards crimes

against the person, such as assaults, cruelty, and the like.  This

fact is easily explained.  Refined sensitiveness and a keen

sympathy with physical suffering are the result of a certain amount

of material well-being, together with a certain degree of

intellectual and moral culture, and neither of these is yet

possessed by the Russian peasantry.  Any one who has had

opportunities of frequently observing the peasants must have been

often astonished by their indifference to suffering, both in their

own persons and in the person of others.  In a drunken brawl heads

may be broken and wounds inflicted without any interference on the

part of the spectators.  If no fatal consequences ensue, the

peasant does not think it necessary that official notice should be

taken of the incident, and certainly does not consider that any of

the combatants should be transported to Siberia.  Slight wounds

heal of their own accord without any serious loss to the sufferer,

and therefore the man who inflicts them is not to be put on the

same level as the criminal who reduces a family to beggary.  This

reasoning may, perhaps, shock people of sensitive nerves, but it

undeniably contains a certain amount of plain, homely wisdom.



Of all kinds of cruelty, that which is perhaps most revolting to

civilised mankind is the cruelty of the husband towards his wife;

but to this crime the Russian peasant shows especial leniency.  He

is still influenced by the old conceptions of the husband's rights,

and by that low estimate of the weaker sex which finds expression

in many popular proverbs.



The peculiar moral conceptions reflected in these facts are

evidently the result of external conditions, and not of any

recondite ethnographical peculiarities, for they are not found

among the merchants, who are nearly all of peasant origin.  On the

contrary, the merchants are more severe with regard to crimes

against the person than with regard to crimes against property.

The explanation of this is simple.  The merchant has means of

protecting his property, and if he should happen to suffer by

theft, his fortune is not likely to be seriously affected by it.

On the other hand, he has a certain sensitiveness with regard to

such crimes as assault; for though he has commonly not much more

intellectual and moral culture than the peasant, he is accustomed

to comfort and material well-being, which naturally develop

sensitiveness regarding physical pain.



Towards fraud the merchants are quite as lenient as the peasantry.

This may, perhaps, seem strange, for fraudulent practices are sure

in the long run to undermine trade.  The Russian merchants,

however, have not yet arrived at this conception, and can point to

many of the richest members of their class as a proof that

fraudulent practices often create enormous fortunes.  Long ago

Samuel Butler justly remarked that we damn the sins we have no mind

to.



As the external conditions have little or no influence on the

religious conceptions of the merchants and the peasantry, the two

classes are equally severe with regard to those acts which are

regarded as crimes against the Deity.  Hence acquittals in cases of

sacrilege, blasphemy, and the like never occur unless the jury is

in part composed of educated men.



In their decisions, as in their ordinary modes of thought, the

jurors drawn from the educated classes are little, if at all,

affected by theological conceptions, but they are sometimes

influenced in a not less unfortunate way by conceptions of a

different order.  It may happen, for instance, that a juror who had

passed through one of the higher educational establishments has his

own peculiar theory about the value of evidence, or he is

profoundly impressed with the idea that it is better that a

thousand guilty men should escape than that one innocent man should

be punished, or he is imbued with sentimental pseudo-philanthropy,

or he is convinced that punishments are useless because they

neither cure the delinquent nor deter others from crime; in a word,

he may have in some way or other lost his mental balance in that

moral chaos through which Russia is at present passing.  In

England, France, or Germany such an individual would have little

influence on his fellow-jurymen, for in these countries there are

very few people who allow new paradoxical ideas to overturn their

traditional notions and obscure their common-sense; but in Russia,

where even the elementary moral conceptions are singularly unstable

and pliable, a man of this type may succeed in leading a jury.

More than once I have heard men boast of having induced their

fellow-jurymen to acquit every prisoner brought before them, not

because they believed the prisoners to be innocent or the evidence

to be insufficient, but because all punishments are useless and

barbarous.



One word in conclusion regarding the independence and political

significance of the new courts.  When the question of judicial

reform was first publicly raised many people hoped that the new

courts would receive complete autonomy and real independence, and

would thus form a foundation for political liberty.  These hopes,

like so many illusions of that strange time, have not been

realised.  A large measure of autonomy and independence was indeed

granted in theory.  The law laid down the principle that no judge

could be removed unless convicted of a definite crime, and that the

courts should present candidates for all the vacant places on the

Bench; but these and similar rights have little practical

significance.  If the Minister cannot depose a judge, he can

deprive him of all possibility of receiving promotion, and he can

easily force him in an indirect way to send in his resignation; and

if the courts have still the right to present candidates for vacant

places, the Minister has also this right, and can, of course,

always secure the nomination of his own candidate.  By the

influence of that centripetal force which exists in all centralised

bureaucracies, the Procureurs have become more important personages

than the Presidents of the courts.



From the political point of view the question of the independence

of the Courts has not yet acquired much practical importance,

because the Government can always have political offenders tried by

a special tribunal or can send them to Siberia for an indefinite

term of years without regular trial by the "administrative

procedure" to which I have above referred.

