





CHAPTER XXXIV



REVOLUTIONARY NIHILISM AND THE REACTION





The Reform-enthusiasm Becomes Unpractical and Culminates in

Nihilism--Nihilism, the Distorted Reflection of Academic Western

Socialism--Russia Well Prepared for Reception of Ultra-Socialist

Virus--Social Reorganisation According to Latest Results of

Science--Positivist Theory--Leniency of Press-censure--Chief

Representatives of New Movement--Government Becomes Alarmed--

Repressive Measures--Reaction in the Public--The Term Nihilist

Invented--The Nihilist and His Theory--Further Repressive Measures--

Attitude of Landed Proprietors--Foundation of a Liberal Party--

Liberalism Checked by Polish Insurrection--Practical Reform

Continued--An Attempt at Regicide Forms a Turning-point of

Government's Policy--Change in Educational System--Decline of

Nihilism.





The rapidly increasing enthusiasm for reform did not confine itself

to practical measures such as the emancipation of the serfs, the

creation of local self-government, and the thorough reorganisation

of the law-courts and legal procedure.  In the younger section of

the educated classes, and especially among the students of the

universities and technical colleges, it produced a feverish

intellectual excitement and wild aspirations which culminated in

what is commonly known as Nihilism.



In a preceding chapter I pointed out that during the last two

centuries all the important intellectual movements in Western

Europe have been reflected in Russia, and that these reflections

have generally been what may fairly be termed exaggerated and

distorted reproductions of the originals.*  Roughly speaking, the

Nihilist movement in Russia may be described as the exaggerated,

distorted reflection of the earlier Socialist movements of the

West; but it has local peculiarities and local colouring which

deserve attention.





* See Chapter XXVI.





The Russian educated classes had been well prepared by their past

history for the reception and rapid development of the Socialist

virus.  For a century and a half the country had been subjected to

a series of drastic changes, administrative and social, by the

energetic action of the Autocratic Power, with little spontaneous

co-operation on the part of the people.  In a nation with such a

history, Socialistic ideas naturally found favour, because all

Socialist systems until quite recent times were founded on the

assumption that political and social progress must be the result

not of slow natural development, but rather of philosophic

speculation, legislative wisdom, and administrative energy.



This assumption lay at the bottom of the reform enthusiasm in St.

Petersburg at the commencement of Alexander II.'s reign.  Russia

might be radically transformed, it was thought, politically and

socially, according to abstract scientific principles, in the space

of a few years, and be thereby raised to the level of West-European

civilisation, or even higher.  The older nations had for centuries

groped in darkness, or stumbled along in the faint light of

practical experience, and consequently their progress had been slow

and uncertain.  For Russia there was no necessity to follow such

devious, unexplored paths.  She ought to profit by the experience

of her elder sisters, and avoid the errors into which they had

fallen.  Nor was it difficult to ascertain what these errors were,

because they had been discovered, examined and explained by the

most eminent thinkers of France and England, and efficient remedies

had been prescribed.  Russian reformers had merely to study and

apply the conclusions at which these eminent authorities had

arrived, and their task would be greatly facilitated by the fact

that they could operate on virgin soil, untrammelled by the feudal

traditions, religious superstitions, metaphysical conceptions,

romantic illusions, aristocratic prejudices, and similar obstacles

to social and political progress which existed in Western Europe.



Such was the extraordinary intellectual atmosphere in which the

Russian educated classes lived during the early years of the

sixties.  On the "men with aspirations," who had longed in vain for

more light and more public activity under the obscurantist,

repressive regime of the preceding reign, it had an intoxicating

effect.  The more excitable and sanguine amongst them now believed

seriously that they had discovered a convenient short-cut to

national prosperity, and that for Russia a grandiose social and

political millennium was at hand.*





* I was not myself in St. Petersburg at that period, but on

arriving a few years afterwards I became intimately acquainted with

men and women who had lived through it, and who still retained much

of their early enthusiasm.





In these circumstances it is not surprising that one of the most

prominent characteristics of the time was a boundless, child-like

faith in the so-called "latest results of science."  Infallible

science was supposed to have found the solution of all political

and social problems.  What a reformer had to do--and who was not a

would-be reformer in those days?--was merely to study the best

authorities.  Their works had been long rigidly excluded by the

Press censure, but now that it was possible to obtain them, they

were read with avidity.  Chief among the new, infallible prophets

whose works were profoundly venerated was Auguste Comte, the

inventor of Positivism.  In his classification of the sciences the

crowning of the edifice was sociology, which taught how to organise

human society on scientific principles.  Russia had merely to adopt

the principles laid down and expounded at great length in the Cours

de Philosophie Positive.  There Comte explained that humanity had

to pass through three stages of intellectual development--the

religious, the metaphysical, and the positive--and that the most

advanced nations, after spending centuries in the two first, were

entering on the third.  Russia must endeavour, therefore, to get

into the positive stage as quickly as possible, and there was

reason to believe that, in consequence of certain ethnographical

and historical peculiarities, she could make the transition more

quickly than other nations.  After Comte's works, the book which

found, for a time, most favour was Buckle's "History of

Civilisation," which seemed to reduce history and progress to a

matter of statistics, and which laid down the principle that

progress is always in the inverse ratio of the influence of

theological conceptions.  This principle was regarded as of great

practical importance, and the conclusion drawn from it was that

rapid national progress was certain if only the influence of

religion and theology could be destroyed.  Very popular, too, was

John Stuart Mill, because he was "imbued with enthusiasm for

humanity and female emancipation"; and in his tract on

Utilitarianism he showed that morality was simply the crystallised

experience of many generations as to what was most conducive to the

greatest good of the greatest number.  The minor prophets of the

time, among whom Buchner occupied a prominent place, are too

numerous to mention.



Strange to say, the newest and most advanced doctrines appeared

regularly, under a very thin and transparent veil, in the St.

Petersburg daily Press, and especially in the thick monthly

magazines, which were as big as, or bigger than, our venerable

quarterlies.  The art of writing and reading "between the lines,"

not altogether unknown under the Draconian regime of Nicholas I.,

was now developed to such a marvellous extent that almost any thing

could be written clearly enough to be understood by the initiated

without calling for the thunderbolts of the Press censors, which

was now only intermittently severe.  Indeed, the Press censors

themselves were sometimes carried away by the reform enthusiasm.

One of them long afterwards related to me that during "the mad

time," as he called it, in the course of a single year he had

received from his superiors no less than seventeen reprimands for

passing objectionable articles without remark.



The movement found its warmest partisans among the students and

young literary men, but not a few grey-beards were to be found

among the youthful apostles.  All who read the periodical

literature became more or less imbued with the new spirit; but it

must be presumed that many of those who discoursed most eloquently

had no clear idea of what they were talking about; for even at a

later date, when the novices had had time to acquaint themselves

with the doctrines they professed, I often encountered the most

astounding ignorance.  Let me give one instance by way of

illustration:



A young gentleman who was in the habit of talking glibly about the

necessity of scientifically reorganising human society, declared to

me one day that not only sociology, but also biology should be

taken into consideration.  Confessing my complete ignorance of the

latter science, I requested him to enlighten me by giving me an

instance of a biological principle which could be applied to social

regeneration.  He looked confused, and tried to ride out of the

difficulty on vague general phrases; but I persistently kept him to

the point, and maliciously suggested that as an alternative he

might cite to me a biological principle which could NOT be used for

such a purpose.  Again he failed, and it became evident to all

present that of biology, about which he talked so often, he knew

absolutely nothing but the name!  After this I frequently employed

the same pseudo-Socratic method of discussion, and very often with

a similar result.  Not one in fifty, perhaps, ever attempted to

reduce the current hazy conceptions to a concrete form.  The

enthusiasm was not the less intense, however, on that account.



At first the partisans of the movement seemed desirous of

assisting, rather than of opposing or undermining the Government,

and so long as they merely talked academically about scientific

principles and similar vague entities, the Government felt no

necessity for energetic interference; but as early as 1861 symptoms

of a change in the character of the movement became apparent.  A

secret society of officers organised a small printing-press in the

building of the Headquarters Staff and issued clandestinely three

numbers of a periodical called the Velikoruss (Great Russian),

which advocated administrative reform, the convocation of a

constituent assembly, and the emancipation of Poland from Russian

rule.  A few months later (April, 1862) a seditious proclamation

appeared, professing to emanate from a central revolutionary

committee, and declaring that the Romanoffs must expiate with their

blood the misery of the people.



These symptoms of an underground revolutionary agitation caused

alarm in the official world, and repressive measures were at once

adopted.  Sunday schools for the working classes, reading-rooms,

students' clubs, and similar institutions which might be used for

purposes of revolutionary propaganda were closed; several trials

for political offences took place; the most popular of the monthly

periodicals (Sovremennik) was suspended, and its editor,

Tchernishevski, arrested.  There was nothing to show that

Tchernishevski was implicated in any treasonable designs, but he

was undoubtedly the leader of a group of youthful writers whose

aspirations went far beyond the intentions of the Government, and

it was thought desirable to counteract his influence by shutting

him up in prison.  Here he wrote and published, with the permission

of the authorities and the imprimatur of the Press censure, a novel

called "Shto delat'?" (" What is to be Done?"), which was regarded

at first as a most harmless production, but which is now considered

one of the most influential and baneful works in the whole range of

Nihilist literature.  As a novel it had no pretensions to artistic

merit, and in ordinary times it would have attracted little or no

attention, but it put into concrete shape many of the vague

Socialist and Communist notions that were at the moment floating

about in the intellectual atmosphere, and it came to be looked upon

by the young enthusiasts as a sort of informal manifesto of their

new-born faith.  It was divided into two parts; in the first was

described a group of students living according to the new ideas in

open defiance of traditional conventionalities, and in the second

was depicted a village organised on the communistic principles

recommended by Fourier.  The first was supposed to represent the

dawn of the new era; the second, the goal to be ultimately

attained.  When the authorities discovered the mistake they had

committed in allowing the book to be published, it was at once

confiscated and withdrawn from circulation, whilst the author,

after being tried by the Senate, was exiled to Northeastern Siberia

and kept there for nearly twenty years.*





* Tchernishevski was a man of encyclopaedic knowledge and specially

conversant with political economy.  According to the testimony of

those who knew him intimately, he was one of the ablest and most

sympathetic men of his generation.  During his exile a bold attempt

was made to rescue him, and very nearly succeeded.  A daring youth,

disguised as an officer of gendarmes and provided with forged

official papers, reached the place where he was confined and

procured his release, but the officer in charge had vague

suspicions, and insisted on the two travellers being escorted to

the next post-station by a couple of Cossacks.  The rescuer tried

to get rid of the escort by means of his revolver, but he failed in

the attempt, and the fugitives were arrested.  In 1883

Tchernishevski was transferred to the milder climate of Astrakhan,

and in 1889 he was allowed to return to his native town, Saratof,

where he died a few months afterwards.





With the arrest and exile of Tchernishevski the young would-be

reformers were constrained to recognise that they had no chance of

carrying the Government with them in their endeavours to realise

their patriotic aspirations.  Police supervision over the young

generation was increased, and all kinds of association, whether for

mutual instruction, mutual aid, or any other purpose, were

discouraged or positively forbidden.  And it was not merely in the

mind of the police that suspicion was aroused.  In the opinion of

the great majority of moderate, respectable people the young

enthusiasts were becoming discredited.  The violently seditious

proclamations with which they were supposed to sympathise, and a

series of destructive fires in St. Petersburg, erroneously

attributed to them, frightened timid Liberals and gave the

Reactionaries, who had hitherto remained silent, an opportunity of

preaching their doctrines with telling effect.  The celebrated

novelist, Turgeneif, long the idol of the young generation, had

inadvertently in "Fathers and Children" invented the term Nihilist,

and it at once came to be applied as an opprobrious epithet,

notwithstanding the efforts of Pissaref, a popular writer of

remarkable talent, to prove to the public that it ought to be

regarded as a term of honour.



Pissaref's attempt at rehabilitation made no impression outside of

his own small circle.  According to popular opinion the Nihilists

were a band of fanatical young men and women, mostly medical

students, who had determined to turn the world upside down and to

introduce a new kind of social order, founded on the most advanced

principles of social equality and Communism.  As a first step

towards the great transformation they had reversed the traditional

order of things in the matter of coiffure: the males allowed their

hair to grow long, and the female adepts cut their hair short,

adding occasionally the additional badge of blue spectacles.  Their

unkempt appearance naturally shocked the aesthetic feelings of

ordinary people, but to this they were indifferent.  They had

raised themselves above the level of popular notions, took no

account of so-called public opinion, gloried in Bohemianism,

despised Philistine respectability, and rather liked to scandalise

old-fashioned people imbued with antiquated prejudices.



This was the ridiculous side of the movement, but underneath the

absurdities there was something serious.  These young men and

women, who were themselves terribly in earnest, were systematically

hostile not only to accepted conventionalities in the matter of

dress, but to all manner of shams, hypocrisy, and cant in the broad

Carlylean sense of those terms.  To the "beautiful souls" of the

older generation, who had habitually, in conversation and

literature, shed pathetic tears over the defects of Russian social

and political organisation without ever moving a finger to correct

them--especially the landed proprietors who talked and wrote about

civilisation, culture, and justice while living comfortably on the

revenues provided for them by their unfortunate serfs--these had

the strongest aversion; and this naturally led them to condemn in

strong language the worship of aesthetic culture.  But here again

they fell into exaggeration.  Professing extreme utilitarianism,

they explained that the humble shoemaker who practises his craft

diligently is, in the true sense, a greater man than a Shakespeare,

or a Goethe, because humanity has more need of shoes than of dramas

and poetry.



Such silly paradoxes provoked, of course, merely a smile of

compassion; what alarmed the sensible, respectable "Philistine" was

the method of cleansing the Augean stable recommended by these

enthusiasts.  Having discovered in the course of their desultory

reading that most of the ills that flesh is heir to proceed

directly or indirectly from uncontrolled sexual passion and the

lust of gain, they proposed to seal hermetically these two great

sources of crime and misery by abolishing the old-fashioned

institutions of marriage and private property.  When society, they

argued, should be so organised that all the healthy instincts of

human nature could find complete and untrammelled satisfaction,

there would be no motive or inducement for committing crimes or

misdemeanours.  For thousands of years humanity had been sailing on

a wrong tack.  The great law-givers of the world, religious and

civil, in their ignorance of physical science and positivist

methods, had created institutions, commonly known as law and

morality, which were utterly unfitted to human nature, and then the

magistrate and the moralist had endeavoured to compel or persuade

men and women to conform to them, but their efforts had failed most

signally.  In vain the police had threatened and punished and the

priests had preached and admonished.  Human nature had

systematically and obstinately rebelled, and still rebels, against

the unnatural constraint.  It is time, therefore, to try a new

system.  Instead of continuing, as has been done for thousands of

years, to force men and women, as it were, into badly fitting,

unelastic clothes which cause intense discomfort and prevent all

healthy muscular action, why not adapt the costume to the anatomy

and physiology of the human frame?  Then the clothes will no longer

be rent, and those who wear them will be contented and happy.



Unfortunately for the progress of humanity there are serious

obstacles in the way of this radical change of system.  The absurd,

antiquated and pernicious institutions and customs are supported by

abstruse metaphysical reasons and enshrined in mystical romantic

sentiment, and in this way they may still be preserved for

generations unless the axe be laid to the root of the tree.  Now is

the critical moment.  Russia must be made to rise at once from the

metaphysical to the positivist stage of intellectual development;

metaphysical reasoning and romantic sentiment must be rigorously

discarded; and everything must be brought to the touchstone of

naked practical utility.



One might naturally suppose that men holding such opinions must be

materialists of the grossest type--and, indeed, many of them

gloried in the name of materialist and atheist--but such an

inference would be erroneous.  While denouncing metaphysics, they

were themselves metaphysicians in so far as they were constantly

juggling with abstract conceptions, and letting themselves be

guided in their walk and conversation by a priori deductions; while

ridiculing romanticism, they had romantic sentiment enough to make

them sacrifice their time, their property, and sometimes even their

life, to the attainment of an unrealisable ideal; and while

congratulating themselves on having passed from the religious to

the positivist stage of intellectual development, they frequently

showed themselves animated with the spirit of the early martyrs!

Rarely have the strange inconsistencies of human nature been so

strikingly exemplified as in these unpractical, anti-religious

fanatics.  In dealing with them I might easily, without very great

exaggeration, produce a most amusing caricature, but I prefer

describing them as they really were.  A few years after the period

here referred to I knew some of them intimately, and I must say

that, without at all sharing or sympathising with their opinions, I

could not help respecting them as honourable, upright, quixotic men

and women who had made great sacrifices for their convictions.  One

of them whom I have specially in view at this moment suffered

patiently for years from the utter shipwreck of his generous

illusions, and when he could no longer hope to see the dawn of a

brighter day, he ended by committing suicide.  Yet that man

believed himself to be a Realist, a Materialist, and a Utilitarian

of the purest water, and habitually professed a scathing contempt

for every form of romantic sentiment!  In reality he was one of the

best and most sympathetic men I have ever known.



To return from this digression.  So long as the subversive opinions

were veiled in abstract language they raised misgivings in only a

comparative small circle; but when school-teachers put them into a

form suited to the juvenile mind, they were apt to produce

startling effects.  In a satirical novel of the time a little girl

is represented as coming to her mother and saying, "Little mamma!

Maria Ivan'na (our new school-mistress) says there is no God and no

Tsar, and that it is wrong to marry!"  Whether such incidents

actually occurred in real life, as several friends assured me, I am

not prepared to say, but certainly people believed that they might

occur in their own families, and that was quite sufficient to

produce alarm even in the ranks of the Liberals, to say nothing of

the rapidly increasing army of the Reactionaries.



To illustrate the general uneasiness produced in St. Petersburg, I

may quote here a letter written in October, 1861, by a man who

occupied one of the highest positions in the Administration.  As he

had the reputation of being an ultra-Liberal who sympathised

overmuch with Young Russia, we may assume that he did not take an

exceptionally alarmist view of the situation.





"You have not been long absent--merely a few months; but if you

returned now, you would be astonished by the progress which the

Opposition, one might say the Revolutionary Party, has already

made.  The disorders in the university do not concern merely the

students.  I see in the affair the beginning of serious dangers for

public tranquillity and the existing order of things.  Young

people, without distinction of costume, uniform and origin, take

part in the street demonstrations.  Besides the students of the

university, there are the students of other institutions, and a

mass of people who are students only in name.  Among these last are

certain gentlemen in long beards and a number of revolutionnaires

in crinoline, who are of all the most fanatical.  Blue collars--the

distinguishing mark of the students' uniform--have become the signe

de ralliement.  Almost all the professors and many officers take

the part of the students.  The newspaper critics openly defend

their colleagues.  Mikhailof has been convicted of writing,

printing and circulating one of the most violent proclamations that

ever existed, under the heading, 'To the young generation!'  Among

the students and the men of letters there is unquestionably an

organised conspiracy, which has perhaps leaders outside the

literary circle. . . .  The police are powerless.  They arrest any

one they can lay hands on.  About eighty people have already been

sent to the fortress and examined, but all this leads to no

practical result, because the revolutionary ideas have taken

possession of all classes, all ages, all professions, and are

publicly expressed in the streets, in the barracks, and in the

Ministries.  I believe the police itself is carried away by them!

What this will lead to, it is difficult to predict.  I am very much

afraid of some bloody catastrophe.  Even if it should not go to

such a length immediately, the position of the Government will he

extremely difficult.  Its authority is shaken, and all are

convinced that it is powerless, stupid and incapable.  On that

point there is the most perfect unanimity among all parties of all

colours, even the most opposite.  The most desperate 'planter'*

agrees in that respect with the most desperate socialist.

Meanwhile those who have the direction of affairs do almost nothing

and have no plan or definite aim in view.  At present the Emperor

is not in the Capital, and now, more than at any other time, there

is complete anarchy in the absence of the master of the house.

There is a great deal of bustle and talk, and all blame they know

not whom."**





* An epithet commonly applied, at the time of the Emancipation, to

the partisans of serfage and the defenders of the proprietors'

rights.



** I found this interesting letter (which might have been written

today) thirty years ago among the private papers of Nicholas

Milutin, who played a leading part as an official in the reforms of

the time.  It was first published in an article on "Secret

Societies in Russia," which I contributed to the Fortnightly Review

of 1st August, 1877.





The expected revolution did not take place, but timid people had no

difficulty in perceiving signs of its approach.  The Press

continued to disseminate, under a more or less disguised form,

ideas which were considered dangerous.  The Kolokol, a Russian

revolutionary paper published in London by Herzen and strictly

prohibited by the Press-censure, found its way in large quantities

into the country, and, as is recorded in an earlier chapter, was

read by thousands, including the higher officials and the Emperor

himself, who found it regularly on his writing-table, laid there by

some unknown hand.  In St. Petersburg the arrest of Tchernishevski

and the suspension of his magazine, The Contemporary, made the

writers a little more cautious in their mode of expression, but the

spirit of the articles remained unchanged.  These energetic

intolerant leaders of public opinion were novi homines not

personally connected with the social strata in which moderate views

and retrograde tenderness had begun to prevail.  Mostly sons of

priests or of petty officials, they belonged to a recently created

literary proletariat composed of young men with boundless

aspirations and meagre national resources, who earned a precarious

subsistence by journalism or by giving lessons in private families.

Living habitually in a world of theories and unrestrained by

practical acquaintance with public life, they were ready, from the

purest and most disinterested motives to destroy ruthlessly the

existing order of things in order to realise their crude notions of

social regeneration.  Their heated imagination showed them in the

near future a New Russia, composed of independent federated

Communes, without any bureaucracy or any central power--a happy

land in which everybody virtuously and automatically fulfilled his

public and private duties, and in which the policeman and all other

embodiments of material constraint were wholly superfluous.



Governments are not easily converted to Utopian schemes of that

idyllic type, and it is not surprising that even a Government with

liberal humanitarian aspirations like that of Alexander II. should

have become alarmed and should have attempted to stem the current.

What is to be regretted is that the repressive measures adopted

were a little too Oriental in their character.  Scores of young

students of both sexes--for the Nihilist army included a strong

female contingent--were secretly arrested and confined for months

in unwholesome prisons, and many of them were finally exiled,

without any regular trial, to distant provinces in European Russia

or to Siberia.  Their exile, it is true, was not at all so terrible

as is commonly supposed, because political exiles are not usually

confined in prisons or compelled to labour in the mines, but are

obliged merely to reside at a given place under police supervision.

Still, such punishment was severe enough for educated young men and

women, especially when their lot was cast among a population

composed exclusively of peasants and small shop-keepers or of

Siberian aborigines, and when there were no means of satisfying the

most elementary intellectual wants.  For those who had no private

resources the punishment was particularly severe, because the

Government granted merely a miserable monthly pittance, hardly

sufficient to purchase food of the coarsest kind, and there was

rarely an opportunity of adding to the meagre official allowance by

intellectual or manual labour.  In all cases the treatment accorded

to the exiles wounded their sense of justice and increased the

existing discontent among their friends and acquaintances.  Instead

of acting as a deterrent, the system produced a feeling of profound

indignation, and ultimately transformed not a few sentimental

dreamers into active conspirators.



At first there was no conspiracy or regularly organised secret

society and nothing of which the criminal law in Western Europe

could have taken cognisance.  Students met in each other's rooms to

discuss prohibited books on political and social science, and

occasionally short essays on the subjects discussed were written in

a revolutionary spirit by members of the coterie.  This was called

mutual instruction.  Between the various coteries or groups there

were private personal relations, not only in the capital, but also

in the provinces, so that manuscripts and printed papers could be

transmitted from one group to another.  From time to time the

police captured these academic disquisitions, and made raids on the

meetings of students who had come together merely for conversation

and discussion; and the fresh arrests caused by these incidents

increased the hostility to the Government.



In the letter above quoted it is said that the revolutionary ideas

had taken possession of all classes, all ages, and all professions.

This may have been true with regard to St. Petersburg, but it could

not have been said of the provinces.  There the landed proprietors

were in a very different frame of mind.  They had to struggle with

a multitude of urgent practical affairs which left them little time

for idyllic dreaming about an imaginary millennium.  Their serfs

had been emancipated, and what remained to them of their estates

had to be reorganised on the basis of free labour.  Into the semi-

chaotic state of things created by such far-reaching changes, legal

and economic, they did not wish to see any more confusion

introduced, and they did not at all feel that they could dispense

with the Central Government and the policeman.  On the contrary,

the Central Government was urgently needed in order to obtain a

little ready money wherewith to reorganise the estates in the new

conditions, and the police organisation required to be strengthened

in order to compel the emancipated serfs to fulfil their legal

obligations.  These men and their families were, therefore, much

more conservative than the class commonly designated "the young

generation," and they naturally sympathised with the "Philistines"

in St. Petersburg, who had been alarmed by the exaggerations of the

Nihilists.



Even the landed proprietors, however, were not so entirely free

from discontent and troublesome political aspirations as the

Government would have desired.  They had not forgotten the

autocratic and bureaucratic way in which the Emancipation had been

prepared, and their indignation had been only partially appeased by

their being allowed to carry out the provisions of the law without

much bureaucratic interference.  So much for the discontent.  As

for the reform aspirations, they thought that, as a compensation

for having consented to the liberation of their serfs and for

having been expropriated from about a half of their land, they

ought to receive extensive political rights, and be admitted, like

the upper classes in Western Europe, to a fair share in the

government of the country.  Unlike the fiery young Nihilists of St.

Petersburg, they did not want to abolish or paralyse the central

power; what they wanted was to co-operate with it loyally and to

give their advice on important questions by means of representative

institutions.  They formed a constitutional group which exists

still at the present day, as we shall see in the sequel, but which

has never been allowed to develop into an organised political

party.  Its aims were so moderate that its programme might have

been used as a convenient safety-valve for the explosive forces

which were steadily accumulating under the surface of Society, but

it never found favour in the official world.  When some of its

leading members ventured to hint in the Press and in loyal

addresses to the Emperor that the Government would do well to

consult the country on important questions, their respectful

suggestions were coldly received or bluntly rejected by the

bureaucracy and the Autocratic Power.



The more the revolutionary and constitutional groups sought to

strengthen their position, the more pronounced became the

reactionary tendencies in the official world, and these received in

1863 an immense impetus from the Polish insurrection, with which

the Nihilists and even some of the Liberals sympathised.*   That

ill-advised attempt on the part of the Poles to recover their

independence had a curious effect on Russian public opinion.

Alexander II., with the warm approval of the more Liberal section

of the educated classes, was in the course of creating for Poland

almost complete administrative autonomy under the viceroyalty of a

Russian Grand Duke; and the Emperor's brother Constantine was

preparing to carry out the scheme in a generous spirit.  Soon it

became evident that what the Poles wanted was not administrative

autonomy, but political independence, with the frontiers which

existed before the first partition!  Trusting to the expected

assistance of the Western Powers and the secret connivance of

Austria, they raised the standard of insurrection, and some

trifling successes were magnified by the pro-Polish Press into

important victories.  As the news of the rising spread over Russia,

there was a moment of hesitation.  Those who had been for some

years habitually extolling liberty and self-government as the

normal conditions of progress, who had been sympathising warmly

with every Liberal movement, whether at home or abroad, and who had

put forward a voluntary federation of independent Communes as the

ideal State organism, could not well frown on the political

aspirations of the Polish patriots.  The Liberal sentiment of that

time was so extremely philosophical and cosmopolitan that it hardly

distinguished between Poles and Russians, and liberty was supposed

to be the birthright of every man and woman to whatever nationality

they might happen to belong.  But underneath these beautiful

artificial clouds of cosmopolitan Liberal sentiment lay the volcano

of national patriotism, dormant for the moment, but by no means

extinct.  Though the Russians are in some respects the most

cosmopolitan of European nations, they are at the same time capable

of indulging in violent outbursts of patriotic fanaticism; and

events in Warsaw brought into hostile contact these two

contradictory elements in the national character.  The struggle was

only momentary.  Ere long the patriotic feelings gained the upper

hand and crushed all cosmopolitan sympathy with political freedom.

The Moscow Gazette, the first of the papers to recover its mental

equilibrium, thundered against the pseudo-Liberal sentimentalism,

which would, if unchecked, necessarily lead to the dismemberment of

the Empire, and its editor, Katkoff, became for a time the most

influential private individual in the country.  A few, indeed,

remained true to their convictions.  Herzen, for instance, wrote in

the Kolokol a glowing panegyric on two Russian officers who had

refused to fire on the insurgents; and here and there a good

Orthodox Russian might be found who confessed that he was ashamed

of Muravieff's extreme severity in Lithuania.  But such men were

few, and were commonly regarded as traitors, especially after the

ill-advised diplomatic intervention of the Western Powers.  Even

Herzen, by his publicly expressed sympathy with the insurgents,

lost entirely his popularity and influence among his fellow-

countrymen.  The great majority of the public thoroughly approved

of the severe energetic measures adopted by the Government, and

when the insurrection was suppressed, men who had a few months

previously spoken and written in magniloquent terms about

humanitarian Liberalism joined in the ovations offered to

Muravieff!  At a great dinner given in his honour, that ruthless

administrator of the old Muscovite type, who had systematically

opposed the emancipation of the serfs and had never concealed his

contempt for the Liberal ideas in fashion, could ironically express

his satisfaction at seeing around him so many "new friends"!**

This revulsion of public feeling gave the Moscow Slavophils an

opportunity of again preaching their doctrine that the safety and

prosperity of Russia were to be found, not in the Liberalism and

Constitutionalism of Western Europe, but in patriarchal autocracy,

Eastern Orthodoxy, and other peculiarities of Russian nationality.

Thus the reactionary tendencies gained ground; but Alexander II.,

while causing all political agitation to be repressed, did not at

once abandon his policy of introducing radical reforms by means of

the Autocratic Power.  On the contrary, he gave orders that the

preparatory work for creating local self-government and

reorganising the Law Courts should be pushed on energetically.  The

important laws for the establishment of the Zemstvo and for the

great judicial reforms, which I have described in previous

chapters, both date from the year 1864.





* The students of the St. Petersburg University scandalised their

more patriotic fellow-countrymen by making a pro-Polish

demonstration.



** In fairness to Count Muravieff I must say that he was not quite

so black as he was painted in the Polish and West-European Press.

He left an interesting autobiographical fragment relating to the

history of this time, but it is not likely to be printed for some

years.  As an historical document it is valuable, but must be used

with caution by the future historian.  A copy of it was for some

time in my possession, but I was bound by a promise not to make

extracts.





These and other reforms of a less important kind made no impression

on the young irreconcilables.  A small group of them, under the

leadership of a certain Ishutin, formed in Moscow a small secret

society, and conceived the design of assassinating the Emperor, in

the hope that his son and successor, who was erroneously supposed

to be imbued with ultra-Liberal ideas, might continue the work

which his father had begun and had not the courage to complete.  In

April, 1866, the attempt on the life of the Emperor was made by a

youth called Karakozof as his Majesty was leaving a public garden

in St. Petersburg, but the bullet happily missed its mark, and the

culprit was executed.



This incident formed a turning-point in the policy of the

Government.  Alexander II. began to fear that he had gone too far,

or, at least, too quickly, in his policy of radical reform.  An

Imperial rescript announced that law, property, and religion were

in danger, and that the Government would lean on the Noblesse and

other conservative elements of Society.  The two periodicals which

advocated the most advanced views (Sovremennik and Russkoye Slovo)

were suppressed permanently, and precautions were taken to prevent

the annual assemblies of the Zemstvo from giving public expression

to the aspirations of the moderate Liberals.



A secret official inquiry showed that the revolutionary agitation

proceeded in all cases from young men who were studying, or had

recently studied, in the universities, the seminaries, or the

technical schools, such as the Medical Academy and the Agricultural

Institute.  Plainly, therefore, the system of education was at

fault.  The semi-military system of the time of Nicholas had been

supplanted by one in which discipline was reduced to a minimum and

the study of natural science formed a prominent element.  Here it

was thought, lay the chief root of the evil.  Englishmen may have

some difficulty in imagining a possible connection between natural

science and revolutionary agitation.  To them the two things must

seem wide as the poles asunder.  Surely mathematics, chemistry,

physiology, and similar subjects have nothing to do with politics.

When a young Englishman takes to studying any branch of natural

science he gets up his subject by means of lectures, text-books,

and museums or laboratories, and when he has mastered it he

probably puts his knowledge to some practical use.  In Russia it is

otherwise.  Few students confine themselves to their speciality.

The majority of them dislike the laborious work of mastering dry

details, and, with the presumption which is often found in

conjunction with youth and a smattering of knowledge, they aspire

to become social reformers and imagine themselves specially

qualified for such activity.



But what, it may he asked, has social reform to do with natural

science?  I have already indicated the connection in the Russian

mind.  Though very few of the students of that time had ever read

the voluminous works of Auguste Comte, they were all more or less

imbued with the spirit of the Positive Philosophy, in which all the

sciences are subsidiary to sociology, and social reorganisation is

the ultimate object of scientific research.  The imaginative

Positivist can see with prophetic eye humanity reorganised on

strictly scientific principles.  Cool-headed people who have had a

little experience of the world, if they ever indulge in such

delightful dreams, recognise clearly that this ultimate goal of

human intellectual activity, if it is ever to be reached, is still

a long way off in the misty distance of the future; but the would-

be social reformers among the Russian students of the sixties were

too young, too inexperienced, and too presumptuously self-confident

to recognise this plain, simple truth.  They felt that too much

valuable time had been already lost, and they were madly impatient

to begin the great work without further delay.  As soon as they had

acquired a smattering of chemistry, physiology, and biology they

imagined themselves capable of reorganising human society from top

to bottom, and when they had acquired this conviction they were of

course unfitted for the patient, plodding study of details.



To remedy these evils, Count Dimitri Tolstoy, who was regarded as a

pillar of Conservatism, was appointed Minister of Public

Instruction, with the mission of protecting the young generation

against pernicious ideas, and eradicating from the schools,

colleges, and universities all revolutionary tendencies.  He

determined to introduce more discipline into all the educational

establishments and to supplant to a certain extent the superficial

study of natural science by the thorough study of the classics--

that is to say, Latin and Greek.  This scheme, which became known

before it was actually put into execution, produced a storm of

discontent in the young generation.  Discipline at that time was

regarded as an antiquated and useless remnant of patriarchal

tyranny, and young men who were impatient to take part in social

reorganisation resented being treated as naughty schoolboys.  To

them it seemed that the Latin grammar was an ingenious instrument

for stultifying youthful intelligence, destroying intellectual

development, and checking political progress.  Ingenious

speculations about the possible organisation of the working classes

and grandiose views of the future of humanity are so much more

interesting and agreeable than the rules of Latin syntax and the

Greek irregular verbs!



Count Tolstoy could congratulate himself on the efficacy of his

administration, for from the time of his appointment there was a

lull in the political excitement.  During three or four years there

was only one political trial, and that an insignificant one;

whereas there had been twenty between 1861 and 1864, and all more

or less important.  I am not at all sure, however, that the

educational reform which created much momentary irritation and

discontent had anything to do with the improvement in the

situation.  In any case, there were other and more potent causes at

work.  The excitement was too intense to be long-lived, and the

fashionable theories too fanciful to stand the wear and tear of

everyday life.  They evaporated, therefore, with amazing rapidity

when the leaders of the movement had disappeared--Tchernishevski

and others by exile, and Dobrolubof and Pissaref by death--and when

among the less prominent representatives of the younger generation

many succumbed to the sobering influences of time and experience or

drifted into lucrative professions.  Besides this, the reactionary

currents were making themselves felt, especially since the attempt

on the life of the Emperor.  So long as these had been confined to

the official world they had not much affected the literature,

except externally through the Press-censure, but when they

permeated the reading public their influence was much stronger.

Whatever the cause, there is no doubt that, in the last years of

the sixties, there was a subsidence of excitement and enthusiasm

and the peculiar intellectual phenomenon which had been nicknamed

Nihilism was supposed to be a thing of the past.  In reality the

movement of which Nihilism was a prominent manifestation had merely

lost something of its academic character and was entering on a new

stage of development.

