





CHAPTER XIV



THE MONGOL DOMINATION





The Conquest--Genghis Khan and his People--Creation and Rapid

Disintegration of the Mongol Empire--The Golden Horde--The Real

Character of the Mongol Domination--Religious Toleration--Mongol

System of Government--Grand Princes--The Princes of Moscow--

Influence of the Mongol Domination--Practical Importance of the

Subject.





The Tartar invasion, with its direct and indirect consequences, is

a subject which has more than a mere antiquarian interest.  To the

influence of the Mongols are commonly attributed many peculiarities

in the actual condition and national character of the Russians of

the present day, and some writers would even have us believe that

the men whom we call Russians are simply Tartars half disguised by

a thin varnish of European civilisation.  It may be well,

therefore, to inquire what the Tartar or Mongol domination really

was, and how far it affected the historical development and

national character of the Russian people.



The story of the conquest may be briefly told.  In 1224 the

chieftains of the Poloftsi--one of those pastoral tribes which

roamed on the Steppe and habitually carried on a predatory warfare

with the Russians of the south--sent deputies to Mistislaf the

Brave, Prince of Galicia, to inform him that their country had been

invaded from the southeast by strong, cruel enemies called

Tartars*--strange-looking men with brown faces, eyes small and wide

apart, thick lips, broad shoulders, and black hair.  "Today," said

the deputies, "they have seized our country, and tomorrow they will

seize yours if you do not help us."





* The word is properly "Tatar," and the Russians write and

pronounce it in this way, but I have preferred to retain the better

known form.





Mistislaf had probably no objection to the Poloftsi being

annihilated by some tribe stronger and fiercer than themselves, for

they gave him a great deal of trouble by their frequent raids; but

he perceived the force of the argument about his own turn coming

next, and thought it wise to assist his usually hostile neighbours.

For the purpose of warding off the danger he called together the

neighbouring Princes, and urged them to join him in an expedition

against the new enemy.  The expedition was undertaken, and ended in

disaster.  On the Kalka, a small river falling into the Sea of

Azof, the Russian host met the invaders, and was completely routed.

The country was thereby opened to the victors, but they did not

follow up their advantage.  After advancing for some distance they

suddenly wheeled round and disappeared.



Thus ended unexpectedly the first visit of these unwelcome

strangers.  Thirteen years afterwards they returned, and were not

so easily got rid of.  An enormous horde crossed the River Ural and

advanced into the heart of the country, pillaging, burning,

devastating, and murdering.  Nowhere did they meet with serious

resistance.  The Princes made no attempt to combine against the

common enemy.  Nearly all the principal towns were laid in ashes,

and the inhabitants were killed or carried off as slaves.  Having

conquered Russia, they advanced westward, and threw all Europe into

alarm.  The panic reached even England, and interrupted, it is

said, for a time the herring fishing on the coast.  Western Europe,

however, escaped their ravages.  After visiting Poland, Hungary,

Bulgaria, Servia, and Dalmatia, they retreated to the Lower Volga,

and the Russian Princes were summoned thither to do homage to the

victorious Khan.



At first the Russians had only very vague notions as to who this

terrible enemy was.  The old chronicler remarks briefly: "For our

sins unknown peoples have appeared.  No one knows who they are or

whence they have come, or to what race and faith they belong.  They

are commonly called Tartars, but some call them Tauermen, and

others Petchenegs.  Who they really are is known only to God, and

perhaps to wise men deeply read in books."  Some of these "wise men

deeply read in books" supposed them to be the idolatrous Moabites

who had in Old Testament times harassed God's chosen people, whilst

others thought that they must be the descendants of the men whom

Gideon had driven out, of whom a revered saint had prophesied that

they would come in the latter days and conquer the whole earth,

from the East even unto the Euphrates, and from the Tigris even

unto the Black Sea.



We are now happily in a position to dispense with such vague

ethnographical speculations.  From the accounts of several European

travellers who visited Tartary about that time, and from the

writings of various Oriental historians, we know a great deal about

these barbarians who conquered Russia and frightened the Western

nations.



The vast region lying to the east of Russia, from the basin of the

Volga to the shores of the Pacific Ocean, was inhabited then, as it

is still, by numerous Tartar and Mongol tribes.  These two terms

are often regarded as identical and interchangeable, but they

ought, I think, to be distinguished.  From the ethnographic, the

linguistic, and the religious point of view they differ widely from

each other.  The Kazan Tartars, the Bashkirs, the Kirghiz, in a

word, all the tribes in the country stretching latitudinally from

the Volga to Kashgar, and longitudinally from the Persian frontier,

the Hindu Kush and the Northern Himalaya, to a line drawn east and

west through the middle of Siberia, belong to the Tartar group;

whereas those further eastward, occupying Mongolia and Manchuria,

are Mongol in the stricter sense of the term.



A very little experience enables the traveller to distinguish

between the two.  Both of them have the well-known characteristics

of the Northern Asiatic--the broad flat face, yellow skin, small,

obliquely set eyes, high cheekbones, thin, straggling beard; but

these traits are more strongly marked, more exaggerated, if we may

use such an expression, in the Mongol than in the Tartar.  Thus the

Mongol is, according to our conceptions, by far the uglier of the

two, and the man of Tartar race, when seen beside him, appears

almost European by comparison.  The distinction is confirmed by a

study of their languages.  All the Tartar languages are closely

allied, so that a person of average linguistic talent who has

mastered one of them, whether it be the rude Turki of Central Asia

or the highly polished Turkish of Stambul, can easily acquire any

of the others; whereas even an extensive acquaintance with the

Tartar dialects will be of no practical use to him in learning a

language of the Mongol group.  In their religions likewise the two

races differ.  The Mongols are as a rule Shamanists or Buddhists,

while the Tartars are Mahometans.  Some of the Mongol invaders, it

is true, adopted Mahometanism from the conquered Tartar tribes, and

by this change of religion, which led naturally to intermarriage,

their descendants became gradually blended with the older

population; but the broad line of distinction was not permanently

effaced.



It is often supposed, even by people who profess to be acquainted

with Russian history, that Mongols and Tartars alike first came

westward to the frontiers of Europe with Genghis Khan.  This is

true of the Mongols, but so far as the Tartars are concerned it is

an entire mistake.  From time immemorial the Tartar tribes roamed

over these territories.  Like the Russians, they were conquered by

the Mongol invaders and had long to pay tribute, and when the

Mongol empire crumbled to pieces by internal dissensions and

finally disappeared before the victorious advance of the Russians,

the Tartars reappeared from the confusion without having lost,

notwithstanding an intermixture doubtless of Mongol blood, their

old racial characteristics, their old dialects, and their old

tribal organisation.



The germ of the vast horde which swept over Asia and advanced into

the centre of Europe was a small pastoral tribe of Mongols living

in the hilly country to the north of China, near the sources of the

Amur.  This tribe was neither more warlike nor more formidable than

its neighbours till near the close of the twelfth century, when

there appeared in it a man who is described as "a mighty hunter

before the Lord."  Of him and his people we have a brief

description by a Chinese author of the time: "A man of gigantic

stature, with broad forehead and long beard, and remarkable for his

bravery.  As to his people, their faces are broad, flat, and four-

cornered, with prominent cheek-bones; their eyes have no upper

eyelashes; they have very little hair in their beards and

moustaches; their exterior is very repulsive."  This man of

gigantic stature was no other than Genghis Khan.  He began by

subduing and incorporating into his army the surrounding tribes,

conquered with their assistance a great part of Northern China, and

then, leaving one of his generals to complete the conquest of the

Celestial Empire, he led his army westward with the ambitious

design of conquering the whole world.  "As there is but one God in

heaven," he was wont to say, "so there should be but one ruler on

earth"; and this one universal ruler he himself aspired to be.



A European army necessarily diminishes in force and its existence

becomes more and more imperilled as it advances from its base of

operations into a foreign and hostile country.  Not so a horde like

that of Genghis Khan in a country such as that which it had to

traverse.  It needed no base of operations, for it took with it its

flocks, its tents, and all its worldly goods.  Properly speaking,

it was not an army at all, but rather a people in movement.  The

grassy Steppes fed the flocks, and the flocks fed the warriors; and

with such a simple commissariat system there was no necessity for

keeping up communications with the point of departure.  Instead of

diminishing in numbers, the horde constantly increased as it moved

forwards.  The nomadic tribes which it encountered on its way,

composed of men who found a home wherever they found pasture and

drinking-water, required little persuasion to make them join the

onward movement.  By means of this terrible instrument of conquest

Genghis succeeded in creating a colossal Empire, stretching from

the Carpathians to the eastern shores of Asia, and from the Arctic

Ocean to the Himalayas.



Genghis was no mere ruthless destroyer; he was at the same time one

of the greatest administrators the world has ever seen.  But his

administrative genius could not work miracles.  His vast Empire,

founded on conquest and composed of the most heterogeneous

elements, had no principle of organic life in it, and could not

possibly be long-lived.  It had been created by him, and it

perished with him.  For some time after his death the dignity of

Grand Khan was held by some one of his descendants, and the

centralised administration was nominally preserved; but the local

rulers rapidly emancipated themselves from the central authority,

and within half a century after the death of its founder the great

Mongol Empire was little more than "a geographical expression."



With the dismemberment of the short-lived Empire the danger for

Eastern Europe was by no means at an end.  The independent hordes

were scarcely less formidable than the Empire itself.  A grandson

of Genghis formed on the Russian frontier a new State, commonly

known as Kiptchak, or the Golden Horde, and built a capital called

Serai, on one of the arms of the Lower Volga.  This capital, which

has since so completely disappeared that there is some doubt as to

its site, is described by Ibn Batuta, who visited it in the

fifteenth century, as a very great, populous, and beautiful city,

possessing many mosques, fine market-places, and broad streets, in

which were to be seen merchants from Babylon, Egypt, Syria, and

other countries.  Here lived the Khans of the Golden Horde, who

kept Russia in subjection for two centuries.



In conquering Russia the Mongols had no wish to possess themselves

of the soil, or to take into their own hands the local

administration.  What they wanted was not land, of which they had

enough and to spare, but movable property which they might enjoy

without giving up their pastoral, nomadic life.  They applied,

therefore, to Russia the same method of extracting supplies as they

had used in other countries.  As soon as their authority had been

formally acknowledged they sent officials into the country to

number the inhabitants and to collect an amount of tribute

proportionate to the population.  This was a severe burden for the

people, not only on account of the sum demanded, but also on

account of the manner in which it was raised.  The exactions and

cruelty of the tax-gatherers led to local insurrections, and the

insurrections were of course always severely punished.  But there

was never any general military occupation of the country or any

wholesale confiscations of land, and the existing political

organisation was left undisturbed.  The modern method of dealing

with annexed provinces was totally unknown to the Mongols.  The

Khans never thought of attempting to denationalise their Russian

subjects.  They demanded simply an oath of allegiance from the

Princes* and a certain sum of tribute from the people.  The

vanquished were allowed to retain their land, their religion, their

language, their courts of justice, and all their other

institutions.





* During the Mongol domination Russia was composed of a large

number of independent principalities.





The nature of the Mongol domination is well illustrated by the

policy which the conquerors adopted towards the Russian Church.

For more than half a century after the conquest the religion of the

Tartars was a mixture of Buddhism and Paganism, with traces of

Sabaeism or fire-worship.  During this period Christianity was more

than simply tolerated.  The Grand Khan Kuyuk caused a Christian

chapel to be erected near his domicile, and one of his successors,

Khubilai, was in the habit of publicly taking part in the Easter

festivals.  In 1261 the Khan of the Golden Horde allowed the

Russians to found a bishopric in his capital, and several members

of his family adopted Christianity.  One of them even founded a

monastery, and became a saint of the Russian Church!  The Orthodox

clergy were exempted from the poll-tax, and in the charters granted

to them it was expressly declared that if any one committed

blasphemy against the faith of the Russians he should be put to

death.  Some time afterwards the Golden Horde was converted to

Islam, but the Khans did not on that account change their policy.

They continued to favour the clergy, and their protection was long

remembered.  Many generations later, when the property of the

Church was threatened by the autocratic power, refractory

ecclesiastics contrasted the policy of the Orthodox Sovereign with

that of the "godless Tartars," much to the advantage of the latter.



At first there was and could be very little mutual confidence

between the conquerors and the conquered.  The Princes anxiously

looked for an opportunity of throwing off the galling yoke, and the

people chafed under the exactions and cruelty of the tribute-

collectors, whilst the Khans took precautions to prevent

insurrection, and threatened to devastate the country if their

authority was not respected.  But in the course of time this mutual

distrust and hostility greatly lessened.  When the Princes found by

experience that all attempts at resistance were fruitless, they

became reconciled to their new position, and instead of seeking to

throw off the Khan's authority, they tried to gain his favour, in

the hope of forwarding their personal interests.  For this purpose

they paid frequent visits to the Tartar Suzerain, made rich

presents to his wives and courtiers, received from him charters

confirming their authority, and sometimes even married members of

his family.  Some of them used the favour thus acquired for

extending their possessions at the expense of neighbouring Princes

of their own race, and did not hesitate to call in Tartar hordes to

their assistance.  The Khans, in their turn, placed greater

confidence in their vassals, entrusted them with the task of

collecting the tribute, recalled their own officials who were a

constant eyesore to the people, and abstained from all interference

in the internal affairs of the principalities so long as the

tribute was regularly paid.  The Princes acted, in short, as the

Khan's lieutenants, and became to a certain extent Tartarised.

Some of them carried this policy so far that they were reproached

by the people with "loving beyond measure the Tartars and their

language, and with giving them too freely land, and gold, and goods

of every kind."



Had the Khans of the Golden Horde been prudent, far-seeing

statesmen, they might have long retained their supremacy over

Russia.  In reality they showed themselves miserably deficient in

political talent.  Seeking merely to extract from the country as

much tribute as possible, they overlooked all higher

considerations, and by this culpable shortsightedness prepared

their own political ruin.  Instead of keeping all the Russian

Princes on the same level and thereby rendering them all equally

feeble, they were constantly bribed or cajoled into giving to one

or more of their vassals a pre-eminence over the others.  At first

this pre-eminence consisted in little more than the empty title of

Grand Prince; but the vassals thus favoured soon transformed the

barren distinction into a genuine power by arrogating to themselves

the exclusive right of holding direct communications with the

Horde, and compelling the minor Princes to deliver to them the

Mongol tribute.  If any of the lesser Princes refused to

acknowledge this intermediate authority, the Grand Prince could

easily crush them by representing them at the Horde as rebels.

Such an accusation would cause the accused to be summoned before

the Supreme Tribunal, where the procedure was extremely summary and

the Grand Prince had always the means of obtaining a decision in

his own favour.



Of the Princes who strove in this way to increase their influence,

the most successful were the Grand Princes of Moscow.  They were

not a chivalrous race, or one with which the severe moralist can

sympathise, but they were largely endowed with cunning, tact, and

perseverance, and were little hampered by conscientious scruples.

Having early discovered that the liberal distribution of money at

the Tartar court was the surest means of gaining favour, they lived

parsimoniously at home and spent their savings at the Horde.  To

secure the continuance of the favour thus acquired, they were ready

to form matrimonial alliances with the Khan's family, and to act

zealously as his lieutenants.  When Novgorod, the haughty,

turbulent republic, refused to pay the yearly tribute, they quelled

the insurrection and punished the leaders; and when the inhabitants

of Tver rose against the Tartars and compelled their Prince to make

common cause with them, the wily Muscovite hastened to the Tartar

court and received from the Khan the revolted principality, with

50,000 Tartars to support his authority.



Thus those cunning Moscow Princes "loved the Tartars beyond

measure" so long as the Khan was irresistibly powerful, but as his

power waned they stood forth as his rivals.  When the Golden Horde,

like the great Empire of which it had once formed a part, fell to

pieces in the fifteenth century, these ambitious Princes read the

signs of the times, and put themselves at the head of the

liberation movement, which was at first unsuccessful, but

ultimately freed the country from the hated yoke.



From this brief sketch of the Mongol domination the reader will

readily understand that it did not leave any deep, lasting

impression on the people.  The invaders never settled in Russia

proper, and never amalgamated with the native population.  So long

as they retained their semi-pagan, semi-Buddhistic religion, a

certain number of their notables became Christians and were

absorbed by the Russian Noblesse; but as soon as the Horde adopted

Islam this movement was arrested.  There was no blending of the two

races such as has taken place--and is still taking place--between

the Russian peasantry and the Finnish tribes of the North.  The

Russians remained Christians, and the Tartars remained Mahometans;

and this difference of religion raised an impassable barrier

between the two nationalities.



It must, however, be admitted that the Tartar domination, though it

had little influence on the life and habits of the people, had a

considerable influence on the political development of the nation.

At the time of the conquest Russia was composed of a large number

of independent principalities, all governed by descendants of

Rurik.  As these principalities were not geographical or

ethnographical units, but mere artificial, arbitrarily defined

districts, which were regularly subdivided or combined according to

the hereditary rights of the Princes, it is highly probable that

they would in any case have been sooner or later united under one

sceptre; but it is quite certain that the policy of the Khans

helped to accelerate this unification and to create the autocratic

power which has since been wielded by the Tsars.  If the

principalities had been united without foreign interference we

should probably have found in the united State some form of

political organisation corresponding to that which existed in the

component parts--some mixed form of government, in which the

political power would have been more or less equally divided

between the Tsar and the people.  The Tartar rule interrupted this

normal development by extinguishing all free political life.  The

first Tsars of Muscovy were the political descendants, not of the

old independent Princes, but of the Mongol Khans.  It may be said,

therefore, that the autocratic power, which has been during the

last four centuries out of all comparison the most important factor

in Russian history, was in a certain sense created by the Mongol

domination.


