





CHAPTER XII



THE TOWNS AND THE MERCANTILE CLASSES





General Character of Russian Towns--Scarcity of Towns in Russia--

Why the Urban Element in the Population is so Small--History of

Russian Municipal Institutions--Unsuccessful Efforts to Create a

Tiers-etat--Merchants, Burghers, and Artisans--Town Council--A Rich

Merchant--His House--His Love of Ostentation--His Conception of

Aristocracy--Official Decorations--Ignorance and Dishonesty of the

Commercial Classes--Symptoms of Change.





Those who wish to enjoy the illusions produced by scene painting

and stage decorations should never go behind the scenes.  In like

manner he who wishes to preserve the delusion that Russian

provincial towns are picturesque should never enter them, but

content himself with viewing them from a distance.



However imposing they may look when seen from the outside, they

will be found on closer inspection, with very few exceptions, to be

little more than villages in disguise.  If they have not a

positively rustic, they have at least a suburban, appearance.  The

streets are straight and wide, and are either miserably paved or

not paved at all.  Trottoirs are not considered indispensable.  The

houses are built of wood or brick, generally one-storied, and

separated from each other by spacious yards.  Many of them do not

condescend to turn their facades to the street.  The general

impression produced is that the majority of the burghers have come

from the country, and have brought their country-houses with them.

There are few or no shops with merchandise tastefully arranged in

the window to tempt the passer-by.  If you wish to make purchases

you must go to the Gostinny Dvor,* or Bazaar, which consists of

long, symmetrical rows of low-roofed, dimly-lighted stores, with a

colonnade in front.  This is the place where merchants most do

congregate, but it presents nothing of that bustle and activity

which we are accustomed to associate with commercial life.  The

shopkeepers stand at their doors or loiter about in the immediate

vicinity waiting for customers.  From the scarcity of these latter

I should say that when sales are effected the profits must be

enormous.





* These words mean literally the Guests' Court or Yard.  The

Ghosti--a word which is etymologically the same as our "host" and

"guest"--were originally the merchants who traded with other towns

or other countries.





In the other parts of the town the air of solitude and languor is

still more conspicuous.  In the great square, or by the side of the

promenade--if the town is fortunate enough to have one--cows or

horses may be seen grazing tranquilly, without being at all

conscious of the incongruity of their position.  And, indeed, it

would be strange if they had any such consciousness, for it does

not exist in the minds either of the police or of the inhabitants.

At night the streets may be lighted merely with a few oil-lamps,

which do little more than render the darkness visible, so that

cautious citizens returning home late often provide themselves with

lanterns.  As late as the sixties the learned historian, Pogodin,

then a town-councillor of Moscow, opposed the lighting of the city

with gas on the ground that those who chose to go out at night

should carry their lamps with them.  The objection was overruled,

and Moscow is now fairly well lit, but the provincial towns are

still far from being on the same level.  Some retain their old

primitive arrangements, while others enjoy the luxury of electric

lighting.



The scarcity of large towns in Russia is not less remarkable than

their rustic appearance.  According to the last census (1897) the

number of towns, officially so-called, is 1,321, but about three-

fifths of them have under 5,000 inhabitants; only 104 have over

25,000, and only 19 over 100,000.  These figures indicate plainly

that the urban element of the population is relatively small, and

it is declared by the official statisticians to be only 14 per

cent., as against 72 per cent. in Great Britain, but it is now

increasing rapidly.  When the first edition of this work was

published, in 1877, European Russia in the narrower sense of the

term--excluding Finland, the Baltic Provinces, Lithuania, Poland,

and the Caucasus--had only 11 towns with a population of over

50,000, and now there are 34; that is to say, the number of such

towns has more than trebled.  In the other portions of the country

a similar increase has taken place.  The towns which have become

important industrial and commercial centres have naturally grown

most rapidly.  For example, in a period of twelve years (1885-97)

the populations of Lodz, of Ekaterinoslaf, of Baku, of Yaroslavl,

and of Libau, have more than doubled.  In the five largest towns of

the Empire--St. Petersburg, Moscow, Warsaw, Odessa and Lodz--the

aggregate population rose during the same twelve years from

2,423,000 to 3,590,000, or nearly 50 per cent.  In ten other towns,

with populations varying from 50,000 to 282,000, the aggregate rose

from 780,000 to 1,382,000, or about 77 per cent.



That Russia should have taken so long to assimilate herself in this

respect to Western Europe is to be explained by the geographical

and political conditions.  Her population was not hemmed in by

natural or artificial frontiers strong enough to restrain their

expansive tendencies.  To the north, the east, and the southeast

there was a boundless expanse of fertile, uncultivated land,

offering a tempting field for emigration; and the peasantry have

ever shown themselves ready to take advantage of their

opportunities.  Instead of improving their primitive system of

agriculture, which requires an enormous area and rapidly exhausts

the soil, they have always found it easier and more profitable to

emigrate and take possession of the virgin land beyond.  Thus the

territory--sometimes with the aid of, and sometimes in spite of,

the Government--has constantly expanded, and has already reached

the Polar Ocean, the Pacific, and the northern offshoots of the

Himalayas.  The little district around the sources of the Dnieper

has grown into a mighty empire, comprising one-seventh of the land

surface of the globe.  Prolific as the Russian race is, its power

of reproduction could not keep pace with its territorial expansion,

and consequently the country is still very thinly peopled.

According to the latest census (1897) in the whole empire there are

under 130 millions of inhabitants, and the average density of

population is only about fifteen to the English square mile.  Even

the most densely populated provinces, including Moscow with its

988,610 inhabitants, cannot show more than 189 to the English

square mile, whereas England has about 400.  A people that has such

an abundance of land, and can support itself by agriculture, is not

naturally disposed to devote itself to industry, or to congregate

in large cities.



For many generations there were other powerful influences working

in the same direction.  Of these the most important was serfage,

which was not abolished till 1861.  That institution, and the

administrative system of which it formed an essential part, tended

to prevent the growth of the towns by hemming the natural movements

of the population.  Peasants, for example, who learned trades, and

who ought to have drifted naturally into the burgher class, were

mostly retained by the master on his estate, where artisans of all

sorts were daily wanted, and the few who were sent to seek work in

the towns were not allowed to settle there permanently.



Thus the insignificance of the Russian towns is to be attributed

mainly to two causes.  The abundance of land tended to prevent the

development of industry, and the little industry which did exist

was prevented by serfage from collecting in the towns.  But this

explanation is evidently incomplete.  The same causes existed

during the Middle Ages in Central Europe, and yet, in spite of

them, flourishing cities grew up and played an important part in

the social and political history of Germany.  In these cities

collected traders and artisans, forming a distinct social class,

distinguished from the nobles on the one hand, and the surrounding

peasantry on the other, by peculiar occupations, peculiar aims,

peculiar intellectual physiognomy, and peculiar moral conceptions.

Why did these important towns and this burgher class not likewise

come into existence in Russia, in spite of the two preventive

causes above mentioned?



To discuss this question fully it would be necessary to enter into

certain debated points of mediaeval history.  All I can do here is

to indicate what seems to me the true explanation.



In Central Europe, all through the Middle Ages, a perpetual

struggle went on between the various political factors of which

society was composed, and the important towns were in a certain

sense the products of this struggle.  They were preserved and

fostered by the mutual rivalry of the Sovereign, the Feudal

Nobility, and the Church; and those who desired to live by trade or

industry settled in them in order to enjoy the protection and

immunities which they afforded.  In Russia there was never any

political struggle of this kind.  As soon as the Grand Princes of

Moscow, in the sixteenth century, threw off the yoke of the

Tartars, and made themselves Tsars of all Russia, their power was

irresistible and uncontested.  Complete masters of the situation,

they organised the country as they thought fit.  At first their

policy was favourable to the development of the towns.  Perceiving

that the mercantile and industrial classes might be made a rich

source of revenue, they separated them from the peasantry, gave

them the exclusive right of trading, prevented the other classes

from competing with them, and freed them from the authority of the

landed proprietors.  Had they carried out this policy in a

cautious, rational way, they might have created a rich burgher

class; but they acted with true Oriental short-sightedness, and

defeated their own purpose by imposing inordinately heavy taxes,

and treating the urban population as their serfs.  The richer

merchants were forced to serve as custom-house officers--often at a

great distance from their domiciles*--and artisans were yearly

summoned to Moscow to do work for the Tsars without remuneration.





* Merchants from Yaroslavl, for instance, were sent to Astrakhan to

collect the custom-dues.





Besides this, the system of taxation was radically defective, and

the members of the local administration, who received no pay and

were practically free from control, were merciless in their

exactions.  In a word, the Tsars used their power so stupidly and

so recklessly that the industrial and trading population, instead

of fleeing to the towns to secure protection, fled from them to

escape oppression.  At length this emigration from the towns

assumed such dimensions that it was found necessary to prevent it

by administrative and legislative measures; and the urban

population was legally fixed in the towns as the rural population

was fixed to the soil.  Those who fled were brought back as

runaways, and those who attempted flight a second time were ordered

to be flogged and transported to Siberia.*





* See the "Ulozhenie" (i.e. the laws of Alexis, father of Peter the

Great), chap. xix. 13.





With the eighteenth century began a new era in the history of the

towns and of the urban population.  Peter the Great observed,

during his travels in Western Europe, that national wealth and

prosperity reposed chiefly on the enterprising, educated middle

classes, and he attributed the poverty of his own country to the

absence of this burgher element.  Might not such a class be created

in Russia?  Peter unhesitatingly assumed that it might, and set

himself at once to create it in a simple, straightforward way.

Foreign artisans were imported into his dominions and foreign

merchants were invited to trade with his subjects; young Russians

were sent abroad to learn the useful arts; efforts were made to

disseminate practical knowledge by the translation of foreign books

and the foundation of schools; all kinds of trade were encouraged,

and various industrial enterprises were organised.  At the same

time the administration of the towns was thoroughly reorganised

after the model of the ancient free-towns of Germany.  In place of

the old organisation, which was a slightly modified form of the

rural Commune, they received German municipal institutions, with

burgomasters, town councils, courts of justice, guilds for the

merchants, trade corporations (tsekhi) for the artisans, and an

endless list of instructions regarding the development of trade and

industry, the building of hospitals, sanitary precautions, the

founding of schools, the dispensation of justice, the organisation

of the police, and similar matters.



Catherine II. followed in the same track.  If she did less for

trade and industry, she did more in the way of legislating and

writing grandiloquent manifestoes.  In the course of her historical

studies she had learned, as she proclaims in one of her

manifestoes, that "from remotest antiquity we everywhere find the

memory of town-builders elevated to the same level as the memory of

legislators, and we see that heroes, famous for their victories,

hoped by town-building to give immortality to their names."  As the

securing of immortality for her own name was her chief aim in life,

she acted in accordance with historical precedent, and created 216

towns in the short space of twenty-three years.  This seems a great

work, but it did not satisfy her ambition.  She was not only a

student of history, but was at the same time a warm admirer of the

fashionable political philosophy of her time.  That philosophy paid

much attention to the tiers-etat, which was then acquiring in

France great political importance, and Catherine thought that as

she had created a Noblesse on the French model, she might also

create a bourgeoisie.  For this purpose she modified the municipal

organisation created by her great predecessor, and granted to all

the towns an Imperial Charter.  This charter remained without

essential modification until the publication of the new

Municipality Law in 1870.



The efforts of the Government to create a rich, intelligent tiers-

etat were not attended with much success.  Their influence was

always more apparent in official documents than in real life.  The

great mass of the population remained serfs, fixed to the soil,

whilst the nobles--that is to say, all who possessed a little

education--were required for the military and civil services.

Those who were sent abroad to learn the useful arts learned little,

and made little use of the knowledge which they acquired.  On their

return to their native country they very soon fell victims to the

soporific influence of the surrounding social atmosphere.  The

"town-building" had as little practical result.  It was an easy

matter to create any number of towns in the official sense of the

term.  To transform a village into a town, it was necessary merely

to prepare an izba, or log-house, for the district court, another

for the police-office, a third for the prison, and so on.  On an

appointed day the Governor of the province arrived in the village,

collected the officials appointed to serve in the newly-constructed

or newly-arranged log-houses, ordered a simple religious ceremony

to be performed by the priest, caused a formal act to be drawn up,

and then declared the town to be "opened."  All this required very

little creative effort; to create a spirit of commercial and

industrial enterprise among the population was a more difficult

matter and could not be effected by Imperial ukaz.



To animate the newly-imported municipal institutions, which had no

root in the traditions and habits of the people, was a task of

equal difficulty.  In the West these institutions had been slowly

devised in the course of centuries to meet real, keenly-felt,

practical wants.  In Russia they were adopted for the purpose of

creating those wants which were not yet felt.  Let the reader

imagine our Board of Trade supplying the masters of fishing-smacks

with accurate charts, learned treatises on navigation, and detailed

instructions for the proper ventilation of ships' cabins, and he

will have some idea of the effect which Peter's legislation had

upon the towns.  The office-bearers, elected against their will,

were hopelessly bewildered by the complicated procedure, and were

incapable of understanding the numerous ukazes which prescribed to

them their multifarious duties and threatened the most merciless

punishments for sins of omission and commission.  Soon, however, it

was discovered that the threats were not nearly so dreadful as they

seemed; and accordingly those municipal authorities who were to

protect and enlighten the burghers, "forgot the fear of God and the

Tsar," and extorted so unblushingly that it was found necessary to

place them under the control of Government officials.



The chief practical result of the efforts made by Peter and

Catherine to create a bourgeoisie was that the inhabitants of the

towns were more systematically arranged in categories for the

purpose of taxation, and that the taxes were increased.  All those

parts of the new administration which had no direct relation to the

fiscal interests of the Government had very little vitality in

them.  The whole system had been arbitrarily imposed on the people,

and had as motive only the Imperial will.  Had that motive power

been withdrawn and the burghers left to regulate their own

municipal affairs, the system would immediately have collapsed.

Rathhaus, burgomasters, guilds, aldermen, and all the other

lifeless shadows which had been called into existence by Imperial

ukaz would instantly have vanished into space.  In this fact we

have one of the characteristic traits of Russian historical

development compared with that of Western Europe.  In the West

monarchy had to struggle with municipal institutions to prevent

them from becoming too powerful; in Russia, it had to struggle with

them to prevent them from committing suicide or dying of inanition.



According to Catherine's legislation, which remained in force until

1870, and still exists in some of its main features, the towns were

divided into three categories: (1) Government towns (gubernskiye

goroda)--that is to say, the chief towns of provinces, or

governments (gubernii)--in which are concentrated the various

organs of provincial administration; (2) district towns (uyezdniye

goroda), in which resides the administration of the districts

(uyezdi) into which the provinces are divided; and (3)

supernumerary towns (zashtatniye goroda), which have no particular

significance in the territorial administration.



In all these the municipal organisation is the same.  Leaving out

of consideration those persons who happen to reside in the towns,

but in reality belong to the Noblesse, the clergy, or the lower

ranks of officials, we may say that the town population is composed

of three groups: the merchants (kuptsi), the burghers in the

narrower sense of the term (meshtchanye), and the artisans

(tsekhoviye).  These categories are not hereditary castes, like the

nobles, the clergy, and the peasantry.  A noble may become a

merchant, or a man may be one year a burgher, the next year an

artisan, and the third year a merchant, if he changes his

occupation and pays the necessary dues.  But the categories form,

for the time being, distinct corporations, each possessing a

peculiar organisation and peculiar privileges and obligations.



Of these three groups the first in the scale of dignity is that of

the merchants.  It is chiefly recruited from the burghers and the

peasantry.  Any one who wishes to engage in commerce inscribes

himself in one of the three guilds, according to the amount of his

capital and the nature of the operations in which he wishes to

embark, and as soon as he has paid the required dues he becomes

officially a merchant.  As soon as he ceases to pay these dues he

ceases to be a merchant in the legal sense of the term, and returns

to the class to which he formerly belonged.  There are some

families whose members have belonged to the merchant class for

several generations, and the law speaks about a certain "velvet-

book" (barkhatnaya kniga) in which their names should be inscribed,

but in reality they do not form a distinct category, and they

descend at once from their privileged position as soon as they

cease to pay the annual guild dues.



The artisans form the connecting link between the town population

and the peasantry, for peasants often enrol themselves in the

trades-corporations, or tsekhi, without severing their connection

with the rural Communes to which they belong.  Each trade or

handicraft constitutes a tsekh, at the head of which stands an

elder and two assistants, elected by the members; and all the

tsekhi together form a corporation under an elected head

(remeslenny golova) assisted by a council composed of the elders of

the various tsekhi.  It is the duty of this council and its

president to regulate all matters connected with the tsekhi, and to

see that the multifarious regulations regarding masters,

journeymen, and apprentices are duly observed.



The nondescript class, composed of those who are inscribed as

permanent inhabitants of the towns, but who do not belong to any

guild or tsekh, constitutes what is called the burghers in the

narrower sense of the term.  Like the other two categories, they

form a separate corporation, with an elder and an administrative

bureau.



Some idea of the relative numerical strength of these three

categories may be obtained from the following figures.  Thirty

years ago in European Russia the merchant class (including wives

and children) numbered about 466,000, the burghers about 4,033,000,

and the artisans about 260,000.  The numbers according to the last

census are not yet available.



In 1870 the entire municipal administration was reorganised on

modern West-European principles, and the Town Council (gorodskaya

duma), which formed under the previous system the connecting link

between the old-fashioned corporations, and was composed

exclusively of members of these bodies, became a genuine

representative body composed of householders, irrespective of the

social class to which they might belong.  A noble, provided he was

a house-proprietor, could become Town Councillor or Mayor, and in

this way a certain amount of vitality and a progressive spirit were

infused into the municipal administration.  As a consequence of

this change the schools, hospitals, and other benevolent

institutions were much improved, the streets were kept cleaner and

somewhat better paved, and for a time it seemed as if the towns in

Russia might gradually rise to the level of those of Western

Europe.  But the charm of novelty, which so often works wonders in

Russia, soon wore off.  After a few years of strenuous effort the

best citizens no longer came forward as candidates, and the office-

bearers selected no longer displayed zeal and intelligence in the

discharge of their duties.  In these circumstances the Government

felt called upon again to intervene.  By a decree dated June 11,

1892, it introduced a new series of reforms, by which the municipal

self-government was placed more under the direction and control of

the centralised bureaucracy, and the attendance of the Town

Councillors at the periodical meetings was declared to be

obligatory, recalcitrant members being threatened with reprimands

and fines.



This last fact speaks volumes for the low vitality of the

institutions and the prevalent popular apathy with regard to

municipal affairs.  Nor was the unsatisfactory state of things much

improved by the new reforms; on the contrary, the increased

interference of the regular officials tended rather to weaken the

vitality of the urban self government, and the so-called reform was

pretty generally condemned as a needlessly reactionary measure.  We

have here, in fact, a case of what has often occurred in the

administrative history of the Russian Empire since the time of

Peter the Great, and to which I shall again have occasion to refer.

The central authority, finding itself incompetent to do all that is

required of it, and wishing to make a display of liberalism,

accords large concessions in the direction of local autonomy; and

when it discovers that the new institutions do not accomplish all

that was expected of them, and are not quite so subservient and

obsequious as is considered desirable, it returns in a certain

measure to the old principles of centralised bureaucracy.



The great development of trade and industry in recent years has of

course enriched the mercantile classes, and has introduced into

them a more highly educated element, drawn chiefly from the

Noblesse, which formerly eschewed such occupations; but it has not

yet affected very deeply the mode of life of those who have sprung

from the old merchant families and the peasantry.  When a merchant,

contractor, or manufacturer of the old type becomes wealthy, he

builds for himself a fine house, or buys and thoroughly repairs the

house of some ruined noble, and spends money freely on parquetry

floors, large mirrors, malachite tables, grand pianos by the best

makers, and other articles of furniture made of the most costly

materials.  Occasionally--especially on the occasion of a marriage

or a death in the family--he will give magnificent banquets, and

expend enormous sums on gigantic sterlets, choice sturgeons,

foreign fruits, champagne, and all manner of costly delicacies.

But this lavish, ostentatious expenditure does not affect the

ordinary current of his daily life.  As you enter those gaudily

furnished rooms you can perceive at a glance that they are not for

ordinary use.  You notice a rigid symmetry and an indescribable

bareness which inevitably suggest that the original arrangements of

the upholsterer have never been modified or supplemented.  The

truth is that by far the greater part of the house is used only on

state occasions.  The host and his family live down-stairs in

small, dirty rooms, furnished in a very different, and for them

more comfortable, style.  At ordinary times the fine rooms are

closed, and the fine furniture carefully covered.



If you make a visite de politesse after an entertainment, you will

probably have some difficulty in gaining admission by the front

door.  When you have knocked or rung several times, some one will

come round from the back regions and ask you what you want.  Then

follows another long pause, and at last footsteps are heard

approaching from within.  The bolts are drawn, the door is opened,

and you are led up to a spacious drawing-room.  At the wall

opposite the windows there is sure to be a sofa, and before it an

oval table.  At each end of the table, and at right angles to the

sofa, there will be a row of three arm-chairs.  The other chairs

will be symmetrically arranged round the room.  In a few minutes

the host will appear, in his long double-breasted black coat and

well-polished long boots.  His hair is parted in the middle, and

his beard shows no trace of scissors or razor.



After the customary greetings have been exchanged, glasses of tea,

with slices of lemon and preserves, or perhaps a bottle of

champagne, are brought in by way of refreshments.  The female

members of the family you must not expect to see, unless you are an

intimate friend; for the merchants still retain something of that

female seclusion which was in vogue among the upper classes before

the time of Peter the Great.  The host himself will probably be an

intelligent, but totally uneducated and decidedly taciturn, man.



About the weather and the crops he may talk fluently enough, but he

will not show much inclination to go beyond these topics.  You may,

perhaps, desire to converse with him on the subject with which he

is best acquainted--the trade in which he is himself engaged; but

if you make the attempt, you will certainly not gain much

information, and you may possibly meet with such an incident as

once happened to my travelling companion, a Russian gentleman who

had been commissioned by two learned societies to collect

information regarding the grain trade.  When he called on a

merchant who had promised to assist him in his investigation, he

was hospitably received; but when he began to speak about the grain

trade of the district the merchant suddenly interrupted him, and

proposed to tell him a story.  The story was as follows:



Once on a time a rich landed proprietor had a son, who was a

thoroughly spoilt child; and one day the boy said to his father

that he wished all the young serfs to come and sing before the door

of the house.  After some attempts at dissuasion the request was

granted, and the young people assembled; but as soon as they began

to sing, the boy rushed out and drove them away.



When the merchant had told this apparently pointless story at great

length, and with much circumstantial detail, he paused a little,

poured some tea into his saucer, drank it off, and then inquired,

"Now what do you think was the reason of this strange conduct?"



My friend replied that the riddle surpassed his powers of

divination.



"Well," said the merchant, looking hard at him, with a knowing

grin, "there was no reason; and all the boy could say was, 'Go

away, go away!  I've changed my mind; I've changed my mind'"

(poshli von; otkhotyel).



There was no possibility of mistaking the point of the story.  My

friend took the hint and departed.



The Russian merchant's love of ostentation is of a peculiar kind--

something entirely different from English snobbery.  He may delight

in gaudy reception-rooms, magnificent dinners, fast trotters,

costly furs; or he may display his riches by princely donations to

churches, monasteries, or benevolent institutions: but in all this

he never affects to be other than he really is.  He habitually

wears a costume which designates plainly his social position; he

makes no attempt to adopt fine manners or elegant tastes; and he

never seeks to gain admission to what is called in Russia la

societe.  Having no desire to seem what he is not, he has a plain,

unaffected manner, and sometimes a quiet dignity which contrasts

favourably with the affected manner of those nobles of the lower

ranks who make pretensions to being highly educated and strive to

adopt the outward forms of French culture.  At his great dinners,

it is true, the merchant likes to see among his guests as many

"generals"--that is to say, official personages--as possible, and

especially those who happen to have a grand cordon; but he never

dreams of thereby establishing an intimacy with these personages,

or of being invited by them in return.  It is perfectly understood

by both parties that nothing of the kind is meant.  The invitation

is given and accepted from quite different motives.  The merchant

has the satisfaction of seeing at his table men of high official

rank, and feels that the consideration which he enjoys among people

of his own class is thereby augmented.  If he succeeds in obtaining

the presence of three generals, he obtains a victory over a rival

who cannot obtain more than two.  The general, on his side, gets a

first-rate dinner, a la russe, and acquires an undefined right to

request subscriptions for public objects or benevolent

institutions.



Of course this undefined right is commonly nothing more than a mere

tacit understanding, but in certain cases the subject is expressly

mentioned.  I know of one case in which a regular bargain was made.

A Moscow magnate was invited by a merchant to a dinner, and

consented to go in full uniform, with all his decorations, on

condition that the merchant should subscribe a certain sum to a

benevolent institution in which he was particularly interested.  It

is whispered that such bargains are sometimes made, not on behalf

of benevolent institutions, but simply in the interest of the

gentleman who accepts the invitation.  I cannot believe that there

are many official personages who would consent to let themselves

out as table decorations, but that it may happen is proved by the

following incident, which accidentally came to my knowledge.  A

rich merchant of the town of T---- once requested the Governor of

the Province to honour a family festivity with his presence, and

added that he would consider it a special favour if the

"Governoress" would enter an appearance.  To this latter request

his Excellency made many objections, and at last let the petitioner

understand that her Excellency could not possibly be present,

because she had no velvet dress that could bear comparison with

those of several merchants' wives in the town.  Two days after the

interview a piece of the finest velvet that could be procured in

Moscow was received by the Governor from an unknown donor, and his

wife was thus enabled to be present at the festivity, to the

complete satisfaction of all parties concerned.



It is worthy of remark that the merchants recognise no aristocracy

but that of official rank.  Many merchants would willingly give

twenty pounds for the presence of an "actual State Councillor" who

perhaps never heard of his grandfather, but who can show a grand

cordon; whilst they would not give twenty pence for the presence of

an undecorated Prince without official rank, though he might be

able to trace his pedigree up to the half-mythical Rurik.  Of the

latter they would probably say, "Kto ikh znact?"  (Who knows what

sort of a fellow he is?)  The former, on the contrary, whoever his

father and grandfather may have been, possesses unmistakable marks

of the Tsar's favour, which, in the merchant's opinion, is

infinitely more important than any rights or pretensions founded on

hereditary titles or long pedigrees.



Some marks of Imperial favour the old-fashioned merchants strive to

obtain for themselves.  They do not dream of grand cordons--that is

far beyond their most sanguine expectations--but they do all in

their power to obtain those lesser decorations which are granted to

the mercantile class.  For this purpose the most common expedient

is a liberal subscription to some benevolent institution, and

occasionally a regular bargain is made.  I know of at least one

instance where the kind of decoration was expressly stipulated.

The affair illustrates so well the commercial character of these

transactions that I venture to state the facts as related to me by

the official chiefly concerned.  A merchant subscribed to a society

which enjoyed the patronage of a Grand Duchess a considerable sum

of money, under the express condition that he should receive in

return a St. Vladimir Cross.  Instead of the desired decoration,

which was considered too much for the sum subscribed, a cross of

St. Stanislas was granted; but the donor was dissatisfied with the

latter and demanded that his money should be returned to him.  The

demand had to be complied with, and, as an Imperial gift cannot be

retracted, the merchant had his Stanislas Cross for nothing.



This traffic in decorations has had its natural result.  Like paper

money issued in too large quantities, the decorations have fallen

in value.  The gold medals which were formerly much coveted and

worn with pride by the rich merchants--suspended by a ribbon round

the neck--are now little sought after.  In like manner the

inordinate respect for official personages has considerably

diminished.  Fifty years ago the provincial merchants vied with

each other in their desire to entertain any great dignitary who

honoured their town with a visit, but now they seek rather to avoid

this expensive and barren honour.  When they do accept the honour,

they fulfil the duties of hospitality in a most liberal spirit.  I

have sometimes, when living as an honoured guest in a rich

merchant's house, found it difficult to obtain anything simpler

than sterlet, sturgeon, and champagne.



The two great blemishes on the character of the Russian merchants

as a class are, according to general opinion, their ignorance and

their dishonesty.  As to the former of these there cannot possibly

be any difference of opinion.  Many of them can neither read nor

write, and are forced to keep their accounts in their memory, or by

means of ingenious hieroglyphics, intelligible only to the

inventor.  Others can decipher the calendar and the lives of the

saints, can sign their names with tolerable facility, and can make

the simpler arithmetical calculations with the help of the stchety,

a little calculating instrument, composed of wooden balls strung on

brass wires, which resembles the "abaca" of the old Romans, and is

universally used in Russia.  It is only the minority who understand

the mysteries of regular book-keeping, and of these very few can

make any pretensions to being educated men.



All this, however, is rapidly undergoing a radical change.

Children are now much better educated than their parents, and the

next generation will doubtless make further progress, so that the

old-fashioned type above described is destined to disappear.

Already there are not a few of the younger generation--especially

among the wealthy manufacturers of Moscow--who have been educated

abroad, who may be described as tout a fait civilises, and whose

mode of life differs little from that of the richer nobles; but

they remain outside fashionable society, and constitute a "set" of

their own.



As to the dishonesty which is said to be so common among the

Russian commercial classes, it is difficult to form an accurate

judgment.  That an enormous amount of unfair dealing does exist

there can be no possible doubt, but in this matter a foreigner is

likely to be unduly severe.  We are apt to apply unflinchingly our

own standard of commercial morality, and to forget that trade in

Russia is only emerging from that primitive condition in which

fixed prices and moderate profits are entirely unknown.  And when

we happen to detect positive dishonesty, it seems to us especially

heinous, because the trickery employed is more primitive and

awkward than that to which we are accustomed.  Trickery in weighing

and measuring, for instance, which is by no means uncommon in

Russia, is likely to make us more indignant than those ingenious

methods of adulteration which are practised nearer home, and are

regarded by many as almost legitimate.  Besides this, foreigners

who go to Russia and embark in speculations without possessing any

adequate knowledge of the character, customs, and language of the

people positively invite spoliation, and ought to blame themselves

rather than the people who profit by their ignorance.



All this, and much more of the same kind, may be fairly urged in

mitigation of the severe judgments which foreign merchants commonly

pass on Russian commercial morality, but these judgments cannot be

reversed by such argumentation.  The dishonesty and rascality which

exist among the merchants are fully recognised by the Russians

themselves.  In all moral affairs the lower classes in Russia are

very lenient in their judgments, and are strongly disposed, like

the Americans, to admire what is called in Transatlantic

phraseology "a smart man," though the smartness is known to contain

a large admixture of dishonesty; and yet the vox populi in Russia

emphatically declares that the merchants as a class are

unscrupulous and dishonest.  There is a rude popular play in which

the Devil, as principal dramatis persona, succeeds in cheating all

manner and conditions of men, but is finally overreached by a

genuine Russian merchant.  When this play is acted in the Carnival

Theatre in St. Petersburg the audience invariably agrees with the

moral of the plot.



If this play were acted in the southern towns near the coast of the

Black Sea it would be necessary to modify it considerably, for

here, in company with Jews, Greeks, and Armenians, the Russian

merchants seem honest by comparison.  As to Greeks and Armenians, I

know not which of the two nationalities deserves the palm, but it

seems that both are surpassed by the Children of Israel.  "How

these Jews do business," I have heard a Russian merchant of this

region exclaim, "I cannot understand.  They buy up wheat in the

villages at eleven roubles per tchetvert, transport it to the coast

at their own expense, and sell it to the exporters at ten roubles!

And yet they contrive to make a profit!  It is said that the

Russian trader is cunning, but here 'our brother' [i.e., the

Russian] can do nothing."  The truth of this statement I have had

abundant opportunities of confirming by personal investigations on

the spot.



If I might express a general opinion regarding Russian commercial

morality, I should say that trade in Russia is carried on very much

on the same principle as horse-dealing in England.  A man who

wishes to buy or sell must trust to his own knowledge and

acuteness, and if he gets the worst of a bargain or lets himself be

deceived, he has himself to blame.  Commercial Englishmen on

arriving in Russia rarely understand this, and when they know it

theoretically they are too often unable, from their ignorance of

the language, the laws, and the customs of the people, to turn

their theoretical knowledge to account.  They indulge, therefore,

at first in endless invectives against the prevailing dishonesty;

but gradually, when they have paid what Germans call Lehrgeld, they

accommodate themselves to circumstances, take large profits to

counterbalance bad debts, and generally succeed--if they have

sufficient energy, mother-wit, and capital--in making a very

handsome income.



The old race of British merchants, however, is rapidly dying out,

and I greatly fear that the rising generation will not be equally

successful.  Times have changed.  It is no longer possible to amass

large fortunes in the old easy-going fashion.  Every year the

conditions alter, and the competition increases.  In order to

foresee, understand, and take advantage of the changes, one must

have far more knowledge of the country than the men of the old

school possessed, and it seems to me that the young generation have

still less of that knowledge than their predecessors.  Unless some

change takes place in this respect, the German merchants, who have

generally a much better commercial education and are much better

acquainted with their adopted country, will ultimately, I believe,

expel their British rivals.  Already many branches of commerce

formerly carried on by Englishmen have passed into their hands.



It must not be supposed that the unsatisfactory organisation of the

Russian commercial world is the result of any radical peculiarity

of the Russian character.  All new countries have to pass through a

similar state of things, and in Russia there are already

premonitory symptoms of a change for the better.  For the present,

it is true, the extensive construction of railways and the rapid

development of banks and limited liability companies have opened up

a new and wide field for all kinds of commercial swindling; but, on

the other hand, there are now in every large town a certain number

of merchants who carry on business in the West-European manner, and

have learnt by experience that honesty is the best policy.  The

success which many of these have obtained will doubtless cause

their example to be followed.  The old spirit of caste and routine

which has long animated the merchant class is rapidly disappearing,

and not a few nobles are now exchanging country life and the

service of the State for industrial and commercial enterprises.  In

this way is being formed the nucleus of that wealthy, enlightened

bourgeoisie which Catherine endeavoured to create by legislation;

but many years must elapse before this class acquires sufficient

social and political significance to deserve the title of a tiers-

etat.
