





CHAPTER XXVI



ST. PETERSBURG AND EUROPEAN INFLUENCE





St. Petersburg and Berlin--Big Houses--The "Lions"--Peter the

Great--His Aims and Policy--The German Regime--Nationalist

Reaction--French Influence--Consequent Intellectual Sterility--

Influence of the Sentimental School--Hostility to Foreign

Influences--A New Period of Literary Importation--Secret Societies--

The Catastrophe--The Age of Nicholas--A Terrible War on Parnassus--

Decline of Romanticism and Transcendentalism--Gogol--The

Revolutionary Agitation of 1848--New Reaction--Conclusion.





From whatever side the traveller approaches St. Petersburg, unless

he goes thither by sea, he must traverse several hundred miles of

forest and morass, presenting few traces of human habitation or

agriculture.  This fact adds powerfully to the first impression

which the city makes on his mind.  In the midst of a waste howling

wilderness, he suddenly comes on a magnificent artificial oasis.



Of all the great European cities, the one that most resembles the

capital of the Tsars is Berlin.  Both are built on perfectly level

ground; both have wide, regularly arranged streets; in both there

is a general look of stiffness and symmetry which suggests military

discipline and German bureaucracy.  But there is at least one

profound difference.  Though Berlin is said by geographers to be

built on the Spree, we might live a long time in the city without

noticing the sluggish little stream on which the name of a river

has been undeservedly conferred.  St. Petersburg, on the contrary,

is built on a magnificent river, which forms the main feature of

the place.  By its breadth, and by the enormous volume of its

clear, blue, cold water, the Neva is certainly one of the noblest

rivers of Europe.  A few miles before reaching the Gulf of Finland

it breaks up into several streams and forms a delta.  It is here

that St. Petersburg stands.



Like the river, everything in St. Petersburg is on a colossal

scale.  The streets, the squares, the palaces, the public

buildings, the churches, whatever may be their defects, have at

least the attribute of greatness, and seem to have been designed

for the countless generations to come, rather than for the

practical wants of the present inhabitants.  In this respect the

city well represents the Empire of which it is the capital.  Even

the private houses are built in enormous blocks and divided into

many separate apartments.  Those built for the working classes

sometimes contain, I am assured, more than a thousand inhabitants.

How many cubic feet of air is allowed to each person, I do not

know; not so many, I fear, as is recommended by the most advanced

sanitary authorities.



For a detailed description of the city I must refer the reader to

the guide books.  Among its numerous monuments, of which the

Russians are justly proud, I confess that the one which interested

me most was neither St. Isaac's Cathedral, with its majestic gilded

dome, its colossal monolithic columns of red granite, and its gaudy

interior; nor the Hermitage, with its magnificent collection of

Dutch pictures; nor the gloomy, frowning fortress of St. Peter and

St. Paul, containing the tombs of the Emperors.  These and other

"sights" may deserve all the praise which enthusiastic tourists

have lavished upon them, but what made a far deeper impression on

me was the little wooden house in which Peter the Great lived

whilst his future capital was being built.  In its style and

arrangement it looks more like the hut of a navvy than the

residence of a Tsar, but it was quite in keeping with the character

of the illustrious man who occupied it.  Peter could and did

occasionally work like a navvy without feeling that his Imperial

dignity was thereby impaired.  When he determined to build a new

capital on a Finnish marsh, inhabited chiefly by wildfowl, he did

not content himself with exercising his autocratic power in a

comfortable arm chair.  Like the Greek gods, he went down from his

Olympus and took his place in the ranks of ordinary mortals,

superintending the work with his own eyes, and taking part in it

with his own hands.  If he was as arbitrary and oppressive as any

of the pyramid-building Pharaohs, he could at least say in self-

justification that he did not spare himself any more than his

people, but exposed himself freely to the discomforts and dangers

under which thousands of his fellow-labourers succumbed.



In reading the account of Peter's life, written in part by his own

pen, we can easily understand how the piously Conservative section

of his subjects failed to recognise in him the legitimate successor

of the orthodox Tsars.  The old Tsars had been men of grave,

pompous demeanour, deeply imbued with the consciousness of their

semi-religious dignity.  Living habitually in Moscow or its

immediate neighbourhood, they spent their time in attending long

religious services, in consulting with their Boyars, in being

present at ceremonious hunting-parties, in visiting the

monasteries, and in holding edifying conversations with

ecclesiastical dignitaries or revered ascetics.  If they undertook

a journey, it was probably to make a pilgrimage to some holy

shrine; and, whether in Moscow or elsewhere, they were always

protected from contact with ordinary humanity by a formidable

barricade of court ceremonial.  In short, they combined the

characters of a Christian monk and of an Oriental potentate.



Peter was a man of an entirely different type, and played in the

calm, dignified, orthodox, ceremonious world of Moscow the part of

the bull in the china shop, outraging ruthlessly and wantonly all

the time-honored traditional conceptions of propriety and

etiquette.  Utterly regardless of public opinion and popular

prejudices, he swept away the old formalities, avoided ceremonies

of all kinds, scoffed at ancient usage, preferred foreign secular

books to edifying conversations, chose profane heretics as his boon

companions, travelled in foreign countries, dressed in heretical

costume, defaced the image of God and put his soul in jeopardy by

shaving off his beard, compelled his nobles to dress and shave like

himself, rushed about the Empire as if goaded on by the demon of

unrest, employed his sacred hands in carpentering and other menial

occupations, took part openly in the uproarious orgies of his

foreign soldiery, and, in short, did everything that "the Lord's

anointed" might reasonably be expected not to do.  No wonder the

Muscovites were scandalised by his conduct, and that some of them

suspected he was not the Tsar at all, but Antichrist in disguise.

And no wonder he felt the atmosphere of Moscow oppressive, and

preferred living in the new capital which he had himself created.



His avowed object in building St. Petersburg was to have "a window

by which the Russians might look into civilised Europe"; and well

has the city fulfilled its purpose.  From its foundation may be

dated the European period of Russian history.  Before Peter's time

Russia belonged to Asia rather than to Europe, and was doubtless

regarded by Englishmen and Frenchmen pretty much as we nowadays

regard Bokhara or Kashgar; since that time she has formed an

integral part of the European political system, and her

intellectual history has been but a reflection of the intellectual

history of Western Europe, modified and coloured by national

character and by peculiar local conditions.



When we speak of the intellectual history of a nation we generally

mean in reality the intellectual history of the upper classes.

With regard to Russia, more perhaps than with regard to any other

country, this distinction must always carefully be borne in mind.

Peter succeeded in forcing European civilisation on the nobles, but

the people remained unaffected.  The nation was, as it were, cleft

in two, and with each succeeding generation the cleft has widened.

Whilst the masses clung obstinately to their time-honoured customs

and beliefs, the nobles came to look on the objects of popular

veneration as the relics of a barbarous past, of which a civilised

nation ought to be ashamed.



The intellectual movement inaugurated by Peter had a purely

practical character.  He was himself a thorough utilitarian, and

perceived clearly that what his people needed was not theological

or philosophical enlightment, but plain, practical knowledge

suitable for the requirements of everyday life.  He wanted neither

theologians nor philosophers, but military and naval officers,

administrators, artisans, miners, manufacturers, and merchants, and

for this purpose he introduced secular technical education.  For

the young generation primary schools were founded, and for more

advanced pupils the best foreign works on fortification,

architecture, navigation, metallurgy, engineering and cognate

subjects were translated into the native tongue.  Scientific men

and cunning artificers were brought into the country, and young

Russians were sent abroad to learn foreign languages and the useful

arts.  In a word, everything was done that seemed likely to raise

the Russians to the level of material well-being already attained

by the more advanced nations.



We have here an important peculiarity in the intellectual

development of Russia.  In Western Europe the modern scientific

spirit, being the natural offspring of numerous concomitant

historical causes, was born in the natural way, and Society had,

consequently, before giving birth to it, to endure the pains of

pregnancy and the throes of prolonged labour.  In Russia, on the

contrary, this spirit appeared suddenly as an adult foreigner,

adopted by a despotic paterfamilias.  Thus Russia made the

transition from mediaeval to modern times without any violent

struggle between the old and the new conceptions such as had taken

place in the West.  The Church, effectually restrained from all

active opposition by the Imperial power, preserved unmodified her

ancient beliefs; whilst the nobles, casting their traditional

conceptions and beliefs to the winds, marched forward unfettered on

that path which their fathers and grandfathers had regarded as the

direct road to perdition.



During the first part of Peter's reign Russia was not subjected to

the exclusive influence of any one particular country.  Thoroughly

cosmopolitan in his sympathies, the great reformer, like the

Japanese of the present day, was ready to borrow from any foreign

nation--German, Dutch, Danish, or French--whatever seemed to him to

suit his purpose.  But soon the geographical proximity to Germany,

the annexation of the Baltic Provinces in which the civilisation

was German, and intermarriages between the Imperial family and

various German dynasties, gave to German influence a decided

preponderance.  When the Empress Anne, Peter's niece, who had been

Duchess of Courland, entrusted the whole administration of the

country to her favourite Biron, the German influence became almost

exclusive, and the Court, the official world, and the schools were

Germanised.



The harsh, cruel, tyrannical rule of Biron produced a strong

reaction, ending in a revolution, which raised to the throne the

Princess Elizabeth, Peter's unmarried daughter, who had lived in

retirement and neglect during the German regime.  She was expected

to rid the country of foreigners, and she did what she could to

fulfil the expectations that were entertained of her.  With loud

protestations of patriotic feelings, she removed the Germans from

all important posts, demanded that in future the members of the

Academy should be chosen from among born Russians, and gave orders

that the Russian youth should be carefully prepared for all kinds

of official activity.



This attempt to throw off the German bondage did not lead to

intellectual independence.  During Peter's violent reforms Russia

had ruthlessly thrown away her own historic past with whatever

germs it contained, and now she possessed none of the elements of a

genuine national culture.  She was in the position of a fugitive

who has escaped from slavery, and, finding himself in danger of

starvation, looks about for a new master.  The upper classes, who

had acquired a taste for foreign civilisation, no sooner threw off

everything German than they sought some other civilisation to put

in its place.  And they could not long hesitate in making a choice,

for at that time all who thought of culture and refinement turned

their eyes to Paris and Versailles.  All that was most brilliant

and refined was to be found at the Court of the French kings, under

whose patronage the art and literature of the Renaissance had

attained their highest development.  Even Germany, which had

resisted the ambitious designs of Louis XIV., imitated the manners

of his Court.  Every petty German potentate strove to ape the pomp

and dignity of the Grand Monarque; and the courtiers, affecting to

look on everything German as rude and barbarous, adopted French

fashions, and spoke a hybrid jargon which they considered much more

elegant than the plain mother tongue.  In a word, Gallomania had

become the prevailing social epidemic of the time, and it could not

fail to attack and metamorphose such a class as the Russian

Noblesse, which possessed few stubborn deep-rooted national

convictions.



At first the French influence was manifested chiefly in external

forms--that is to say, in dress, manners, language, and upholstery--

but gradually, and very rapidly after the accession of Catherine

II., the friend of Voltaire and the Encyclopaedists, it sank

deeper.  Every noble who had pretensions to being "civilised"

learned to speak French fluently, and gained some superficial

acquaintance with French literature.  The tragedies of Corneille

and Racine and the comedies of Moliere were played regularly at the

Court theatre in presence of the Empress, and awakened a real or

affected enthusiasm among the audience.  For those who preferred

reading in their native language, numerous translations were

published, a simple list of which would fill several pages.  Among

them we find not only Voltaire, Rousseau, Lesage, Marmontel, and

other favourite French authors, but also all the masterpieces of

European literature, ancient and modern, which at that time enjoyed

a high reputation in the French literary world--Homer and

Demosthenes, Cicero and Virgil, Ariosto and Camoens, Milton and

Locke, Sterne and Fielding.



It is related of Byron that he never wrote a description whilst the

scene was actually before him; and this fact points to an important

psychological principle.  The human mind, so long as it is

compelled to strain the receptive faculties, cannot engage in that

"poetic" activity--to use the term in its Greek sense--which is

commonly called "original creation."  And as with individuals, so

with nations.  By accepting in a lump a foreign culture a nation

inevitably condemns itself for a time to intellectual sterility.

So long as it is occupied in receiving and assimilating a flood of

new ideas, unfamiliar conceptions, and foreign modes of thought, it

will produce nothing original, and the result of its highest

efforts will be merely successful imitation.  We need not be

surprised therefore to find that the Russians, in becoming

acquainted with foreign literature, became imitators and

plagiarists.  In this kind of work their natural pliancy of mind

and powerful histrionic talent made them wonderfully successful.

Odes, pseudo-classical tragedies, satirical comedies, epic poems,

elegies, and all the other recognised forms of poetical

composition, appeared in great profusion, and many of the writers

acquired a remarkable command over their native language, which had

hitherto been regarded as uncouth and barbarous.  But in all this

mass of imitative literature, which has since fallen into well-

merited oblivion, there are very few traces of genuine originality.

To obtain the title of the Russian Racine, the Russian Lafontaine,

the Russian Pindar, or the Russian Homer, was at that time the

highest aim of Russian literary ambition.



Together with the fashionable literature the Russian educated

classes adopted something of the fashionable philosophy.  They were

peculiarly unfitted to resist that hurricane of "enlightenment"

which swept over Europe during the latter half of the eighteenth

century, first breaking or uprooting the received philosophical

systems, theological conceptions, and scientific theories, and then

shaking to their foundations the existing political and social

institutions.  The Russian Noblesse had neither the traditional

conservative spirit, nor the firm, well-reasoned, logical beliefs

which in England and Germany formed a powerful barrier against the

spread of French influence.  They had been too recently

metamorphosed, and were too eager to acquire a foreign

civilisation, to have even the germs of a conservative spirit.  The

rapidity and violence with which Peter's reforms had been effected,

together with the peculiar spirit of Greek Orthodoxy and the low

intellectual level of the clergy, had prevented theology from

associating itself with the new order of things.  The upper classes

had become estranged from the beliefs of their forefathers without

acquiring other beliefs to supply the place of those which had been

lost.  The old religious conceptions were inseparably interwoven

with what was recognised as antiquated and barbarous, whilst the

new philosophical ideas were associated with all that was modern

and civilised.  Besides this, the sovereign, Catherine II., who

enjoyed the unbounded admiration of the upper classes, openly

professed allegiance to the new philosophy, and sought the advice

and friendship of its high priests.  If we bear in mind these facts

we shall not be surprised to find among the Russian nobles of that

time a considerable number of so-called "Voltaireans" and numerous

unquestioning believers in the infallibility of the Encyclopedie.

What is a little more surprising is, that the new philosophy

sometimes found its way into the ecclesiastical seminaries.  The

famous Speranski relates that in the seminary of St. Petersburg one

of his professors, when not in a state of intoxication, was in the

habit of preaching the doctrines of Voltaire and Diderot!



The rise of the sentimental school in Western Europe produced an

important change in Russian literature, by undermining the

inordinate admiration for the French pseudo-classical school.

Florian, Richardson, Sterne, Rousseau, and Bernardin de St. Pierre

found first translators, and then imitators, and soon the loud-

sounding declamation and wordy ecstatic despair of the stage heroes

were drowned in the deep-drawn sighs and plaintive wailings of

amorous swains and peasant-maids forsaken.  The mania seems to have

been in Russia even more severe than in the countries where it

originated.  Full-grown, bearded men wept because they had not been

born in peaceful primitive times, "when all men were shepherds and

brothers."  Hundreds of sighing youths and maidens visited the

scenes described by the sentimental writers, and wandered by the

rivers and ponds in which despairing heroines had drowned

themselves.  People talked, wrote, and meditated about "the

sympathy of hearts created for each other," "the soft communion of

sympathetic souls," and much more of the same kind.  Sentimental

journeys became a favourite amusement, and formed the subject of

very popular books, containing maudlin absurdities likely to

produce nowadays mirth rather than tears.  One traveller, for

instance, throws himself on his knees before an old oak and makes a

speech to it; another weeps daily on the grave of a favourite dog,

and constantly longs to marry a peasant girl; a third talks love to

the moon, sends kisses to the stars, and wishes to press the

heavenly orbs to his bosom!  For a time the public would read

nothing but absurd productions of this sort, and Karamzin, the

great literary authority of the time, expressly declared that the

true function of Art was "to disseminate agreeable impressions in

the region of the sentimental."



The love of French philosophy vanished as suddenly as the

inordinate admiration of the French pseudo-classical literature.

When the great Revolution broke out in Paris the fashionable

philosophic literature in St. Petersburg disappeared.  Men who

talked about political freedom and the rights of man, without

thinking for a moment of limiting the autocratic power or of

emancipating their serfs, were naturally surprised and frightened

on discovering what the liberal principles could effect when

applied to real life.  Horrified by the awful scenes of the Terror,

they hastened to divest themselves of the principles which led to

such results, and sank into a kind of optimistic conservatism that

harmonised well with the virtuous sentimentalism in vogue.  In this

the Empress herself gave the example.  The Imperial disciple and

friend of the Encyclopaedists became in the last years of her reign

a decided reactionnaire.



During the Napoleonic wars, when the patriotic feelings were

excited, there was a violent hostility to foreign intellectual

influence; and feeble intermittent attempts were made to throw off

the intellectual bondage.  The invasion of the country in 1812 by

the Grande Armee, and the burning of Moscow, added abundant fuel to

this patriotic fire.  For some time any one who ventured to express

even a moderate admiration for French culture incurred the risk of

being stigmatised as a traitor to his country and a renegade to the

national faith.  But this patriotic fanaticism soon evaporated, and

exaggerations of the ultra-national party became the object of

satire and parody.  When the political danger was past, and people

resumed their ordinary occupations, those who loved foreign

literature returned to their old favourites--or, as the ultra-

patriots called it, to their "wallowing in the mire"--simply

because the native literature did not supply them with what they

desired.  "We are quite ready," they said to their upbraiders, "to

admire your great works as soon as they appear, but in the meantime

please allow us to enjoy what we possess."  Thus in the last years

of the reign of Alexander I. the patriotic opposition to West

European literature gradually ceased, and a new period of

unrestricted intellectual importation began.



The intellectual merchandise now brought into the country was very

different from that which had been imported in the time of

Catherine.  The French Revolution, the Napoleonic domination, the

patriotic wars, the restoration of the Bourbons, and the other

great events of that memorable epoch, had in the interval produced

profound changes in the intellectual as well as the political

condition of Western Europe.  During the Napoleonic wars Russia had

become closely associated with Germany; and now the peculiar

intellectual fermentation which was going on among the German

educated classes was reflected in the society of St. Petersburg.

It did not appear, indeed, in the printed literature, for the

Press-censure had been recently organised on the principles laid

down by Metternich, but it was none the less violent on that

account.  Whilst the periodicals were filled with commonplace

meditations on youth, spring, the love of Art, and similar innocent

topics, the young generation was discussing in the salons all the

burning questions which Metternich and his adherents were

endeavouring to extinguish.



These discussions, if discussions they might be called, were not of

a very serious kind.  In true dilettante style the fashionable

young philosophers culled from the newest books the newest thoughts

and theories, and retailed them in the salon or the ballroom.  And

they were always sure to find attentive listeners.  The more

astounding the idea or dogma, the more likely was it to be

favourably received.  No matter whether it came from the

Rationalists, the Mystics, the Freemasons, or the Methodists, it

was certain to find favour, provided it was novel and presented in

an elegant form.  The eclectic minds of that curious time could

derive equal satisfaction from the brilliant discourses of the

reactionary jesuitical De Maistre, the revolutionary odes of

Pushkin, and the mysticism of Frau von Krudener.  For the majority

the vague theosophic doctrines and the projects for a spiritual

union of governments and peoples had perhaps the greatest charm,

being specially commended by the fact that they enjoyed the

protection and sympathy of the Emperor.  Pious souls discovered in

the mystical lucubrations of Jung-Stilling and Baader the final

solution of all existing difficulties--political, social, and

philosophical.  Men of less dreamy temperament put their faith in

political economy and constitutional theories, and sought a

foundation for their favourite schemes in the past history of the

country and in the supposed fundamental peculiarities of the

national character.  Like the young German democrats, who were then

talking enthusiastically about Teutons, Cheruskers, Skalds, the

shade of Arminius, and the heroes of the Niebelungen, these young

Russian savants recognised in early Russian history--when

reconstructed according to their own fancy--lofty political ideals,

and dreamed of resuscitating the ancient institutions in all their

pristine imaginary splendour.



Each age has its peculiar social and political panaceas.  One

generation puts its trust in religion, another in philanthropy, a

third in written constitutions, a fourth in universal suffrage, a

fifth in popular education.  In the Epoch of the Restoration, as it

is called, the favourite panacea all over the Continent was secret

political association.  Very soon after the overthrow of Napoleon

the peoples who had risen in arms to obtain political independence

discovered that they had merely changed masters.  The Princes

reconstructed Europe according to their own convenience, without

paying much attention to patriotic aspirations, and forgot their

promises of liberal institutions as soon as they were again firmly

seated on their thrones.  This was naturally for many a bitter

deception.  The young generation, excluded from all share in

political life and gagged by the stringent police supervision,

sought to realise its political aspirations by means of secret

societies, resembling more or less the Masonic brotherhoods.  There

were the Burschenschaften in Germany; the Union, and the "Aide toi

et le ciel t'aidera," in France; the Order of the Hammer in Spain;

the Carbonari in Italy; and the Hetairai in Greece.  In Russia the

young nobles followed the prevailing fashion.  Secret societies

were formed, and in December, 1825, an attempt was made to raise a

military insurrection in St. Petersburg, for the purpose of

deposing the Imperial family and proclaiming a republic; but the

attempt failed, and the vague Utopian dreams of the romantic would-

be reformers were swept away by grape-shot.



This "December catastrophe," still vividly remembered, was for the

society of St. Petersburg like the giving way of the floor in a

crowded ball-room.  But a moment before, all had been animated,

careless, and happy; now consternation was depicted on every face.

The salons, that but yesterday had been ringing with lively

discussions on morals, aesthetics, politics, and theology, were now

silent and deserted.  Many of those who had been wont to lead the

causeries had been removed to the cells of the fortress, and those

who had not been arrested trembled for themselves or their friends;

for nearly all had of late dabbled more or less in the theory and

practice of revolution.  The announcement that five of the

conspirators had been condemned to the gallows and the others

sentenced to transportation did not tend to calm the consternation.

Society was like a discomfited child, who, amidst the delight and

excitement of letting off fireworks, has had its fingers severely

burnt.



The sentimental, wavering Alexander I. had been succeeded by his

stern, energetic brother Nicholas, and the command went forth that

there should be no more fireworks, no more dilettante

philosophising or political aspirations.  There was, however,

little need for such an order.  Society had been, for the moment at

least, effectually cured of all tendencies to political dreaming.

It had discovered, to its astonishment and dismay, that these new

ideas, which were to bring temporal salvation to humanity, and to

make all men happy, virtuous, refined, and poetical, led in reality

to exile and the scaffold!  The pleasant dream was at an end, and

the fashionable world, giving up its former habits, took to

harmless occupations--card-playing, dissipation, and the reading of

French light literature.  "The French quadrille," as a writer of

the time tersely expresses it, "has taken the place of Adam Smith."



When the storm had passed, the life of the salons began anew, but

it was very different from what it had been.  There was no longer

any talk about political economy, theology, popular education,

administrative abuses, social and political reforms.  Everything

that had any relation to politics in the wider sense of the term

was by tacit consent avoided.  Discussions there were as of old,

but they were now confined to literary topics, theories of art, and

similar innocent subjects.



This indifference or positive repugnance to philosophy and

political science, strengthened and prolonged by the repressive

system of administration adopted by Nicholas, was of course fatal

to the many-sided intellectual activity which had flourished during

the preceding reign, but it was by no means unfavourable to the

cultivation of imaginative literature.  On the contrary, by

excluding those practical interests which tend to disturb artistic

production and to engross the attention of the public, it fostered

what was called in the phraseology of that time "the pure-hearted

worship of the Muses."  We need not, therefore, be surprised to

find that the reign of Nicholas, which is commonly and not unjustly

described as an epoch of social and intellectual stagnation, may be

called in a certain sense the Golden Age of Russian literature.



Already in the preceding reign the struggle between the Classical

and the Romantic school--between the adherents of traditional

aesthetic principles and the partisans of untrammelled poetic

inspiration--which was being carried on in Western Europe, was

reflected in Russia.  A group of young men belonging to the

aristocratic society of St. Petersburg embraced with enthusiasm the

new doctrines, and declared war against "classicism," under which

term they understood all that was antiquated, dry, and pedantic.

Discarding the stately, lumbering, unwieldy periods which had

hitherto been in fashion, they wrote a light, elastic, vigorous

style, and formed a literary society for the express purpose of

ridiculing the most approved classical writers.  The new principles

found many adherents, and the new style many admirers, but this

only intensified the hostility of the literary Conservatives.  The

staid, respectable leaders of the old school, who had all their

lives kept the fear of Boileau before their eyes and considered his

precepts as the infallible utterances of aesthetic wisdom,

thundered against the impious innovations as unmistakable symptoms

of literary decline and moral degeneracy--representing the

boisterous young iconoclasts as dissipated Don Juans and dangerous

freethinkers.



Thus for some time in Russia, as in Western Europe, "a terrible war

raged on Parnassus."  At first the Government frowned at the

innovators, on account of certain revolutionary odes which one of

their number had written; but when the Romantic Muse, having turned

away from the present as essentially prosaic, went back into the

distant past and soared into the region of sublime abstractions,

the most keen-eyed Press Censors found no reason to condemn her

worship, and the authorities placed almost no restrictions on free

poetic inspiration.  Romantic poetry acquired the protection of the

Government and the patronage of the Court, and the names of

Zhukofski, Pushkin, and Lermontof--the three chief representatives

of the Russian Romantic school--became household words in all ranks

of the educated classes.



These three great luminaries of the literary world were of course

attended by a host of satellites of various magnitudes, who did all

in their power to refute the romantic principles by reductiones ad

absurdum.  Endowed for the most part with considerable facility of

composition, the poetasters poured forth their feelings with

torrential recklessness, demanding freedom for their inspiration,

and cursing the age that fettered them with its prosaic cares, its

cold reason, and its dry science.  At the same time the dramatists

and novelists created heroes of immaculate character and angelic

purity, endowed with all the cardinal virtues in the superlative

degree; and, as a contrast to these, terrible Satanic personages

with savage passions, gleaming daggers, deadly poisons, and all

manner of aimless melodramatic villainy.  These stilted

productions, interspersed with light satirical essays, historical

sketches, literary criticism, and amusing anecdotes, formed the

contents of the periodical literature, and completely satisfied the

wants of the reading public.  Almost no one at that time took any

interest in public affairs or foreign politics.  The acts of the

Government which were watched most attentively were the promotions

in the service and the conferring of decorations.  The publication

of a new tale by Zagoskin or Marlinski--two writers now well-nigh

forgotten--seemed of much greater importance than any amount of

legislation, and such events as the French Revolution of 1830 paled

before the publication of a new poem by Pushkin.



The Transcendental philosophy, which in Germany went hand in hand

with the Romantic literature, found likewise a faint reflection in

Russia.  A number of young professors and students in Moscow, who

had become ardent admirers of German literature, passed from the

works of Schiller, Goethe, and Hoffmann to the writing of Schelling

and Hegel.  Trained in the Romantic school, these young

philosophers found at first a special charm in Schelling's mystical

system, teeming with hazy poetical metaphors, and presenting a

misty grandiose picture of the universe; but gradually they felt

the want of some logical basis for their speculations, and Hegel

became their favourite.  Gallantly they struggled with the uncouth

terminology and epigrammatic paradoxes of the great thinker, and

strove to force their way through the intricate mazes of his

logical formulae.  With the ardour of neophytes they looked at

every phenomenon--even the most trivial incident of common life--

from the philosophical point of view, talked day and night about

principles, ideas, subjectivity, Weltauffassung, and similar

abstract entities, and habitually attacked the "hydra of

unphilosophy" by analysing the phenomena presented and relegating

the ingredient elements to the recognised categories.  In ordinary

life they were men of quiet, grave, contemplative demeanour, but

their faces could flush and their blood boil when they discussed

the all-important question, whether it is possible to pass

logically from Pure Being through Nonentity to the conception of

Development and Definite Existence!



We know how in Western Europe Romanticism and Transcendentalism, in

their various forms, sank into oblivion, and were replaced by a

literature which had a closer connection with ordinary prosaic

wants and plain everyday life.  The educated public became weary of

the Romantic writers, who were always "sighing like a furnace,"

delighting in solitude, cold eternity, and moonshine, deluging the

world with their heart-gushings, and calling on the heavens and the

earth to stand aghast at their Promethean agonising or their

Wertherean despair.  Healthy human nature revolted against the

poetical enthusiasts who had lost the faculty of seeing things in

their natural light, and who constantly indulged in that morbid

self-analysis which is fatal to genuine feeling and vigorous

action.  And in this healthy reaction the philosophers fared no

better than the poets, with whom, indeed, they had much in common.

Shutting their eyes to the visible world around them, they had

busied themselves with burrowing in the mysterious depths of

Absolute Being, grappling with the ego and the non-ego,

constructing the great world, visible and invisible, out of their

own puny internal self-consciousness, endeavouring to appropriate

all departments of human thought, and imparting to every subject

they touched the dryness and rigidity of an algebraical formula.

Gradually men with real human sympathies began to perceive that

from all this philosophical turmoil little real advantage was to be

derived.  It became only too evident that the philosophers were

perfectly reconciled with all the evil in the world, provided it

did not contradict their theories; that they were men of the same

type as the physician in Moliere's comedy, whose chief care was

that his patients should die selon les ordonnances de la medicine.



In Russia the reaction first appeared in the aesthetic literature.

Its first influential representative was Gogol (b. 1808, d. 1852),

who may be called, in a certain sense, the Russian Dickens.  A

minute comparison of those two great humourists would perhaps show

as many points of contrast as of similarity, but there is a strong

superficial resemblance between them.  They both possessed an

inexhaustible supply of broad humour and an imagination of singular

vividness.  Both had the power of seeing the ridiculous side of

common things, and the talent of producing caricatures that had a

wonderful semblance of reality.  A little calm reflection would

suffice to show that the characters presented are for the most part

psychological impossibilities; but on first making their

acquaintance we are so struck with one or two life-like

characteristics and various little details dexterously introduced,

and at the same time we are so carried away by the overflowing fun

of the narrative, that we have neither time nor inclination to use

our critical faculties.  In a very short time Gogol's fame spread

throughout the length and breadth of the Empire, and many of his

characters became as familiar to his countrymen as Sam Weller and

Mrs. Gamp were to Englishmen.  His descriptions were so graphic--so

like the world which everybody knew!  The characters seemed to be

old acquaintances hit off to the life; and readers revelled in that

peculiar pleasure which most of us derive from seeing our friends

successfully mimicked.  Even the Iron Tsar could not resist the fun

and humour of "The Inspector" (Revizor), and not only laughed

heartily, but also protected the author against the tyranny of the

literary censors, who considered that the piece was not written in

a sufficiently "well-intentioned" tone.  In a word, the reading

public laughed as it had never laughed before, and this wholesome

genuine merriment did much to destroy the morbid appetite for

Byronic heroes and Romantic affectation.



The Romantic Muse did not at once abdicate, but with the spread of

Gogol's popularity her reign was practically at an end.  In vain

some of the conservative critics decried the new favourite as

talentless, prosaic, and vulgar.  The public were not to be robbed

of their amusement for the sake of any abstract aesthetic

considerations; and young authors, taking Gogol for their model,

chose their subjects from real life, and endeavoured to delineate

with minute truthfulness.



This new intellectual movement was at first purely literary, and

affected merely the manner of writing novels, tales, and poems.

The critics who had previously demanded beauty of form and elegance

of expression now demanded accuracy of description, condemned the

aspirations towards so-called high art, and praised loudly those

who produced the best literary photographs.  But authors and

critics did not long remain on this purely aesthetic standpoint.

The authors, in describing reality, began to indicate moral

approval and condemnation, and the critics began to pass from the

criticism of the representations to the criticism of the realities

represented.  A poem or a tale was often used as a peg on which to

hang a moral lecture, and the fictitious characters were soundly

rated for their sins of omission and commission.  Much was said

about the defence of the oppressed, female emancipation, honour,

and humanitarianism; and ridicule was unsparingly launched against

all forms of ignorance, apathy, and the spirit of routine.  The

ordinary refrain was that the public ought now to discard what was

formerly regarded as poetical and sublime, and to occupy itself

with practical concerns--with the real wants of social life.



The literary movement was thus becoming a movement in favour of

social and political reforms when it was suddenly arrested by

political events in the West.  The February Revolution in Paris,

and the political fermentation which appeared during 1848-49 in

almost every country of Europe, alarmed the Emperor Nicholas and

his counsellors.  A Russian army was sent into Austria to suppress

the Hungarian insurrection and save the Hapsburg dynasty, and the

most stringent measures were taken to prevent disorders at home.

One of the first precautions for the preservation of domestic

tranquillity was to muzzle the Press more firmly than before, and

to silence the aspirations towards reform and progress; thenceforth

nothing could be printed which was not in strict accordance with

the ultra-patriotic theory of Russian history, as expressed by a

leading official personage: "The past has been admirable, the

present is more than magnificent, and the future will surpass all

that the human imagination can conceive!"  The alarm caused by the

revolutionary disorders spread to the non-official world, and gave

rise to much patriotic self-congratulation.  "The nations of the

West," it was said, "envy us, and if they knew us better--if they

could see how happy and prosperous we are--they would envy us still

more.  We ought not, however, to withdraw from Europe our

solicitude; its hostility should not deprive us of our high mission

of saving order and restoring rest to the nations; we ought to

teach them to obey authority as we do.  It is for us to introduce

the saving principle of order into a world that has fallen a prey

to anarchy.  Russia ought not to abandon that mission which has

been entrusted to her by the heavenly and by the earthly Tsar."*





* These words were written by Tchaadaef, who, a few years before,

had vigorously attacked the Slavophils for enouncing similar views.





Men who saw in the significant political eruption of 1848 nothing

but an outburst of meaningless, aimless anarchy, and who believed

that their country was destined to restore order throughout the

civilised world, had of course little time or inclination to think

of putting their own house in order.  No one now spoke of the

necessity of social reorganisation: the recently awakened

aspirations and expectations seemed to be completely forgotten.

The critics returned to their old theory that art and literature

should be cultivated for their own sake and not used as a vehicle

for the propagation of ideas foreign to their nature.  It seemed,

in short, as if all the prolific ideas which had for a time

occupied the public attention had been merely "writ in water," and

had now disappeared without leaving a trace behind them.



In reality the new movement was destined to reappear very soon with

tenfold force; but the account of its reappearance and development

belongs to a future chapter.  Meanwhile I may formulate the general

conclusion to be drawn from the foregoing pages.  Ever since the

time of Peter the Great there has been such a close connection

between Russia and Western Europe that every intellectual movement

which has appeared in France and Germany has been reflected--albeit

in an exaggerated, distorted form--in the educated society of St.

Petersburg and Moscow.  Thus the window which Peter opened in order

to enable his subjects to look into Europe has well served its

purpose.

