





CHAPTER IV



THE VILLAGE PRIEST





Priests' Names--Clerical Marriages--The White and the Black Clergy--

Why the People do not Respect the Parish Priests--History of the

White Clergy--The Parish Priest and the Protestant Pastor--In What

Sense the Russian People are Religious--Icons--The Clergy and

Popular Education--Ecclesiastical Reform--Premonitory Symptoms of

Change--Two Typical Specimens of the Parochial Clergy of the

Present Day.





In formal introductions it is customary to pronounce in a more or

less inaudible voice the names of the two persons introduced.

Circumstances compel me in the present case to depart from received

custom.  The truth is, I do not know the names of the two people

whom I wish to bring together!  The reader who knows his own name

will readily pardon one-half of my ignorance, but he may naturally

expect that I should know the name of a man with whom I profess to

be acquainted, and with whom I daily held long conversations during

a period of several months.  Strange as it may seem, I do not.

During all the time of my sojourn in Ivanofka I never heard him

addressed or spoken of otherwise than as "Batushka."  Now

"Batushka" is not a name at all.  It is simply the diminutive form

of an obsolete word meaning "father," and is usually applied to all

village priests.  The ushka is a common diminutive termination, and

the root Bat is evidently the same as that which appears in the

Latin pater.



Though I do not happen to know what Batushka's family name was, I

can communicate two curious facts concerning it: he had not

possessed it in his childhood, and it was not the same as his

father's.



The reader whose intuitive powers have been preternaturally

sharpened by a long course of sensation novels will probably leap

to the conclusion that Batushka was a mysterious individual, very

different from what he seemed--either the illegitimate son of some

great personage, or a man of high birth who had committed some

great sin, and who now sought oblivion and expiation in the humble

duties of a parish priest.  Let me dispel at once all delusions of

this kind.  Batushka was actually as well as legally the legitimate

son of an ordinary parish priest, who was still living, about

twenty miles off, and for many generations all his paternal and

maternal ancestors, male and female, had belonged to the priestly

caste.  He was thus a Levite of the purest water, and thoroughly

Levitical in his character.  Though he knew by experience something

about the weakness of the flesh, he had never committed any sins of

the heroic kind, and had no reason to conceal his origin.  The

curious facts above stated were simply the result of a peculiar

custom which exists among the Russian clergy.  According to this

custom, when a boy enters the seminary he receives from the Bishop

a new family name.  The name may be Bogoslafski, from a word

signifying "Theology," or Bogolubof, "the love of God," or some

similar term; or it may be derived from the name of the boy's

native village, or from any other word which the Bishop thinks fit

to choose.  I know of one instance where a Bishop chose two French

words for the purpose.  He had intended to call the boy

Velikoselski, after his native place, Velikoe Selo, which means

"big village"; but finding that there was already a Velikoselski in

the seminary, and being in a facetious frame of mind, he called the

new comer Grandvillageski--a word that may perhaps sorely puzzle

some philologist of the future.



My reverend teacher was a tall, muscular man of about forty years

of age, with a full dark-brown beard, and long lank hair falling

over his shoulders.  The visible parts of his dress consisted of

three articles--a dingy-brown robe of coarse material buttoned

closely at the neck and descending to the ground, a wideawake hat,

and a pair of large, heavy boots.  As to the esoteric parts of his

attire, I refrained from making investigations.  His life had been

an uneventful one.  At an early age he had been sent to the

seminary in the chief town of the province, and had made for

himself the reputation of a good average scholar.  "The seminary of

that time," he used to say to me, referring to that part of his

life, "was not what it is now.  Nowadays the teachers talk about

humanitarianism, and the boys would think that a crime had been

committed against human dignity if one of them happened to be

flogged.  But they don't consider that human dignity is at all

affected by their getting drunk, and going to--to--to places that I

never went to.  I was flogged often enough, and I don't think that

I am a worse man on that account; and though I never heard then

anything about pedagogical science that they talk so much about

now, I'll read a bit of Latin yet with the best of them.



"When my studies were finished," said Batushka, continuing the

simple story of his life, "the Bishop found a wife for me, and I

succeeded her father, who was then an old man.  In that way I

became a priest of Ivanofka, and have remained here ever since.  It

is a hard life, for the parish is big, and my bit of land is not

very fertile; but, praise be to God! I am healthy and strong, and

get on well enough."



"You said that the Bishop found a wife for you," I remarked.  "I

suppose, therefore, that he was a great friend of yours."



"Not at all.  The Bishop does the same for all the seminarists who

wish to be ordained: it is an important part of his pastoral

duties."



"Indeed!" I exclaimed in astonishment.  "Surely that is carrying

the system of paternal government a little too far.  Why should his

Reverence meddle with things that don't concern him?"



"But these matters do concern him.  He is the natural protector of

widows and orphans, especially among the clergy of his own diocese.

When a parish priest dies, what is to become of his wife and

daughters?"



Not perceiving clearly the exact bearing of these last remarks, I

ventured to suggest that priests ought to economise in view of

future contingencies.



"It is easy to speak," replied Batushka: "'A story is soon told,'

as the old proverb has it, 'but a thing is not soon done.'  How are

we to economise?  Even without saving we have the greatest

difficulty to make the two ends meet."



"Then the widow and daughters might work and gain a livelihood."



"What, pray, could they work at?" asked Batushka, and paused for a

reply.  Seeing that I had none to offer him, he continued, "Even

the house and land belong not to them, but to the new priest."



"If that position occurred in a novel," I said, "I could foretell

what would happen.  The author would make the new priest fall in

love with and marry one of the daughters, and then the whole

family, including the mother-in-law, would live happily ever

afterwards."



"That is exactly how the Bishop arranges the matter.  What the

novelist does with the puppets of his imagination, the Bishop does

with real beings of flesh and blood.  As a rational being he cannot

leave things to chance.  Besides this, he must arrange the matter

before the young man takes orders, because, by the rules of the

Church, the marriage cannot take place after the ceremony of

ordination.  When the affair is arranged before the charge becomes

vacant, the old priest can die with the pleasant consciousness that

his family is provided for."



"Well, Batushka, you certainly put the matter in a very plausible

way, but there seem to be two flaws in the analogy.  The novelist

can make two people fall in love with each other, and make them

live happily together with the mother-in-law, but that--with all

due respect to his Reverence, be it said--is beyond the power of a

Bishop."



"I am not sure," said Batushka, avoiding the point of the

objection, "that love-marriages are always the happiest ones; and

as to the mother-in-law, there are--or at least there were until

the emancipation of the serfs--a mother-in-law and several

daughters-in-law in almost every peasant household."



"And does harmony generally reign in peasant households?"



"That depends upon the head of the house.  If he is a man of the

right sort, he can keep the women-folks in order."  This remark was

made in an energetic tone, with the evident intention of assuring

me that the speaker was himself "a man of the right sort"; but I

did not attribute much importance to it, for I have occasionally

heard henpecked husbands talk in this grandiloquent way when their

wives were out of hearing.  Altogether I was by no means convinced

that the system of providing for the widows and orphans of the

clergy by means of mariages de convenance was a good one, but I

determined to suspend my judgment until I should obtain fuller

information.



An additional bit of evidence came to me a week or two later.  One

morning, on going into the priest's house, I found that he had a

friend with him--the priest of a village some fifteen miles off.

Before we had got through the ordinary conventional remarks about

the weather and the crops, a peasant drove up to the door in his

cart with a message that an old peasant was dying in a neighbouring

village, and desired the last consolations of religion.  Batushka

was thus obliged to leave us, and his friend and I agreed to stroll

leisurely in the direction of the village to which he was going, so

as to meet him on his way home.  The harvest was already finished,

so that our road, after emerging from the village, lay through

stubble-fields.  Beyond this we entered the pine forest, and by the

time we had reached this point I had succeeded in leading the

conversation to the subject of clerical marriages.



"I have been thinking a good deal on this subject," I said, "and I

should very much like to know your opinion about the system."



My new acquaintance was a tall, lean, black-haired man, with a

sallow complexion and vinegar aspect--evidently one of those

unhappy mortals who are intended by Nature to take a pessimistic

view of all things, and to point out to their fellows the deep

shadows of human life.  I was not at all surprised, therefore, when

be replied in a deep, decided tone, "Bad, very bad--utterly bad!"



The way in which these words were pronounced left no doubt as to

the opinion of the speaker, but I was desirous of knowing on what

that opinion was founded--more especially as I seemed to detect in

the tone a note of personal grievance.  My answer was shaped

accordingly.



"I suspected that; but in the discussions which I have had I have

always been placed at a disadvantage, not being able to adduce any

definite facts in support of my opinion."



"You may congratulate yourself on being unable to find any in your

own experience.  A mother-in-law living in the house does not

conduce to domestic harmony.  I don't know how it is in your

country, but so it is with us."



I hastened to assure him that this was not a peculiarity of Russia.



"I know it only too well," he continued.  "My mother-in-law lived

with me for some years, and I was obliged at last to insist on her

going to another son-in-law."



"Rather selfish conduct towards your brother-in-law," I said to

myself, and then added audibly, "I hope you have thus solved the

difficulty satisfactorily."



"Not at all.  Things are worse now than they were.  I agreed to pay

her three roubles a month, and have regularly fulfilled my promise,

but lately she has thought it not enough, and she made a complaint

to the Bishop.  Last week I went to him to defend myself, but as I

had not money enough for all the officials in the Consistorium, I

could not obtain justice.  My mother-in-law had made all sorts of

absurd accusations against me, and consequently I was laid under an

inhibition for six weeks!"



"And what is the effect of an inhibition?"



"The effect is that I cannot perform the ordinary rites of our

religion.  It is really very unjust," he added, assuming an

indignant tone, "and very annoying.  Think of all the hardship and

inconvenience to which it gives rise."



As I thought of the hardship and inconvenience to which the

parishioners must be exposed through the inconsiderate conduct of

the old mother-in-law, I could not but sympathise with my new

acquaintance's indignation.  My sympathy was, however, somewhat

cooled when I perceived that I was on a wrong tack, and that the

priest was looking at the matter from an entirely different point

of view.



"You see," he said, "it is a most unfortunate time of year.  The

peasants have gathered in their harvest, and can give of their

abundance.  There are merry-makings and marriages, besides the

ordinary deaths and baptisms.  Altogether I shall lose by the thing

more than a hundred roubles!"



I confess I was a little shocked on hearing the priest thus speak

of his sacred functions as if they were an ordinary marketable

commodity, and talk of the inhibition as a pushing undertaker might

talk of sanitary improvements.  My surprise was caused not by the

fact that he regarded the matter from a pecuniary point of view--

for I was old enough to know that clerical human nature is not

altogether insensible to pecuniary considerations--but by the fact

that he should thus undisguisedly express his opinions to a

stranger without in the least suspecting that there was anything

unseemly in his way of speaking.  The incident appeared to me very

characteristic, but I refrained from all audible comments, lest I

should inadvertently check his communicativeness.  With the view of

encouraging it, I professed to be very much interested, as I really

was, in what he said, and I asked him how in his opinion the

present unsatisfactory state of things might be remedied.



"There is but one cure," he said, with a readiness that showed he

had often spoken on the theme already, "and that is freedom and

publicity.  We full-grown men are treated like children, and

watched like conspirators.  If I wish to preach a sermon--not that

I often wish to do such a thing, but there are occasions when it is

advisable--I am expected to show it first to the Blagotchinny, and--"



"I beg your pardon, who is the Blagotchinny?"



"The Blagotchinny is a parish priest who is in direct relations

with the Consistory of the Province, and who is supposed to

exercise a strict supervision over all the other parish priests of

his district.  He acts as the spy of the Consistory, which is

filled with greedy, shameless officials, deaf to any one who does

not come provided with a handful of roubles.  The Bishop may be a

good, well-intentioned man, but he always sees and acts through

these worthless subordinates.  Besides this, the Bishops and heads

of monasteries, who monopolise the higher places in the

ecclesiastical Administration, all belong to the Black Clergy--that

is to say, they are all monks--and consequently cannot understand

our wants.  How can they, on whom celibacy is imposed by the rules

of the Church, understand the position of a parish priest who has

to bring up a family and to struggle with domestic cares of every

kind?  What they do is to take all the comfortable places for

themselves, and leave us all the hard work.  The monasteries are

rich enough, and you see how poor we are.  Perhaps you have heard

that the parish priests extort money from the peasants--refusing to

perform the rites of baptism or burial until a considerable sum has

been paid.  It is only too true, but who is to blame?  The priest

must live and bring up his family, and you cannot imagine the

humiliations to which he has to submit in order to gain a scanty

pittance.  I know it by experience.  When I make the periodical

visitation I can see that the peasants grudge every handful of rye

and every egg that they give me.  I can overbear their sneers as I

go away, and I know they have many sayings such as--'The priest

takes from the living and from the dead.'  Many of them fasten

their doors, pretending to be away from home, and do not even take

the precaution of keeping silent till I am out of hearing."



"You surprise me," I said, in reply to the last part of this long

tirade; "I have always heard that the Russians are a very religious

people--at least the lower classes."



"So they are; but the peasantry are poor and heavily taxed.  They

set great importance on the sacraments, and observe rigorously the

fasts, which comprise nearly a half of the year; but they show very

little respect for their priests, who are almost as poor as

themselves."



"But I do not see clearly how you propose to remedy this state of

things."



"By freedom and publicity, as I said before."  The worthy man

seemed to have learned this formula by rote.  "First of all, our

wants must be made known.  In some provinces there have been

attempts to do this by means of provincial assemblies of the

clergy, but these efforts have always been strenuously opposed by

the Consistories, whose members fear publicity above all things.

But in order to have publicity we must have more freedom."



Here followed a long discourse on freedom and publicity, which

seemed to me very confused.  So far as I could understand the

argument, there was a good deal of reasoning in a circle.  Freedom

was necessary in order to get publicity, and publicity was

necessary in order to get freedom; and the practical result would

be that the clergy would enjoy bigger salaries and more popular

respect.  We had only got thus far in the investigation of the

subject when our conversation was interrupted by the rumbling of a

peasant's cart.  In a few seconds our friend Batushka appeared, and

the conversation took a different turn.



Since that time I have frequently spoken on this subject with

competent authorities, and nearly all have admitted that the

present condition of the clergy is highly unsatisfactory, and that

the parish priest rarely enjoys the respect of his parishioners.

In a semi-official report, which I once accidentally stumbled upon

when searching for material of a different kind, the facts are

stated in the following plain language: "The people"--I seek to

translate as literally as possible--"do not respect the clergy, but

persecute them with derision and reproaches, and feel them to be a

burden.  In nearly all the popular comic stories the priest, his

wife, or his labourer is held up to ridicule, and in all the

proverbs and popular sayings where the clergy are mentioned it is

always with derision.  The people shun the clergy, and have

recourse to them not from the inner impulse of conscience, but from

necessity. . . .  And why do the people not respect the clergy?

Because it forms a class apart; because, having received a false

kind of education, it does not introduce into the life of the

people the teaching of the Spirit, but remains in the mere dead

forms of outward ceremonial, at the same time despising these forms

even to blasphemy; because the clergy itself continually presents

examples of want of respect to religion, and transforms the service

of God into a profitable trade.  Can the people respect the clergy

when they hear how one priest stole money from below the pillow of

a dying man at the moment of confession, how another was publicly

dragged out of a house of ill-fame, how a third christened a dog,

how a fourth whilst officiating at the Easter service was dragged

by the hair from the altar by the deacon?  Is it possible for the

people to respect priests who spend their time in the gin-shop,

write fraudulent petitions, fight with the cross in their hands,

and abuse each other in bad language at the altar?



"One might fill several pages with examples of this kind--in each

instance naming the time and place--without overstepping the

boundaries of the province of Nizhni-Novgorod.  Is it possible for

the people to respect the clergy when they see everywhere amongst

them simony, carelessness in performing the religious rites, and

disorder in administering the sacraments?  Is it possible for the

people to respect the clergy when they see that truth has

disappeared from it, and that the Consistories, guided in their

decisions not by rules, but by personal friendship and bribery,

destroy in it the last remains of truthfulness?  If we add to all

this the false certificates which the clergy give to those who do

not wish to partake of the Eucharist, the dues illegally extracted

from the Old Ritualists, the conversion of the altar into a source

of revenue, the giving of churches to priests' daughters as a

dowry, and similar phenomena, the question as to whether the people

can respect the clergy requires no answer."



As these words were written by an orthodox Russian,* celebrated for

his extensive and intimate knowledge of Russian provincial life,

and were addressed in all seriousness to a member of the Imperial

family, we may safely assume that they contain a considerable

amount of truth.  The reader must not, however, imagine that all

Russian priests are of the kind above referred to.  Many of them

are honest, respectable, well-intentioned men, who conscientiously

fulfil their humble duties, and strive hard to procure a good

education for their children.  If they have less learning, culture,

and refinement than the Roman Catholic priesthood, they have at the

same time infinitely less fanaticism, less spiritual pride, and

less intolerance towards the adherents of other faiths.





* Mr. Melnikof, in a "secret" Report to the Grand Duke Constantine

Nikolaievitch.





Both the good and the bad qualities of the Russian priesthood at

the present time can be easily explained by its past history, and

by certain peculiarities of the national character.



The Russian White Clergy--that is to say, the parish priests, as

distinguished from the monks, who are called the Black Clergy--have

had a curious history.  In primitive times they were drawn from all

classes of the population, and freely elected by the parishioners.

When a man was elected by the popular vote, he was presented to the

Bishop, and if he was found to be a fit and proper person for the

office, he was at once ordained.  But this custom early fell into

disuse.  The Bishops, finding that many of the candidates presented

were illiterate peasants, gradually assumed the right of appointing

the priests, with or without the consent of the parishioners; and

their choice generally fell on the sons of the clergy as the men

best fitted to take orders.  The creation of Bishops' schools,

afterwards called seminaries, in which the sons of the clergy were

educated, naturally led, in the course of time, to the total

exclusion of the other classes.  The policy of the civil Government

led to the same end.  Peter the Great laid down the principle that

every subject should in some way serve the State--the nobles as

officers in the army or navy, or as officials in the civil service;

the clergy as ministers of religion; and the lower classes as

soldiers, sailors, or tax-payers.  Of these three classes the

clergy had by far the lightest burdens, and consequently many

nobles and peasants would willingly have entered its ranks.  But

this species of desertion the Government could not tolerate, and

accordingly the priesthood was surrounded by a legal barrier which

prevented all outsiders from entering it.  Thus by the combined

efforts of the ecclesiastical and the civil Administration the

clergy became a separate class or caste, legally and actually

incapable of mingling with the other classes of the population.



The simple fact that the clergy became an exclusive caste, with a

peculiar character, peculiar habits, and peculiar ideals, would in

itself have had a prejudicial influence on the priesthood; but this

was not all.  The caste increased in numbers by the process of

natural reproduction much more rapidly than the offices to be

filled, so that the supply of priests and deacons soon far exceeded

the demand; and the disproportion between supply and demand became

every year greater and greater.  In this way was formed an ever-

increasing clerical Proletariat, which--as is always the case with

a Proletariat of any kind--gravitated towards the towns.  In vain

the Government issued ukazes prohibiting the priests from quitting

their places of domicile, and treated as vagrants and runaways

those who disregarded the prohibition; in vain successive

sovereigns endeavoured to diminish the number of these

supernumeraries by drafting them wholesale into the army.  In

Moscow, St. Petersburg, and all the larger towns the cry was,

"Still they come!"  Every morning, in the Kremlin of Moscow, a

large crowd of them assembled for the purpose of being hired to

officiate in the private chapels of the rich nobles, and a great

deal of hard bargaining took place between the priests and the

lackeys sent to hire them--conducted in the same spirit, and in

nearly the same forms, as that which simultaneously took place in

the bazaar close by between extortionate traders and thrifty

housewives.  "Listen to me," a priest would say, as an ultimatum,

to a lackey who was trying to beat down the price: "if you don't

give me seventy-five kopeks without further ado, I'll take a bite

of this roll, and that will be an end to it!"  And that would have

been an end to the bargaining, for, according to the rules of the

Church, a priest cannot officiate after breaking his fast.  The

ultimatum, however, could be used with effect only to country

servants who had recently come to town.  A sharp lackey,

experienced in this kind of diplomacy, would have laughed at the

threat, and replied coolly, "Bite away, Batushka; I can find plenty

more of your sort!"  Amusing scenes of this kind I have heard

described by old people who professed to have been eye-witnesses.



The condition of the priests who remained in the villages was not

much better.  Those of them who were fortunate enough to find

places were raised at least above the fear of absolute destitution,

but their position was by no means enviable.  They received little

consideration or respect from the peasantry, and still less from

the nobles.  When the church was situated not on the State Domains,

but on a private estate, they were practically under the power of

the proprietor--almost as completely as his serfs; and sometimes

that power was exercised in a most humiliating and shameful way.  I

have heard, for instance, of one priest who was ducked in a pond on

a cold winter day for the amusement of the proprietor and his

guests--choice spirits, of rough, jovial temperament; and of

another who, having neglected to take off his hat as he passed the

proprietor's house, was put into a barrel and rolled down a hill

into the river at the bottom!



In citing these incidents, I do not at all mean to imply that they

represent the relations which usually existed between proprietors

and village priests, for I am quite aware that wanton cruelty was

not among the ordinary vices of Russian serf-owners.  My object in

mentioning the incidents is to show how a brutal proprietor--and it

must be admitted that they were not a few brutal individuals in the

class--could maltreat a priest without much danger of being called

to account for his conduct.  Of course such conduct was an offence

in the eyes of the criminal law; but the criminal law of that time

was very shortsighted, and strongly disposed to close its eyes

completely when the offender was an influential proprietor.  Had

the incidents reached the ears of the Emperor Nicholas he would

probably have ordered the culprit to be summarily and severely

punished but, as the Russian proverb has it, "Heaven is high, and

the Tsar is far off."  A village priest treated in this barbarous

way could have little hope of redress, and, if he were a prudent

man, he would make no attempt to obtain it; for any annoyance which

he might give the proprietor by complaining to the ecclesiastical

authorities would be sure to be paid back to him with interest in

some indirect way.



The sons of the clergy who did not succeed in finding regular

sacerdotal employment were in a still worse position.  Many of them

served as scribes or subordinate officials in the public offices,

where they commonly eked out their scanty salaries by unblushing

extortion and pilfering.  Those who did not succeed in gaining even

modest employment of this kind had to keep off starvation by less

lawful means, and not unfrequently found their way into the prisons

or to Siberia.



In judging of the Russian priesthood of the present time, we must

call to mind this severe school through which it has passed, and we

must also take into consideration the spirit which has been for

centuries predominant in the Eastern Church--I mean the strong

tendency both in the clergy and in the laity to attribute an

inordinate importance to the ceremonial element of religion.

Primitive mankind is everywhere and always disposed to regard

religion as simply a mass of mysterious rites which have a secret

magical power of averting evil in this world and securing felicity

in the next.  To this general rule the Russian peasantry are no

exception, and the Russian Church has not done all it might have

done to eradicate this conception and to bring religion into closer

association with ordinary morality.  Hence such incidents as the

following are still possible: A robber kills and rifles a

traveller, but he refrains from eating a piece of cooked meat which

he finds in the cart, because it happens to be a fast-day; a

peasant prepares to rob a young attache of the Austrian Embassy in

St. Petersburg, and ultimately kills his victim, but before going

to the house he enters a church and commends his undertaking to the

protection of the saints; a housebreaker, when in the act of

robbing a church, finds it difficult to extract the jewels from an

Icon, and makes a vow that if a certain saint assists him he will

place a rouble's-worth of tapers before the saint's image!  These

facts are within the memory of the present generation.  I knew the

young attache, and saw him a few days before his death.



All these are of course extreme cases, but they illustrate a

tendency which in its milder forms is only too general amongst the

Russian people--the tendency to regard religion as a mass of

ceremonies which have a magical rather than a spiritual

significance.  The poor woman who kneels at a religious procession

in order that the Icon may he carried over her head, and the rich

merchant who invites the priests to bring some famous Icon to his

house, illustrates this tendency in a more harmless form.



According to a popular saying, "As is the priest, so is the

parish," and the converse proposition is equally true--as is the

parish, so is the priest.  The great majority of priests, like the

great majority of men in general, content themselves with simply

striving to perform what is expected of them, and their character

is consequently determined to a certain extent by the ideas and

conceptions of their parishioners.  This will become more apparent

if we contrast the Russian priest with the Protestant pastor.



According to Protestant conceptions, the village pastor is a man of

grave demeanour and exemplary conduct, and possesses a certain

amount of education and refinement.  He ought to expound weekly to

his flock, in simple, impressive words, the great truths of

Christianity, and exhort his hearers to walk in the paths of

righteousness.  Besides this, he is expected to comfort the

afflicted, to assist the needy, to counsel those who are harassed

with doubts, and to admonish those who openly stray from the narrow

path.  Such is the ideal in the popular mind, and pastors generally

seek to realise it, if not in very deed, at least in appearance.

The Russian priest, on the contrary, has no such ideal set before

him by his parishioners.  He is expected merely to conform to

certain observances, and to perform punctiliously the rites and

ceremonies prescribed by the Church.  If he does this without

practising extortion his parishioners are quite satisfied.  He

rarely preaches or exhorts, and neither has nor seeks to have a

moral influence over his flock.  I have occasionally heard of

Russian priests who approach to what I have termed the Protestant

ideal, and I have even seen one or two of them, but I fear they are

not numerous.



In the above contrast I have accidentally omitted one important

feature.  The Protestant clergy have in all countries rendered

valuable service to the cause of popular education.  The reason of

this is not difficult to find.  In order to be a good Protestant it

is necessary to "search the Scriptures," and to do this, one must

be able at least to read.  To be a good member of the Greek

Orthodox Church, on the contrary, according to popular conceptions,

the reading of the Scriptures is not necessary, and therefore

primary education has not in the eyes of the Greek Orthodox priest

the same importance which it has in the eyes of the Protestant

pastor.



It must be admitted that the Russian people are in a certain sense

religions.  They go regularly to church on Sundays and holy-days,

cross themselves repeatedly when they pass a church or Icon, take

the Holy Communion at stated seasons, rigorously abstain from

animal food--not only on Wednesdays and Fridays, but also during

Lent and the other long fasts--make occasional pilgrimages to holy

shrines, and, in a word, fulfil punctiliously the ceremonial

observances which they suppose necessary for salvation.  But here

their religiousness ends.  They are generally profoundly ignorant

of religious doctrine, and know little or nothing of Holy Writ.  A

peasant, it is said, was once asked by a priest if he could name

the three Persons of the Trinity, and replied without a moment's

hesitation, "How can one not know that, Batushka?  Of course it is

the Saviour, the Mother of God, and Saint Nicholas the miracle-

worker!



That answer represents fairly enough the theological attainments of

a very large section of the peasantry.  The anecdote is so often

repeated that it is probably an invention, but it is not a calumny

of theology and of what Protestants term the "inner religious life"

the orthodox Russian peasant--of Dissenters, to whom these remarks

do not apply, if shall speak later--has no conception.  For him the

ceremonial part of religion suffices, and he has the most

unbounded, childlike confidence in the saving efficacy of the rites

which he practises.  If he has been baptised in infancy, has

regularly observed the fasts, has annually partaken of the Holy

Communion, and has just confessed and received extreme unction, he

feels death approach with the most perfect tranquillity.  He is

tormented with no doubts as to the efficacy of faith or works, and

has no fears that his past life may possibly have rendered him

unfit for eternal felicity.  Like a man in a sinking ship who has

buckled on his life-preserver, he feels perfectly secure.  With no

fear for the future and little regret for the present or the past,

he awaits calmly the dread summons, and dies with a resignation

which a Stoic philosopher might envy.



In the above paragraph I have used the word Icon, and perhaps the

reader may not clearly understand the word.  Let me explain then,

briefly, what an Icon is--a very necessary explanation, for the

Icons play an important part in the religious observances of the

Russian people.



Icons are pictorial, usually half-length, representations of the

Saviour, of the Madonna, or of a saint, executed in archaic

Byzantine style, on a yellow or gold ground, and varying in size

from a square inch to several square feet.  Very often the whole

picture, with the exception of the face and hands of the figure, is

covered with a metal plaque, embossed so as to represent the form

of the figure and the drapery.  When this plaque is not used, the

crown and costume are often adorned with pearls and other precious

stones--sometimes of great price.



In respect of religions significance, Icons are of two kinds:

simple, and miraculous or miracle-working (tchudotvorny).  The

former are manufactured in enormous quantities--chiefly in the

province of Vladimir, where whole villages are employed in this

kind of work--and are to be found in every Russian house, from the

hut of the peasant to the palace of the Emperor.  They are

generally placed high up in a corner facing the door, and good

orthodox Christians on entering bow in that direction, making at

the same time the sign of the cross.  Before and after meals the

same short ceremony is always performed.  On the eve of fete-days a

small lamp is kept burning before at least one of the Icons in the

house.



The wonder-working Icons are comparatively few in number, and are

always carefully preserved in a church or chapel.  They are

commonly believed to have been "not made with hands," and to have

appeared in a miraculous way.  A monk, or it may be a common

mortal, has a vision, in which he is informed that he may find a

miraculous Icon in such a place, and on going to the spot indicated

he finds it, sometimes buried, sometimes hanging on a tree.  The

sacred treasure is then removed to a church, and the news spreads

like wildfire through the district.  Thousands flock to prostrate

themselves before the heaven-sent picture, and some are healed of

their diseases--a fact that plainly indicates its miracle-working

power.  The whole affair is then officially reported to the Most

Holy Synod, the highest ecclesiastical authority in Russia, in

order that the existence of the miracle-working power may be fully

and regularly proved.  The official recognition of the fact is by

no means a mere matter of form, for the Synod is well aware that

wonder-working Icons are always a rich source of revenue to the

monasteries where they are kept, and that zealous Superiors are

consequently apt in such cases to lean to the side of credulity,

rather than that of over-severe criticism.  A regular investigation

is therefore made, and the formal recognition is not granted till

the testimony of the finder is thoroughly examined and the alleged

miracles duly authenticated.  If the recognition is granted, the

Icon is treated with the greatest veneration, and is sure to be

visited by pilgrims from far and near.



Some of the most revered Icons--as, for instance, the Kazan

Madonna--have annual fete-days instituted in their honour; or, more

correctly speaking, the anniversary of their miraculous appearance

is observed as a religions holiday.  A few of them have an

additional title to popular respect and veneration: that of being

intimately associated with great events in the national history.

The Vladimir Madonna, for example, once saved Moscow from the

Tartars; the Smolensk Madonna accompanied the army in the glorious

campaign against Napoleon in 1812; and when in that year it was

known in Moscow that the French were advancing on the city, the

people wished the Metropolitan to take the Iberian Madonna, which

may still be seen near one of the gates of the Kremlin, and to lead

them out armed with hatchets against the enemy.



If the Russian priests have done little to advance popular

education, they have at least never intentionally opposed it.

Unlike their Roman Catholic brethren, they do not hold that "a

little learning is a dangerous thing," and do not fear that faith

may be endangered by knowledge.  Indeed, it is a remarkable fact

that the Russian Church regards with profound apathy those various

intellectual movements which cause serious alarm to many thoughtful

Christians in Western Europe.  It considers religion as something

so entirely apart that its votaries do not feel the necessity of

bringing their theological beliefs into logical harmony with their

scientific conceptions.  A man may remain a good orthodox Christian

long after he has adopted scientific opinions irreconcilable with

Eastern Orthodoxy, or, indeed, with dogmatic Christianity of any

kind.  In the confessional the priest never seeks to ferret out

heretical opinions; and I can recall no instance in Russian history

of a man being burnt at the stake on the demand of the

ecclesiastical authorities, as so often happened in the Roman

Catholic world, for his scientific views.  This tolerance proceeds

partly, no doubt, from the fact that the Eastern Church in general,

and the Russian Church in particular, have remained for centuries

in a kind of intellectual torpor.  Even such a fervent orthodox

Christian as the late Ivan Aksakof perceived this absence of

healthy vitality, and he did not hesitate to declare his conviction

that neither the Russian nor the Slavonic world will be

resuscitated . . . so long as the Church remains in such

lifelessness (mertvennost'), which is not a matter of chance, but

the legitimate fruit of some organic defect." *





* Solovyoff, "Otcherki ig istorii Russkoi Literaturi XIX. veka."

St. Petersburg, 1903, p. 269.





Though the unsatisfactory condition of the parochial clergy is

generally recognised by the educated classes, very few people take

the trouble to consider seriously how it might be improved.  During

the Reform enthusiasm which raged for some years after the Crimean

War ecclesiastical affairs were entirely overlooked.  Many of the

reformers of those days were so very "advanced" that religion in

all its forms seemed to them an old-world superstition which tended

to retard rather than accelerate social progress, and which

consequently should be allowed to die as tranquilly as possible;

whilst the men of more moderate views found they had enough to do

in emancipating the serfs and reforming the corrupt civil and

judicial Administration.  During the subsequent reactionary period,

which culminated in the reign of the late Emperor, Alexander III.,

much more attention was devoted to Church matters, and it came to

be recognised in official circles that something ought to be done

for the parish clergy in the way of improving their material

condition so as to increase their moral influence.  With this

object in view, M. Pobedonostsef, the Procurator of the Holy Synod,

induced the Government in 1893 to make a State-grant of about

6,500,000 roubles, which should be increased every year, but the

sum was very inadequate, and a large portion of it was devoted to

purposes of political propaganda in the form of maintaining Greek

Orthodox priests in districts where the population was Protestant

or Roman Catholic.  Consequently, of the 35,865 parishes which

Russia contains, only 18,936, or a little more than one-half, were

enabled to benefit by the grant.  In an optimistic, semi-official

statement published as late as 1896 it is admitted that "the means

for the support of the parish clergy must even now be considered

insufficient and wanting in stability, making the priests dependent

on the parishioners, and thereby preventing the establishment of

the necessary moral authority of the spiritual father over his

flock."



In some places the needs of the Church are attended to by voluntary

parish-curatorships which annually raise a certain sum of money,

and the way in which they distribute it is very characteristic of

the Russian people, who have a profound veneration for the Church

and its rites, but very little consideration for the human beings

who serve at the altar.  In 14,564 parishes possessing such

curatorships no less than 2,500,000 roubles were collected, but of

this sum 2,000,000 were expended on the maintenance and

embellishment of churches, and only 174,000 were devoted to the

personal wants of the clergy.  According to the semi-official

document from which these figures are taken the whole body of the

Russian White Clergy in 1893 numbered 99,391, of whom 42,513 were

priests, 12,953 deacons, and 43,925 clerks.



In more recent observations among the parochial clergy I have

noticed premonitory symptoms of important changes.  This may be

illustrated by an entry in my note-book, written in a village of

one of the Southern provinces, under date of 30th September, 1903:



"I have made here the acquaintance of two good specimens of the

parish clergy, both excellent men in their way, but very different

from each other.  The elder one, Father Dmitri, is of the old

school, a plain, practical man, who fulfils his duties

conscientiously according to his lights, but without enthusiasm.

His intellectual wants are very limited, and he devotes his

attention chiefly to the practical affairs of everyday life, which

he manages very successfully.  He does not squeeze his parishioners

unduly, but he considers that the labourer is worthy of his hire,

and insists on his flock providing for his wants according to their

means.  At the same time he farms on his own account and attends

personally to all the details of his farming operations.  With the

condition and doings of every member of his flock he is intimately

acquainted, and, on the whole, as he never idealised anything or

anybody, he has not a very high opinion of them.



"The younger priest, Father Alexander, is of a different type, and

the difference may be remarked even in his external appearance.

There is a look of delicacy and refinement about him, though his

dress and domestic surroundings are of the plainest, and there is

not a tinge of affectation in his manner.  His language is less

archaic and picturesque.  He uses fewer Biblical and semi-Slavonic

expressions--I mean expressions which belong to the antiquated

language of the Church Service rather than to modern parlance--and

his armoury of terse popular proverbs which constitute such a

characteristic trait of the peasantry, is less frequently drawn on.

When I ask him about the present condition of the peasantry, his

account does not differ substantially from that of his elder

colleague, but he does not condemn their sins in the same forcible

terms.  He laments their shortcomings in an evangelical spirit and

has apparently aspirations for their future improvement.  Admitting

frankly that there is a great deal of lukewarmness among them, he

hopes to revive their interest in ecclesiastical affairs and he has

an idea of constituting a sort of church committee for attending to

the temporal affairs of the village church and for works of

charity, but he looks to influencing the younger rather than the

older generation.



"His interest in his parishioners is not confined to their

spiritual welfare, but extends to their material well-being.  Of

late an association for mutual credit has been founded in the

village, and he uses his influence to induce the peasants to take

advantage of the benefits it offers, both to those who are in need

of a little ready money and to those who might invest their

savings, instead of keeping them hidden away in an old stocking or

buried in an earthen pot.  The proposal to create a local

agricultural society meets also with his sympathy."



If the number of parish priests of this type increase, the clergy

may come to exercise great moral influence on the common people.

