





CHAPTER XXX



THE LANDED PROPRIETORS SINCE THE EMANCIPATION



Two Opposite Opinions--Difficulties of Investigation--The Problem

Simplified--Direct and Indirect Compensation--The Direct

Compensation Inadequate--What the Proprietors Have Done with the

Remainder of Their Estates--Immediate Moral Effect of the Abolition

of Serfage--The Economic Problem--The Ideal Solution and the

Difficulty of Realising It--More Primitive Arrangements--The

Northern Agricultural Zone--The Black-earth Zone--The Labour

Difficulty--The Impoverishment of the Noblesse Not a New

Phenomenon--Mortgaging of Estates--Gradual Expropriation of the

Noblesse-Rapid Increase in the Production and Export of Grain--How

Far this Has Benefited the Landed Proprietors.





When the Emancipation question was raised there was a considerable

diversity of opinion as to the effect which the abolition of

serfage would have on the material interests of the two classes

directly concerned.  The Press and "the young generation" took an

optimistic view, and endeavoured to prove that the proposed change

would be beneficial alike to proprietors and to peasants.  Science,

it was said, has long since decided that free labour is immensely

more productive than slavery or serfage, and the principle has been

already proved to demonstration in the countries of Western Europe.

In all those countries modern agricultural progress began with the

emancipation of the serfs, and increased productivity was

everywhere the immediate result of improvements in the method of

culture.  Thus the poor light soils of Germany, France, and Holland

have been made to produce more than the vaunted "black earth" of

Russia.  And from these ameliorations the land-owning class has

everywhere derived the chief advantages.  Are not the landed

proprietors of England--the country in which serfage was first

abolished--the richest in the world?  And is not the proprietor of

a few hundred morgen in Germany often richer than the Russian noble

who has thousands of dessyatins?  By these and similar plausible

arguments the Press endeavoured to prove to the proprietors that

they ought, even in their own interest, to undertake the

emancipation of the serfs.  Many proprietors, however, showed

little faith in the abstract principles of political economy and

the vague teachings of history as interpreted by the contemporary

periodical literature.  They could not always refute the ingenious

arguments adduced by the men of more sanguine temperament, but they

felt convinced that their prospects were not nearly so bright as

these men represented them to be.  They believed that Russia was a

peculiar country, and the Russians a peculiar people.  The lower

classes in England, France, Holland, and Germany were well known to

be laborious and enterprising, while the Russian peasant was

notoriously lazy, and would certainly, if left to himself, not do

more work than was absolutely necessary to keep him from starving.

Free labour might be more profitable than serfage in countries

where the upper classes possessed traditional practical knowledge

and abundance of capital, but in Russia the proprietors had neither

the practical knowledge nor the ready money necessary to make the

proposed ameliorations in the system of agriculture.  To all this

it was added that a system of emancipation by which the peasants

should receive land and be made completely independent of the

landed proprietors had nowhere been tried on such a large scale.



There were thus two diametrically opposite opinions regarding the

economic results of the abolition of serfage, and we have now to

examine which of these two opinions has been confirmed by

experience.



Let us look at the question first from the point of view of the

land-owners.



The reader who has never attempted to make investigations of this

kind may naturally imagine that the question can be easily decided

by simply consulting a large number of individual proprietors, and

drawing a general conclusion from their evidence.  In reality I

found the task much more difficult.  After roaming about the

country for five years (1870-75), collecting information from the

best available sources, I hesitated to draw any sweeping

conclusions, and my state of mind at that time was naturally

reflected in the early editions of this work.  As a rule the

proprietors could not state clearly how much they had lost or

gained, and when definite information was obtained from them it was

not always trustworthy.  In the time of serfage very few of them

had been in the habit of keeping accurate accounts, or accounts of

any kind, and when they lived on their estates there were a very

large number of items which could not possibly be reduced to

figures.  Of course, each proprietor had a general idea as to

whether his position was better or worse than it had been in the

old times, but the vague statements made by individuals regarding

their former and their actual revenues had little or no scientific

value.  So many considerations which had nothing to do with purely

agrarian relations entered into the calculations that the

conclusions did not help me much to estimate the economic results

of the Emancipation as a whole.  Nor, it must be confessed, was the

testimony by any means always unbiassed.  Not a few spoke of the

great reform in an epic or dithyrambic tone, and among these I

easily distinguished two categories: the one desired to prove that

the measure was a complete success in every way, and that all

classes were benefited by it, not only morally, but also

materially; whilst the others strove to represent the proprietors

in general, and themselves in particular, as the self-sacrificing

victims of a great and necessary patriotic reform--as martyrs in

the cause of liberty and progress.  I do not for a moment suppose

that these two groups of witnesses had a clearly conceived

intention of deceiving or misleading, but as a cautious

investigator I had to make allowance for their idealising and

sentimental tendencies.



Since that time the situation has become much clearer, and during

recent visits to Russia I have been able to arrive at much more

definite conclusions.  These I now proceed to communicate to the

reader.



The Emancipation caused the proprietors of all classes to pass

through a severe economic crisis.  Periods of transition always

involve much suffering, and the amount of suffering is generally in

the inverse ratio of the precautions taken beforehand.  In Russia

the precautions had been neglected.  Not one proprietor in a

hundred had made any serious preparations for the inevitable

change.  On the eve of the Emancipation there were about ten

millions of male serfs on private properties, and of these nearly

seven millions remained under the old system of paying their dues

in labour.  Of course, everybody knew that Emancipation must come

sooner or later, but fore-thought, prudence, and readiness to take

time by the forelock are not among the prominent traits of the

Russian character.  Hence most of the land-owners were taken

unawares.  But while all suffered, there were differences of

degree.  Some were completely shipwrecked.  So long as serfage

existed all the relations of life were ill-defined and extremely

elastic, so that a man who was hopelessly insolvent might contrive,

with very little effort, to keep his bead above water for half a

lifetime.  For such men the Emancipation, like a crisis in the

commercial world, brought a day of reckoning.  It did not really

ruin them, but it showed them and the world at large that they were

ruined, and they could no longer continue their old mode of life.

For others the crisis was merely temporary.  These emerged with a

larger income than they ever had before, but I am not prepared to

say that their material condition has improved, because the social

habits have changed, the cost of living has become much greater,

and the work of administering estates is incomparably more

complicated and laborious than in the old patriarchal times.



We may greatly simplify the problem by reducing it to two definite

questions:



1.  How far were the proprietors directly indemnified for the loss

of serf labour and for the transfer in perpetual usufruct of a

large part of their estates to the peasantry?



2.  What have the proprietors done with the remainder of their

estates, and how far have they been indirectly indemnified by the

economic changes which have taken place since the Emancipation?



With the first of these questions I shall deal very briefly,

because it is a controversial subject involving very complicated

calculations which only a specialist can understand.  The

conclusion at which I have arrived, after much patient research, is

that in most provinces the compensation was inadequate, and this

conclusion is confirmed by excellent native authorities.  M.

Bekhteyev, for example, one of the most laborious and conscientious

investigators in this field of research, and the author of an

admirable work on the economic results of the Emancipation,* told

me recently, in course of conversation, that in his opinion the

peasant dues fixed by the Emancipation Law represented, throughout

the Black-earth Zone, only about a half of the value of the labour

previously supplied by the serfs.  To this I must add that the

compensation was in reality not nearly so great as it seemed to be

according to the terms of the law.  As the proprietors found it

extremely difficult to collect the dues from the emancipated serfs,

and as they required a certain amount of capital to reorganise the

estate on the new basis of free labour, most of them were

practically compelled to demand the obligatory redemption of the

land (obiazatelny vuikup), and in adopting this expedient they had

to make considerable sacrifices.  Not only had they to accept as

full payment four-fifths of the normal sum, but of this amount the

greater portion was paid in Treasury bonds, which fell at once to

80 per cent. of their nominal value.





* "Khozaistvenniye Itogi istekshago Sorokoletiya." St. Petersburg,

1902.





Let us now pass to the second part of the problem: What have the

proprietors done with the part of their estates which remained to

them after ceding the required amount of land to the Communes?

Have they been indirectly indemnified for the loss of serf labour

by subsequent economic changes?  How far have they succeeded in

making the transition from serfage to free labour, and what

revenues do they now derive from their estates?  The answer to

these questions will necessarily contain some account of the

present economic position of the proprietors.



On all proprietors the Emancipation had at least one good effect:

it dragged them forcibly from the old path of indolence and routine

and compelled them to think and calculate regarding their affairs.

The hereditary listlessness and apathy, the traditional habit of

looking on the estate with its serfs as a kind of self-acting

machine which must always spontaneously supply the owner with the

means of living, the inveterate practice of spending all ready

money and of taking little heed for the morrow--all this, with much

that resulted from it, was rudely swept away and became a thing of

the past.



The broad, easy road on which the proprietors had hitherto let

themselves be borne along by the force of circumstances suddenly

split up into a number of narrow, arduous, thorny paths.  Each one

had to use his judgement to determine which of the paths he should

adopt, and, having made his choice, he had to struggle along as he

best could.  I remember once asking a proprietor what effect the

Emancipation had had on the class to which he belonged, and he gave

me an answer which is worth recording.  "Formerly," he said, "we

kept no accounts and drank champagne; now we keep accounts and

content ourselves with kvass."  Like all epigrammatic sayings, this

laconic reply is far from giving a complete description of reality,

but it indicates in a graphic way a change that has unquestionably

taken place.  As soon as serfage was abolished it was no longer

possible to live like "the flowers of the field."  Many a

proprietor who had formerly vegetated in apathetic ease had to ask

himself the question: How am I to gain a living?  All had to

consider what was the most profitable way of employing the land

that remained to them.



The ideal solution of the problem was that as soon as the peasant-

land had been demarcated, the proprietor should take to farming the

remainder of his estate by means of hired labour and agricultural

machines in West European or American fashion.  Unfortunately, this

solution could not be generally adopted, because the great majority

of the landlords, even when they had the requisite practical

knowledge of agriculture, had not the requisite capital, and could

not easily obtain it.  Where were they to find money for buying

cattle, horses, and agricultural implements, for building stables

and cattle-sheds, and for defraying all the other initial expenses?

And supposing they succeeded in starting the new system, where was

the working capital to come from?  The old Government institution

in which estates could be mortgaged according to the number of

serfs was permanently closed, and the new land-credit associations

had not yet come into existence.  To borrow from private

capitalists was not to be thought of, for money was so scarce than

ten per cent. was considered a "friendly" rate of interest.

Recourse might be had, it is true, to the redemption operation, but

in that case the Government would deduct the unpaid portion of any

outstanding mortgage, and would pay the balance in depreciated

Treasury bonds.  In these circumstances the proprietors could not,

as a rule, adopt what I have called the ideal solution, and had to

content themselves with some simpler and more primitive

arrangement.  They could employ the peasants of the neighbouring

villages to prepare the land and reap the crops either for a fixed

sum per acre or on the metayage system, or they could let their

land to the peasants for one, three or six years at a moderate

rent.



In the northern agricultural zone, where the soil is poor and

primitive farming with free labour can hardly be made to pay, the

proprietors had to let their land at a small rent, and those of

them who could not find places in the rural administration migrated

to the towns and sought employment in the public service or in the

numerous commercial and industrial enterprises which were springing

up at that time.  There they have since remained.  Their country-

houses, if inhabited at all, are occupied only for a few months in

summer, and too often present a melancholy spectacle of neglect and

dilapidation.  In the Black-earth Zone, on the contrary, where the

soil still possesses enough of its natural fertility to make

farming on a large scale profitable, the estates are in a very

different condition.  The owners cultivate at least a part of their

property, and can easily let to the peasants at a fair rent the

land which they do not wish to farm themselves.  Some have adopted

the metayage system; others get the field-work done by the peasants

at so much per acre.  The more energetic, who have capital enough

at their disposal, organise farms with hired labourers on the

European model.  If they are not so well off as formerly, it is

because they have adopted a less patriarchal and more expensive

style of living.  Their land has doubled and trebled in value

during the last thirty years, and their revenues have increased, if

not in proportion, at least considerably.  In 1903 I visited a

number of estates in this region and found them in a very

prosperous condition, with agricultural machines of the English or

American types, an increasing variety in the rotation of crops,

greatly improved breeds of cattle and horses, and all the other

symptoms of a gradual transition to a more intensive and more

rational system of agriculture.



It must be admitted, however, that even in the Black-earth Zone the

proprietors have formidable difficulties to contend with, the chief

of which are the scarcity of good farm-labourers, the frequent

droughts, the low price of cereals, and the delay in getting the

grain conveyed to the seaports.  On each of these difficulties and

the remedies that might be applied I could write a separate

chapter, but I fear to overtax the reader's patience, and shall

therefore confine myself to a few remarks about the labour

question.  On this subject the complaints are loud and frequent all

over the country.  The peasants, it is said, have become lazy,

careless, addicted to drunkenness, and shamelessly dishonest with

regard to their obligations, so that it is difficult to farm even

in the old primitive fashion and impossible to introduce radical

improvements in the methods of culture.  In these sweeping

accusations there is a certain amount of truth.  That the muzhik,

when working for others, exerts himself as little as possible; that

he pays little attention to the quality of the work done; that he

shows a reckless carelessness with regard to his employer's

property; that he is capable of taking money in advance and failing

to fulfil his contract; that he occasionally gets drunk; and that

he is apt to commit certain acts of petty larceny when he gets the

chance--all this is undoubtedly true, whatever biassed theorists

and sentimental peasant-worshippers may say to the contrary.*  It

would be a mistake, however, to suppose that the fault is entirely

on the side of the peasants, and equally erroneous to believe that

the evils might be remedied, as is often suggested, by greater

severity on the part of the tribunals, or by an improved system of

passports.  Farming with free labour, like every other department

of human activity, requires a fair amount of knowledge, judgment,

prudence, and tact, which cannot be replaced by ingenious

legislation or judicial severity.  In engaging labourers or

servants it is necessary to select them carefully and make such

conditions that they feel it to be to their interest to fulfil

their contract loyally.  This is too often overlooked by the 

Russian land-owners.  From false views of economy they are inclined

to choose the cheapest labourer without examining closely his other

qualifications, or they take advantage of the peasant's pecuniary

embarrassments and make with him a contract which it is hardly

possible for him to fulfil.  In spring, for instance, when his

store of provisions is exhausted and he is being hard pressed by

the tax-collector, they supply him with rye-meal or advance him a

small sum of money on condition of his undertaking to do a

relatively large amount of summer work.  He knows that the contract

is unfair to him, but what is he to do?  He must get food for

himself and his family and a little ready money for his taxes, for

the Communal authorities will probably sell his cow if he does not

pay his arrears.**  In desperation he accepts the conditions and

puts off the evil day--consoling himself with the reflection that

perhaps (avos') something may turn up in the meantime--but when the

time comes for fulfilling his engagements the dilemma revives.

According to the contract he ought to work nearly the whole summer

for the proprietor; but he has his own land to attend to, and he

has to make provision for the winter.  In such circumstances the

temptation to evade the terms of the contract is probably too

strong to be resisted.





* Amongst themselves the peasants are not addicted to thieving, as

is proved by the fact that they habitually leave their doors

unlocked when the inmates of the house are working in the fields;

but if the muzhik finds in the proprietor's farmyard a piece of

iron or a bit of rope, or any of those little things that he

constantly requires and has difficulty in obtaining, he is very apt

to pick it up and carry it home.  Gathering firewood in the

landlord's forest he does not consider as theft, because "God

planted the trees and watered them," and in the time of serfage he

was allowed to supply himself with firewood in this way.



** Until last year (1904) they could use also corporal punishment

as a means of pressure, and I am not sure that they do not

occasionally use it still, though it is no longer permitted by law.





In Russia, as in other countries, the principle holds true that for

good labour a fair price must be paid.  Several large proprietors

of my acquaintance who habitually act on this principle assure me

that they always obtain as much good labour as they require.  I

must add, however, that these fortunate proprietors have the

advantage of possessing a comfortable amount of working capital,

and are therefore not compelled, as so many of their less fortunate

neighbours are, to manage their estates on the hand-to-mouth

principle.



It is only, I fear, a minority of the landed proprietors that have

grappled successfully with these and other difficulties of their

position.  As a class they are impoverished and indebted, but this

state of things is not due entirely to serf-emancipation.  The

indebtedness of the Noblesse is a hereditary peculiarity of much

older date.  By some authorities it is attributed to the laws of

Peter the Great, by which all nobles were obliged to spend the best

part of their lives in the military or civil service, and to leave

the management of their estates to incompetent stewards.  However

that may be, it is certain that from the middle of the eighteenth

century downwards the fact has frequently occupied the attention of

the Government, and repeated attempts have been made to alleviate

the evil.  The Empress Elizabeth, Catherine II., Paul, Alexander

I., Nicholas I., Alexander II., and Alexander III.  tried

successively, as one of the older ukazes expressed it, "to free the

Noblesse from debt and from greedy money-lenders, and to prevent

hereditary estates from passing into the hands of strangers."  The

means commonly adopted was the creation of mortgage banks founded

and controlled by the Government for the purpose of advancing money

to landed proprietors at a comparatively low rate of interest.



These institutions may have been useful to the few who desired to

improve their estates, but they certainly did not cure, and rather

tended to foster, the inveterate improvidence of the many.  On the

eve of the Emancipation the proprietors were indebted to the

Government for the sum of 425 millions of roubles, and 69 per cent.

of their serfs were mortgaged.  A portion of this debt was

gradually extinguished by the redemption operation, so that in 1880

over 300 millions had been paid off, but in the meantime new debts

were being contracted.  In 1873-74 nine private land-mortgage banks

were created, and there was such a rush to obtain money from them

that their paper was a glut in the market, and became seriously

depreciated.  When the prices of grain rose in 1875-80 the mortgage

debt was diminished, but when they began to fall in 1880 it again

increased, and in 1881 it stood at 396 millions.  As the rate of

interest was felt to be very burdensome there was a strong feeling

among the landed proprietors at that time that the Government ought

to help them, and in 1883 the nobles of the province of Orel

ventured to address the Emperor on the subject.  In reply to the

address, Alexander III., who had strong Conservative leanings, was

graciously pleased to declare in an ukaz that "it was really time

to do something to help the Noblesse," and accordingly a new land-

mortgage bank for the Noblesse was created.  The favourable terms

offered by it were taken advantage of to such an extent that in the

first four years of its activity (1886-90) it advanced to the

proprietors over 200 million roubles.  Then came two famine years,

and in 1894 the mortgage debt of the Noblesse in that and other

credit establishments was estimated at 994 millions.  It has since

probably increased rather than diminished, for in that year the

prices of grain began to fall steadily on all the corn-exchanges of

the world, and they have never since recovered.



By means of mortgages some proprietors succeeded in weathering the

storm, but many gave up the struggle altogether, and settled in the

towns.  In the space of thirty years 20,000 of them sold their

estates, and thus, between 1861 and 1892, the area of land

possessed by the Noblesse diminished 30 per cent.--from 77,804,000

to 55,500,000 dessyatins.



This expropriation of the Noblesse, as it is called, was evidently

not the result merely of the temporary economic disturbance caused

by the abolition of serfage, for as time went on it became more

rapid.  During the first twenty years the average annual amount of

Noblesse land sold was 517,000 dessyatins, and it rose steadily

until 1892-96, when it reached the amount of 785,000.  As I have

already stated, the townward movement of the proprietors was

strongest in the barren Northern provinces.  In the province of

Olonetz, for example, they have already parted with 87 per cent. of

their land.  In the black-soil region, on the contrary, there is no

province in which more than 27 per cent. of the Noblesse land has

been alienated, and in one province (Tula) the amount is only 19

per cent.



The habit of mortgaging and selling estates does not necessarily

mean the impoverishment of the landlords as a class.  If the

capital raised in that way is devoted to agricultural improvements,

the result may be an increase of wealth.  Unfortunately, in Russia

the realised capital was usually not so employed.  A very large

proportion of it was spent unproductively, partly in luxuries and

living abroad, and partly in unprofitable commercial and industrial

speculations.  The industrial and railway fever which raged at the

time induced many to risk and lose their capital, and it had

indirectly an injurious effect on all by making money plentiful in

the towns and creating a more expensive style of living, from which

the landed gentry could not hold entirely aloof.



So far I have dwelt on the dark shadows of the picture, but it is

not all shadow.  In the last forty years the production and export

of grain, which constitute the chief source of revenue for the

Noblesse, have increased enormously, thanks mainly to the improved

means of transport.  In the first decade after the Emancipation

(1860-70) the average annual export did not exceed 88 million puds;

in the second decade (1870-80) it leapt up to 218 millions; and so

it went up steadily until in the last decade of the century it had

reached 388 millions--i.e., over six million tons.  At the same

time the home trade had increased likewise in consequence of the

rapidly growing population of the towns.  All this must have

enriched the land-proprietors.  Not to such an extent, it is true,

as the figures seem to indicate, because the old prices could not

be maintained.  Rye, for example, which in 1868 stood at 129 kopeks

per pud, fell as low as 56, and during the rest of the century,

except during a short time in 1881-82 and the famine years of 1891-

92, when there was very little surplus to sell, it never rose above

80.  Still, the increase in quantity more than counterbalanced the

fall in price.  For example: in 1881 the average price of grain per

pud was 119, and in 1894 it had sunk to 59; but the amount exported

during that time rose from 203 to 617 million puds, and the sum

received for it had risen from 242 to 369 millions of roubles.

Surely the whole of that enormous sum was not squandered on

luxuries and unprofitable speculation!



The pessimists, however--and in Russia their name is legion--will

not admit that any permanent advantage has been derived from this

enormous increase in exports.  On the contrary, they maintain that

it is a national misfortune, because it is leading rapidly to a

state of permanent impoverishment.  It quickly exhausted, they say,

the large reserves of grain in the village, so that as soon as

there was a very bad harvest the Government had to come to the

rescue and feed the starving peasantry.  Worse than this, it

compromised the future prosperity of the country.  Being in

pecuniary difficulties, and consequently impatient to make money,

the proprietors increased inordinately the area of grain-producing

land at the expense of pasturage and forests, with the result that

the live stock and the manuring of the land were diminished, the

fertility of the soil impaired, and the necessary quantity of

moisture in the atmosphere greatly lessened.  There is some truth

in this contention; but it would seem that the soil and climate

have not been affected so much as the pessimists suppose, because

in recent years there have been some very good harvests.



On the whole, then, I think it may be justly said that the efforts

of the landed proprietors to work their estates without serf labour

have not as yet been brilliantly successful.  Those who have failed

are in the habit of complaining that they have not received

sufficient support from the Government, which is accused of having

systematically sacrificed the interests of agriculture, the

mainstay of the national resources, to the creation of artificial

and unnecessary manufacturing industries.  How far such complaints

and accusations are well founded I shall not attempt to decide.  It

is a complicated polemical question, into which the reader would

probably decline to accompany me.  Let us examine rather what

influence the above-mentioned changes have had on the peasantry.

