




CHAPTER XXVII



THE CRIMEAN WAR AND ITS CONSEQUENCES





The Emperor Nicholas and his System--The Men with Aspirations and

the Apathetically Contented--National Humiliation--Popular

Discontent and the Manuscript Literature--Death of Nicholas--

Alexander II.--New Spirit--Reform Enthusiasm--Change in the

Periodical Literature--The Kolokol--The Conservatives--The

Tchinovniks--First Specific Proposals--Joint-Stock Companies--The

Serf Question Comes to the Front.





The Russians frankly admit that they were beaten in the Crimean

War, but they regard the heroic defence of Sebastopol as one of the

most glorious events in the military annals of their country.  Nor

do they altogether regret the result of the struggle.  Often in a

half-jocular, half-serious tone they say that they had reason to be

grateful to the Allies.  And there is much truth in this

paradoxical statement.  The Crimean War inaugurated a new epoch in

the national history.  It gave the death-blow to the repressive

system of the Emperor Nicholas, and produced an intellectual

movement and a moral revival which led to gigantic results.



"The affair of December," 1825--I mean the abortive attempt at a

military insurrection in St. Petersburg, to which I have alluded in

the foregoing chapter--gave the key-note to Nicholas's reign.  The

armed attempt to overthrow the Imperial power, ending in the

execution or exile of many young members of the first families,

struck terror into the Noblesse, and prepared the way for a period

of repressive police administration.  Nicholas had none of the

moral limpness and vacillating character of his predecessor.  His

was one of those simple, vigorous, tenacious, straightforward

natures--more frequently to be met with among the Teutonic than

among the Slav races--whose conceptions are all founded on a few

deep-rooted, semi-instinctive convictions, and who are utterly

incapable of accommodating themselves with histrionic cleverness to

the changes of external circumstances.  From his early youth he had

shown a strong liking for military discipline and a decided

repugnance to the humanitarianism and liberal principles then in

fashion.  With "the rights of man," "the spirit of the age," and

similar philosophical abstractions his strong, domineering nature

had no sympathy; and for the vague, loud-sounding phrases of

philosophic liberalism he had a most profound contempt.  "Attend to

your military duties," he was wont to say to his officers before

his accession; "don't trouble your heads with philosophy.  I cannot

bear philosophers!"  The tragic event which formed the prelude to

his reign naturally confirmed and fortified his previous

convictions.  The representatives of liberalism, who could talk so

eloquently about duty in the abstract, had, whilst wearing the

uniform of the Imperial Guard, openly disobeyed the repeated orders

of their superior officers and attempted to shake the allegiance of

the troops for the purpose of overthrowing the Imperial power!  A

man who was at once soldier and autocrat, by nature as well as by

position, could of course admit no extenuating circumstances.  The

incident stereotyped his character for life, and made him the sworn

enemy of liberalism and the fanatical defender of autocracy, not

only in his own country, but throughout Europe.  In European

politics he saw two forces struggling for mastery--monarchy and

democracy, which were in his opinion identical with order and

anarchy; and he was always ready to assist his brother sovereigns

in putting down democratic movements.  In his own Empire he

endeavoured by every means in his power to prevent the introduction

of the dangerous ideas.  For this purpose a stringent intellectual

quarantine was established on the western frontier.  All foreign

books and newspapers, except those of the most harmless kind, were

rigorously excluded.  Native writers were placed under strict

supervision, and peremptorily silenced as soon as they departed

from what was considered a "well-intentioned" tone.  The number of

university students was diminished, the chairs for political

science were suppressed, and the military schools multiplied.

Russians were prevented from travelling abroad, and foreigners who

visited the country were closely watched by the police.  By these

and similar measures it was hoped that Russia would be preserved

from the dangers of revolutionary agitation.



Nicholas has been called the Don Quixote of Autocracy, and the

comparison which the term implies is true in many points.  By

character and aims he belonged to a time that had passed away; but

failure and mishap could not shake his faith in his ideal, and made

no change in his honest, stubborn nature, which was as loyal and

chivalresque as that of the ill-fated Knight of La Mancha.  In

spite of all evidence to the contrary, he believed in the practical

omnipotence of autocracy.  He imagined that as his authority was

theoretically unlimited, so his power could work miracles.  By

nature and training a soldier, he considered government a slightly

modified form of military discipline, and looked on the nation as

an army which might be made to perform any intellectual or economic

evolutions that he might see fit to command.  All social ills

seemed to him the consequence of disobedience to his orders, and he

knew only one remedy--more discipline.  Any expression of doubt as

to the wisdom of his policy, or any criticism of existing

regulations, he treated as an act of insubordination which a wise

sovereign ought not to tolerate.  If he never said, "L'Etat--c'est

moi!" it was because he considered the fact so self-evident that it

did not need to be stated.  Hence any attack on the administration,

even in the person of the most insignificant official, was an

attack on himself and on the monarchical principle which he

represented.  The people must believe--and faith, as we know, comes

not by sight--that they lived under the best possible government.

To doubt this was political heresy.  An incautious word or a

foolish joke against the Government was considered a serious crime,

and might be punished by a long exile in some distant and

inhospitable part of the Empire.  Progress should by all means be

made, but it must be made by word of command, and in the way

ordered.  Private initiative in any form was a thing on no account

to be tolerated.  Nicholas never suspected that a ruler, however

well-intentioned, energetic, and legally autocratic he may be, can

do but little without the co-operation of his people.  Experience

constantly showed him the fruitlessness of his efforts, but he paid

no attention to its teachings.  He had formed once for all his

theory of government, and for thirty years he acted according to it

with all the blindness and obstinacy of a reckless, fanatical

doctrinaire.  Even at the close of his reign, when the terrible

logic of facts had proved his system to be a mistake--when his

armies had been defeated, his best fleet destroyed, his ports

blockaded, and his treasury well-nigh emptied--he could not recant.

"My successor," he is reported to have said on his deathbed, "may

do as he pleases, but I cannot change."



Had Nicholas lived in the old patriarchal times, when kings were

the uncontrolled "shepherds of the people," he would perhaps have

been an admirable ruler; but in the nineteenth century he was a

flagrant anachronism.  His system of administration completely

broke down.  In vain he multiplied formalities and inspectors, and

punished severely the few delinquents who happened by some accident

to be brought to justice; the officials continued to pilfer,

extort, and misgovern in every possible way.  Though the country

was reduced to what would be called in Europe "a state of siege,"

the inhabitants might still have said--as they are reported to have

declared a thousand years before--"Our land is great and fertile,

but there is no order in it."



In a nation accustomed to political life and to a certain amount of

self-government, any approach to the system of Nicholas would, of

course, have produced wide-spread dissatisfaction and violent

hatred against the ruling power.  But in Russia at that time no

such feelings were awakened.  The educated classes--and a fortiori

the uneducated--were profoundly indifferent not only to political

questions, but also to ordinary public affairs, whether local or

Imperial, and were quite content to leave them in the hands of

those who were paid for attending to them.  In common with the

uneducated peasantry, the nobles had a boundless respect--one might

almost say a superstitious reverence--not only for the person, but

also for the will of the Tsar, and were ready to show unquestioning

obedience to his commands, so long as these did not interfere with

their accustomed mode of life.  The Tsar desired them not to

trouble their heads with political questions, and to leave all

public matters to the care of the Administration; and in this

respect the Imperial will coincided so well with their personal

inclinations that they had no difficulty in complying with it.



When the Tsar ordered those of them who held office to refrain from

extortion and peculation, his orders were not so punctiliously

obeyed, but in this disobedience there was no open opposition--no

assertion of a right to pilfer and extort.  As the disobedience

proceeded, not from a feeling of insubordination, but merely from

the weakness that official flesh is heir to, it was not regarded as

very heinous.  In the aristocratic circles of St. Petersburg and

Moscow there was the same indifference to political questions and

public affairs.  All strove to have the reputation of being "well-

intentioned," which was the first requisite for those who desired

Court favour or advancement in the public service; and those whose

attention was not entirely occupied with official duties, card-

playing, and the ordinary routine of everyday life, cultivated

belles-lettres or the fine arts.  In short, the educated classes in

Russia at that time showed a complete indifference to political and

social questions, an apathetic acquiescence in the system of

administration adopted by the Government, and an unreasoning

contentment with the existing state of things.



About the year 1845, when the reaction against Romanticism was

awakening in the reading public an interest in the affairs of real

life,* began to appear what may be called "the men with

aspirations," a little band of generous enthusiasts, strongly

resembling the youth in Longfellow's poem who carries a banner with

the device "Excelsior," and strives ever to climb higher, without

having any clear notion of where he was going or of what he is to

do when he reaches the summit.  At first they had little more than

a sentimental enthusiasm for the true, the beautiful, and the good,

and a certain Platonic love for free institutions, liberty,

enlightenment, progress, and everything that was generally

comprehended at that period under the term "liberal."  Gradually,

under the influence of current French literature, their ideas

became a little clearer, and they began to look on reality around

them with a critical eye.  They could perceive, without much

effort, the unrelenting tyranny of the Administration, the

notorious venality of the tribunals, the reckless squandering of

the public money, the miserable condition of the serfs, the

systematic strangulation of all independent opinion or private

initiative, and, above all, the profound apathy of the upper

classes, who seemed quite content with things as they were.





* Vide supra, p. 377 et seq.





With such ugly facts staring them in the face, and with the habit

of looking at things from the moral point of view, these men could

understand how hollow and false were the soothing or triumphant

phrases of official optimism.  They did not, indeed, dare to

express their indignation publicly, for the authorities would allow

no public expression of dissatisfaction with the existing state of

things, but they disseminated their ideas among their friends and

acquaintances by means of conversation and manuscript literature,

and some of them, as university professors and writers in the

periodical Press, contrived to awaken in a certain section of the

young generation an ardent enthusiasm for enlightenment and

progress, and a vague hope that a brighter day was about to dawn.



Not a few sympathised with these new conceptions and aspirations,

but the great majority of the nobles regarded them--especially

after the French Revolution of 1848--as revolutionary and

dangerous.  Thus the educated classes became divided into two

sections, which have sometimes been called the Liberals and the

Conservatives, but which might be more properly designated the men

with aspirations and the apathetically contented.  These latter

doubtless felt occasionally the irksomeness of the existing

system, but they had always one consolation--if they were oppressed

at home they were feared abroad.  The Tsar was at least a thorough

soldier, possessing an enormous and well-equipped army by which he

might at any moment impose his will on Europe.  Ever since the

glorious days of 1812, when Napoleon was forced to make an

ignominious retreat from the ruins of Moscow, the belief that the

Russian soldiers were superior to all others, and that the Russian

army was invincible, had become an article of the popular creed;

and the respect which the voice of Nicholas commanded in Western

Europe seemed to prove that the fact was admitted by foreign

nations.  In these and similar considerations the apathetically

contented found a justification for their lethargy.



When it became evident that Russia was about to engage in a trial

of strength with the Western Powers, this optimism became general.

"The heavy burdens," it was said, "which the people have had to

bear were necessary to make Russia the first military Power in

Europe, and now the nation will reap the fruits of its long-

suffering and patient resignation.  The West will learn that her

boasted liberty and liberal institutions are of little service in

the hour of danger, and the Russians who admire such institutions

will be constrained to admit that a strong, all-directing autocracy

is the only means of preserving national greatness."  As the

patriotic fervour and military enthusiasm increased, nothing was

heard but praises of Nicholas and his system.  The war was regarded

by many as a kind of crusade--even the Emperor spoke about the

defence of "the native soil and the holy faith"--and the most

exaggerated expectations were entertained of its results.  The old

Eastern Question was at last to be solved in accordance with

Russian aspirations, and Nicholas was about to realise Catherine

II.'s grand scheme of driving the Turks out of Europe.  The date at

which the troops would arrive at Constantinople was actively

discussed, and a Slavophil poet called on the Emperor to lie down

in Constantinople, and rise up as Tsar of a Panslavonic Empire.

Some enthusiasts even expected the speedy liberation of Jerusalem

from the power of the Infidel.  To the enemy, who might possibly

hinder the accomplishment of these schemes, very little attention

was paid.  "We have only to throw our hats at them!" (Shapkami

zakidaem) became a favourite expression.



There were, however, a few men in whom the prospect of the coming

struggle awoke very different thoughts and feelings.  They could

not share the sanguine expectations of those who were confident of

success.  "What preparations have we made," they asked, "for the

struggle with civilisation, which now sends its forces against us?

With all our vast territory and countless population we are

incapable of coping with it.  When we talk of the glorious campaign

against Napoleon, we forget that since that time Europe has been

steadily advancing on the road of progress while we have been

standing still.  We march not to victory, but to defeat, and the

only grain of consolation which we have is that Russia will learn

by experience a lesson that will be of use to her in the future."*





* These are the words of Granovski.





These prophets of evil found, of course, few disciples, and were

generally regarded as unworthy sons of the Fatherland--almost as

traitors to their country.  But their predictions were confirmed by

events.  The Allies were victorious in the Crimea, and even the

despised Turks made a successful stand on the line of the Danube.

In spite of the efforts of the Government to suppress all

unpleasant intelligence, it soon became known that the military

organisation was little, if at all, better than the civil

administration--that the individual bravery of soldiers and

officers was neutralised by the incapacity of the generals, the

venality of the officials, and the shameless peculation of the

commissariat department.  The Emperor, it was said, had drilled out

of the officers all energy, individuality, and moral force.  Almost

the only men who showed judgment, decision, and energy were the

officers of the Black Sea fleet, which had been less subjected to

the prevailing system.  As the struggle went on, it became evident

how weak the country really was--how deficient in the resources

necessary to sustain a prolonged conflict.  "Another year of war,"

writes an eye-witness in 1855, "and the whole of Southern Russia

will be ruined."  To meet the extraordinary demands on the

Treasury, recourse was had to an enormous issue of paper money; but

the rapid depreciation of the currency showed that this resource

would soon be exhausted.  Militia regiments were everywhere raised

throughout the country, and many proprietors spent large sums in

equipping volunteer corps; but very soon this enthusiasm cooled

when it was found that the patriotic efforts enriched the jobbers

without inflicting any serious injury on the enemy.



Under the sting of the great national humiliation, the upper

classes awoke from their optimistic resignation.  They had borne

patiently the oppression of a semi-military administration, and for

this!  The system of Nicholas had been put to a crucial test, and

found wanting.  The policy which had sacrificed all to increase the

military power of the Empire was seen to be a fatal error, and the

worthlessness of the drill-sergeant regime was proved by bitter

experience.  Those administrative fetters which had for more than a

quarter of a century cramped every spontaneous movement had failed

to fulfil even the narrow purpose for which they had been forged.

They had, indeed, secured a certain external tranquillity during

those troublous times when Europe was convulsed by revolutionary

agitation; but this tranquillity was not that of healthy normal

action, but of death--and underneath the surface lay secret and

rapidly spreading corruption.  The army still possessed that

dashing gallantry which it had displayed in the campaigns of

Suvorof, that dogged, stoical bravery which had checked the advance

of Napoleon on the field of Borodino, and that wondrous power of

endurance which had often redeemed the negligence of generals and

the defects of the commissariat; but the result was now not

victory, but defeat.  How could this be explained except by the

radical defects of that system which had been long practised with

such inflexible perseverance?  The Government had imagined that it

could do everything by its own wisdom and energy, and in reality it

had done nothing, or worse than nothing.  The higher officers had

learned only too well to be mere automata; the ameliorations in the

military organisation, on which Nicholas had always bestowed

special attention, were found to exist for the most part only in

the official reports; the shameful exploits of the commissariat

department were such as to excite the indignation of those who had

long lived in an atmosphere of official jobbery and peculation; and

the finances, which people had generally supposed to be in a highly

satisfactory condition, had become seriously crippled by the first

great national effort.



This deep and wide-spread dissatisfaction was not allowed to appear

in the Press, but it found very free expression in the manuscript

literature and in conversation.  In almost every house--I mean, of

course, among the educated classes--words were spoken which a few

months before would have seemed treasonable, if not blasphemous.

Philippics and satires in prose and verse were written by the

dozen, and circulated in hundreds of copies.  A pasquil on the

Commander in Chief, or a tirade against the Government, was sure to

be eagerly read and warmly approved of.  As a specimen of this kind

of literature, and an illustration of the public opinion of the

time, I may translate here one of those metrical tirades.  Though

it was never printed, it obtained a wide circulation:



"'God has placed me over Russia,' said the Tsar to us, 'and you

must bow down before me, for my throne is His altar.  Trouble not

yourselves with public affairs, for I think for you and watch over

you every hour.  My watchful eye detects internal evils and the

machinations of foreign enemies; and I have no need of counsel, for

God inspires me with wisdom.  Be proud, therefore, of being my

slaves, O Russians, and regard my will as your law.'



"We listened to these words with deep reverence, and gave a tacit

consent; and what was the result?  Under mountains of official

papers real interests were forgotten.  The letter of the law was

observed, but negligence and crime were allowed to go unpunished.

While grovelling in the dust before ministers and directors of

departments in the hope of receiving tchins and decorations, the

officials stole unblushingly; and theft became so common that he

who stole the most was the most respected.  The merits of officers

were decided at reviews; and he who obtained the rank of General

was supposed capable of becoming at once an able governor, an

excellent engineer, or a most wise senator.  Those who were

appointed governors were for the most part genuine satraps, the

scourges of the provinces entrusted to their care.  The other

offices were filled up with as little attention to the merits of

the candidates.  A stable-boy became Press censor!  an Imperial

fool became admiral!  Kleinmichel became a count!  In a word, the

country was handed over to the tender mercies of a band of robbers.



"And what did we Russians do all this time?



"We Russians slept!  With groans the peasant paid his yearly dues;

with groans the proprietor mortgaged the second half of his estate;

groaning, we all paid our heavy tribute to the officials.

Occasionally, with a grave shaking of the head, we remarked in a

whisper that it was a shame and a disgrace--that there was no

justice in the courts--that millions were squandered on Imperial

tours, kiosks, and pavilions--that everything was wrong; and then,

with an easy conscience, we sat down to our rubber, praised the

acting of Rachel, criticised the singing of Frezzolini, bowed low

to venal magnates, and squabbled with each other for advancement in

the very service which we so severely condemned.  If we did not

obtain the place we wished we retired to our ancestral estates,

where we talked of the crops, fattened in indolence and gluttony,

and lived a genuine animal life.  If any one, amidst the general

lethargy, suddenly called upon us to rise and fight for the truth

and for Russia, how ridiculous did he appear!  How cleverly the

Pharisaical official ridiculed him, and how quickly the friends of

yesterday showed him the cold shoulder!  Under the anathema of

public opinion, in some distant Siberian mine he recognised what a

heinous sin it was to disturb the heavy sleep of apathetic slaves.

Soon he was forgotten, or remembered as an unfortunate madman; and

the few who said, 'Perhaps after all he was right,' hastened to

add, 'but that is none of our business.'



"But amidst all this we had at least one consolation, one thing to

be proud of--the might of Russia in the assembly of kings.  'What

need we care,' we said, 'for the reproaches of foreign nations?  We

are stronger than those who reproach us.'  And when at great

reviews the stately regiments marched past with waving standards,

glittering helmets, and sparkling bayonets, when we heard the loud

hurrah with which the troops greeted the Emperor, then our hearts

swelled with patriotic pride, and we were ready to repeat the words

of the poet--



    "Strong is our native country, and great the Russian Tsar."



Then British statesmen, in company with the crowned conspirator of

France, and with treacherous Austria, raised Western Europe against

us, but we laughed scornfully at the coming storm.  'Let the

nations rave,' we said; 'we have no cause to be afraid.  The Tsar

doubtless foresaw all, and has long since made the necessary

preparations.'  Boldly we went forth to fight, and confidently

awaited the moment of the struggle.



"And lo! after all our boasting we were taken by surprise, and

caught unawares, as by a robber in the dark.  The sleep of innate

stupidity blinded our Ambassadors, and our Foreign Minister sold us

to our enemies.*  Where were our millions of soldiers?  Where was

the well-considered plan of defence?  One courier brought the order

to advance; another brought the order to retreat; and the army

wandered about without definite aim or purpose.  With loss and

shame we retreated from the forts of Silistria, and the pride of

Russia was humbled before the Hapsburg eagle.  The soldiers fought

well, but the parade-admiral (Menshikof)--the amphibious hero of

lost battles--did not know the geography of his own country, and

sent his troops to certain destruction.





* Many people at that time imagined that Count Nesselrode, who was

then Minister for Foreign Affairs, was a traitor to his adopted

country.





"Awake, O Russia!  Devoured by foreign enemies, crushed by slavery,

shamefully oppressed by stupid authorities and spies, awaken from

your long sleep of ignorance and apathy!  You have been long enough

held in bondage by the successors of the Tartar Khan.  Stand

forward calmly before the throne of the despot, and demand from him

an account of the national disaster.  Say to him boldly that his

throne is not the altar of God, and that God did not condemn us to

be slaves.  Russia entrusted to you, O Tsar, the supreme power, and

you were as a God upon earth.  And what have you done?  Blinded by

ignorance and passion, you have lusted after power and have

forgotten Russia.  You have spent your life in reviewing troops, in

modifying uniforms, and in appending your signature to the

legislative projects of ignorant charlatans.  You created the

despicable race of Press censors, in order to sleep in peace--in

order not to know the wants and not to hear the groans of the

people--in order not to listen to Truth.  You buried Truth, rolled

a great stone to the door of the sepulchre, placed a strong guard

over it, and said in the pride of your heart: For her there is no

resurrection!  But the third day has dawned, and Truth has arisen

from the dead.



"Stand forward, O Tsar, before the judgment-seat of history and of

God!  You have mercilessly trampled Truth under foot, you have

denied Freedom, you have been the slave of your own passions.  By

your pride and obstinacy you have exhausted Russia and raised the

world in arms against us.  Bow down before your brethren and humble

yourself in the dust!  Crave pardon and ask advice!  Throw yourself

into the arms of the people!  There is now no other salvation!"



The innumerable tirades of which the above is a fair specimen were

not very remarkable for literary merit or political wisdom.  For

the most part they were simply bits of bombastic rhetoric couched

in doggerel rhyme, and they have consequently been long since

consigned to well-merited oblivion--so completely that it is now

difficult to obtain copies of them.*  They have, however, an

historical interest, because they express in a more or less

exaggerated form the public opinion and prevalent ideas of the

educated classes at that moment.  In order to comprehend their real

significance, we must remember that the writers and readers were

not a band of conspirators, but ordinary, respectable, well-

intentioned people, who never for a moment dreamed of embarking in

revolutionary designs.  It was the same society that had been a few

months before so indifferent to all political questions, and even

now there was no clear conception as to how the loud-sounding

phrases could be translated into action.  We can imagine the

comical discomfiture of those who read and listened to these

appeals, if the "despot" had obeyed their summons, and suddenly

appeared before them.





* I am indebted for the copies which I possess to friends who

copied and collected these pamphlets at the time.





Was the movement, then, merely an outburst of childish petulance?

Certainly not.  The public were really and seriously convinced that

things were all wrong, and they were seriously and enthusiastically

desirous that a new and better order of things should be

introduced.  It must be said to their honour that they did not

content themselves with accusing and lampooning the individuals who

were supposed to be the chief culprits.  On the contrary, they

looked reality boldly in the face, made a public confession of

their past sins, sought conscientiously the causes which had

produced the recent disasters, and endeavoured to find means by

which such calamities might be prevented in the future.  The public

feeling and aspirations were not strong enough to conquer the

traditional respect for the Imperial will and create an open

opposition to the Autocratic Power, but they were strong enough to

do great things by aiding the Government, if the Emperor

voluntarily undertook a series of radical reforms.



What Nicholas would have done, had he lived, in face of this

national awakening, it is difficult to say.  He declared, indeed,

that he could not change, and we can readily believe that his proud

spirit would have scorned to make concessions to the principles

which he had always condemned; but he gave decided indications in

the last days of his life that his old faith in his system was

somewhat shaken, and he did not exhort his son to persevere in the

path along which he himself had forced his way with such obstinate

consistency.  It is useless, however, to speculate on

possibilities.  Whilst the Government had still to concentrate all

its energies on the defence of the country, the Iron Tsar died, and

was succeeded by his son, a man of a very different type.



Of a kind-hearted, humane disposition, sincerely desirous of

maintaining the national honour, but singularly free from military

ambition and imbued with no fanatical belief in the drill-sergeant

system of government, Alexander II. was by no means insensible to

the spirit of the time.  He had, however, none of the sentimental

enthusiasm for liberal institutions which had characterised his

uncle, Alexander I.  On the contrary, he had inherited from his

father a strong dislike to sentimentalism and rhetoric of all

kinds.  This dislike, joined to a goodly portion of sober common-

sense, a limited confidence in his own judgment, and a

consciousness of enormous responsibility, prevented him from being

carried away by the prevailing excitement.  With all that was

generous and humane in the movement he thoroughly sympathised, and

he allowed the popular ideas and aspirations to find free

utterance; but he did not at once commit himself to any definite

policy, and carefully refrained from all exaggerated expressions of

reforming zeal.



As soon, however, as peace had been concluded, there were

unmistakable symptoms that the rigorously repressive system of

Nicholas was about to be abandoned.  In the manifesto announcing

the termination of hostilities the Emperor expressed his conviction

that by the combined efforts of the Government and the people, the

public administration would be improved, and that justice and mercy

would reign in the courts of law.  Apparently as a preparation for

this great work, to be undertaken by the Tsar and his people in

common, the ministers began to take the public into their

confidence, and submitted to public criticism many official data

which had hitherto been regarded as State secrets.  The Minister of

the Interior, for instance, in his annual report, spoke almost in

the tone of a penitent, and confessed openly that the morality of

the officials under his orders left much to be desired.  He

declared that the Emperor now showed a paternal confidence in his

people, and as a proof of this he mentioned the significant fact

that 9,000 persons had been liberated from police supervision.  The

other branches of the Administration underwent a similar

transformation.  The haughty, dictatorial tone which had hitherto

been used by superiors to their subordinates, and by all ranks of

officials to the public, was replaced by one of considerate

politeness.  About the same time those of the Decembrists who were

still alive were pardoned.  The restrictions regarding the number

of students in each university were abolished, the difficulty of

obtaining foreign passports was removed, and the Press censors

became singularly indulgent.  Though no decided change had been

made in the laws, it was universally felt that the spirit of

Nicholas was no more.



The public, anxiously seeking after a sign, readily took these

symptoms of change as a complete confirmation of their ardent

hopes, and leaped at once to the conclusion that a vast, all-

embracing system of radical reform was about to be undertaken--not

secretly by the Administration, as had been the custom in the

preceding reign when any little changes had to be made, but

publicly, by the Government and the people in common.  "The heart

trembles with joy," said one of the leading organs of the Press,

"in expectation of the great social reforms that are about to be

effected--reforms that are thoroughly in accordance with the

spirit, the wishes, and the expectations of the public."  "The old

harmony and community of feeling," said another, "which has always

existed between the government and the people, save during short

exceptional periods, has been fully re-established.  The absence of

all sentiment of caste, and the feeling of common origin and

brotherhood which binds all classes of the Russian people into a

homogeneous whole, will enable Russia to accomplish peacefully and

without effort not only those great reforms which cost Europe

centuries of struggle and bloodshed, but also many which the

nations of the West are still unable to accomplish, in consequence

of feudal traditions and caste prejudices."  The past was depicted

in the blackest colours, and the nation was called upon to begin a

new and glorious epoch of its history.  "We have to struggle," it

was said, "in the name of the highest truth against egotism and the

puny interests of the moment; and we ought to prepare our children

from their infancy to take part in that struggle which awaits every

honest man.  We have to thank the war for opening our eyes to the

dark sides of our political and social organisation, and it is now

our duty to profit by the lesson.  But it must not be supposed that

the Government can, single-handed, remedy the defects.  The

destinies of Russia are, as it were, a stranded vessel which the

captain and crew cannot move, and which nothing, indeed, but the

rising tide of the national life can raise and float."



Hearts beat quicker at the sound of these calls to action.  Many

heard this new teaching, if we may believe a contemporary

authority, "with tears in their eyes"; then, "raising boldly their

heads, they made a solemn vow that they would act honourably,

perseveringly, fearlessly."  Some of those who had formerly yielded

to the force of circumstances now confessed their misdemeanours

with bitterness of heart.  "Tears of repentance," said a popular

poet, "give relief, and call us to new exploits."  Russia was

compared to a strong giant who awakes from sleep, stretches his

brawny limbs, collects his thoughts, and prepares to atone for his

long inactivity by feats of untold prowess.  All believed, or at

least assumed, that the recognition of defects would necessarily

entail their removal.  When an actor in one of the St. Petersburg

theatres shouted from the stage, "Let us proclaim throughout all

Russia that the time has come for tearing up evil by the roots!"

the audience gave way to the most frantic enthusiasm.  "Altogether

a joyful time," says one who took part in the excitement, "as when,

after the long winter, the genial breath of spring glides over the

cold, petrified earth, and nature awakens from her deathlike sleep.

Speech, long restrained by police and censorial regulations, now

flows smoothly, majestically, like a mighty river that has just

been freed from ice."



Under these influences a multitude of newspapers and periodicals

were founded, and the current literature entirely changed its

character.  The purely literary and historical questions which had

hitherto engaged the attention of the reading public were thrown

aside and forgotten, unless they could be made to illustrate some

principle of political or social science.  Criticisms on style and

diction, explanations of aesthetic principles, metaphysical

discussions--all this seemed miserable trifling to men who wished

to devote themselves to gigantic practical interests.  "Science,"

it was said, "has now descended from the heights of philosophic

abstraction into the arena of real life."  The periodicals were

accordingly filled with articles on railways, banks, free-trade,

education, agriculture, communal institutions, local self-

government, joint-stock companies, and with crushing philippics

against personal and national vanity, inordinate luxury,

administrative tyranny, and the habitual peculation of the

officials.  This last-named subject received special attention.

During the preceding reign any attempt to criticise publicly the

character or acts of an official was regarded as a very heinous

offence; now there was a deluge of sketches, tales, comedies, and

monologues, describing the corruption of the Administration, and

explaining the ingenious devices by which the tchinovniks increased

their scanty salaries.  The public would read nothing that had not

a direct or indirect bearing on the questions of the day, and

whatever had such a bearing was read with interest.  It did not

seem at all strange that a drama should be written in defence of

free-trade, or a poem in advocacy of some peculiar mode of

taxation; that an author should expound his political ideas in a

tale, and his antagonist reply by a comedy.  A few men of the old

school protested feebly against this "prostitution of art," but

they received little attention, and the doctrine that art should be

cultivated for its own sake was scouted as an invention of

aristocratic indolence.  Here is an ipsa pinxit of the literature

of the time: "Literature has come to look at Russia with her own

eyes, and sees that the idyllic romantic personages which the poets

formerly loved to describe have no objective existence.  Having

taken off her French glove, she offers her hand to the rude, hard-

working labourer, and observing lovingly Russian village life, she

feels herself in her native land.  The writers of the present have

analysed the past, and, having separated themselves from

aristocratic litterateurs and aristocratic society, have demolished

their former idols."



By far the most influential periodical at the commencement of the

movement was the Kolokol, or Bell, a fortnightly journal published

in London by Herzen, who was at that time an important personage

among the political refugees.  Herzen was a man of education and

culture, with ultra-radical opinions, and not averse to using

revolutionary methods of reform when he considered them necessary.

His intimate relations with many of the leading men in Russia

enabled him to obtain secret information of the most important and

varied kind, and his sparkling wit, biting satire, and clear,

terse, brilliant style secured him a large number of readers.  He

seemed to know everything that was done in the ministries and even

in the Cabinet of the Emperor,* and he exposed most mercilessly

every abuse that came to his knowledge.  We who are accustomed to

free political discussion can hardly form a conception of the

avidity with which his articles were read, and the effect which

they produced.  Though strictly prohibited by the Press censure,

the Kolokol found its way across the frontier in thousands of

copies, and was eagerly perused and commented on by all ranks of

the educated classes.  The Emperor himself received it regularly,

and high-priced delinquents examined it with fear and trembling.

In this way Herzen was for some years, though an exile, an

important political personage, and did much to awaken and keep up

the reform enthusiasm.





* As an illustration of this, the following anecdote is told: One

number of the Kolokol contained a violent attack on an important

personage of the court, and the accused, or some one of his

friends, considered it advisable to have a copy specially printed

for the Emperor without the objectionable article.  The Emperor did

not at first discover the trick, but shortly afterwards he received

from London a polite note containing the article which had been

omitted, and informing him how he had been deceived.





But where were the Conservatives all this time?  How came it that

for two or three years no voice was raised and no protest made even

against the rhetorical exaggerations of the new-born liberalism?

Where were the representatives of the old regime, who had been so

thoroughly imbued with the spirit of Nicholas?  Where were those

ministers who had systematically extinguished the least indication

of private initiative, those "satraps" who had stamped out the

least symptom of insubordination or discontent, those Press censors

who had diligently suppressed the mildest expression of liberal

opinion, those thousands of well-intentioned proprietors who had

regarded as dangerous free-thinkers and treasonable republicans all

who ventured to express dissatisfaction with the existing state of

things?  A short time before, the Conservatives composed at least

nine-tenths of the upper classes, and now they had suddenly and

mysteriously disappeared.



It is scarcely necessary to say that in a country accustomed to

political life, such a sudden, unopposed revolution in public

opinion could not possibly take place.  The key to the mystery lies

in the fact that for centuries Russia had known nothing of

political life or political parties.  Those who were sometimes

called Conservatives were in reality not at all Conservatives in

our sense of the term.  If we say that they had a certain amount of

conservatism, we must add that it was of the latent, passive,

unreasoned kind--the fruit of indolence and apathy.  Their

political creed had but one article: Thou shalt love the Tsar with

all thy might, and carefully abstain from all resistance to his

will--especially when it happens that the Tsar is a man of the

Nicholas type.  So long as Nicholas lived they had passively

acquiesced in his system--active acquiescence had been neither

demanded nor desired--but when he died, the system of which he was

the soul died with him.  What then could they seek to defend?  They

were told that the system which they had been taught to regard as

the sheet-anchor of the State was in reality the chief cause of the

national disasters; and to this they could make no reply, because

they had no better explanation of their own to offer.  They were

convinced that the Russian soldier was the best soldier in the

world, and they knew that in the recent war the army had not been

victorious; the system, therefore, must be to blame.  They were

told that a series of gigantic reforms was necessary in order to

restore Russia to her proper place among the nations; and to this

they could make no answer, for they had never studied such abstract

questions.  And one thing they did know: that those who hesitated

to admit the necessity of gigantic reforms were branded by the

Press as ignorant, narrow-minded, prejudiced, and egotistical, and

were held up to derision as men who did not know the most

elementary principles of political and economic science.  Freely

expressed public opinion was such a new phenomenon in Russia that

the Press was able for some time to exercise a "Liberal" tyranny

scarcely less severe than the "Conservative" tyranny of the censors

in the preceding reign.  Men who would have stood fire gallantly on

the field of battle quailed before the poisoned darts of Herzen in

the Kolokol.  Under such circumstances, even the few who possessed

some vague Conservative convictions refrained from publicly

expressing them.



The men who had played a more or less active part during the

preceding reign, and who might therefore be expected to have

clearer and deeper convictions, were specially incapable of

offering opposition to the prevailing Liberal enthusiasm.  Their

Conservatism was of quite as limp a kind as that of the landed

proprietors who were not in the public service, for under Nicholas

the higher a man was placed the less likely was he to have

political convictions of any kind outside the simple political

creed above referred to.  Besides this, they belonged to that class

which was for the moment under the anathema of public opinion, and

they had drawn direct personal advantage from the system which was

now recognised as the chief cause of the national disasters.



For a time the name of tchinovnik became a term of reproach and

derision, and the position of those who bore it was comically

painful.  They strove to prove that, though they held a post in the

public service, they were entirely free from the tchinovnik spirit--

that there was nothing of the genuine tchinovnik about them.

Those who had formerly paraded their tchin (official rank) on all

occasions, in season and out of season, became half ashamed to

admit that they had the rank of General; for the title no longer

commanded respect, and had become associated with all that was

antiquated, formal, and stupid.  Among the young generation it was

used most disrespectfully as equivalent to "pompous blockhead."

Zealous officials who had lately regarded the acquisition of Stars

and Orders as among the chief ends of man, were fain to conceal

those hard-won trophies, lest some cynical "Liberal" might notice

them and make them the butt of his satire.  "Look at the depth of

humiliation to which you have brought the country"--such was the

chorus of reproach that was ever ringing in their ears--"with your

red tape, your Chinese formalism, and your principle of lifeless,

unreasoning, mechanical obedience!  You asserted constantly that

you were the only true patriots, and branded with the name of

traitor those who warned you of the insane folly of your conduct.

You see now what it has all come to.  The men whom you helped to

send to the mines turn out to have been the true patriots."*





* It was a common saying at that time that nearly all the best men

in Russia had spent a part of their lives in Siberia, and it was

proposed to publish a biographical dictionary of remarkable men, in

which every article was to end thus: "Exiled to ---- in 18--."  I

am not aware how far the project was seriously entertained, but, of

course, the book was never published.





And to these reproaches what could they reply?  Like a child who

has in his frolics inadvertently set the house on fire, they could

only look contrite, and say they did not mean it.  They had simply

accepted without criticism the existing order of things, and ranged

themselves among those who were officially recognised as "the well-

intentioned."  If they had always avoided the Liberals, and perhaps

helped to persecute them, it was simply because all "well-

intentioned" people said that Liberals were "restless" and

dangerous to the State.  Those who were not convinced of their

errors simply kept silence, but the great majority passed over to

the ranks of the Progressists, and many endeavoured to redeem their

past by showing extreme zeal for the Liberal cause.



In explanation of this extraordinary outburst of reform enthusiasm,

we must further remember that the Russian educated classes, in

spite of the severe northern climate which is supposed to make the

blood circulate slowly, are extremely impulsive.  They are fettered

by no venerable historical prejudices, and are wonderfully

sensitive to the seductive influence of grandiose projects,

especially when these excite the patriotic feelings.  Then there

was the simple force of reaction--the rebound which naturally

followed the terrific compression of the preceding reign.  Without

disrespect, the Russians of that time may be compared to schoolboys

who have just escaped from the rigorous discipline of a severe

schoolmaster.  In the first moments of freedom it was supposed that

there would be no more discipline or compulsion.  The utmost

respect was to be shown to "human dignity," and every Russian was

to act spontaneously and zealously at the great work of national

regeneration.  All thirsted for reforming activity.  The men in

authority were inundated with projects of reform--some of them

anonymous, and others from obscure individuals; some of them

practical, and very many wildly fantastic.  Even the grammarians

showed their sympathy with the spirit of the time by proposing to

expel summarily all redundant letters from the Russian alphabet!



The fact that very few people had clear, precise ideas as to what

was to be done did not prevent, but rather tended to increase, the

reform enthusiasm.  All had at least one common feeling--dislike to

what had previously existed.  It was only when it became necessary

to forsake pure negation, and to create something, that the

conceptions became clearer, and a variety of opinions appeared.  At

the first moment there was merely unanimity in negation, and an

impulsive enthusiasm for beneficent reforms in general.



The first specific proposals were direct deductions from the

lessons taught by the war.  The war had shown in a terrible way the

disastrous consequences of having merely primitive means of

communication; the Press and the public began, accordingly, to

speak about the necessity of constructing railways, roads and

river-steamers.  The war had shown that a country which has not

developed its natural resources very soon becomes exhausted if it

has to make a great national effort; accordingly the public and the

Press talked about the necessity of developing the natural

resources, and about the means by which this desirable end might be

attained.  It had been shown by the war that a system of education

which tends to make men mere apathetic automata cannot produce even

a good army; accordingly the public and the Press began to discuss

the different systems of education and the numerous questions of

pedagogical science.  It had been shown by the war that the best

intentions of a Government will necessarily be frustrated if the

majority of the officials are dishonest or incapable; accordingly

the public and the Press began to speak about the paramount

necessity of reforming the Administration in all its branches.



It must not, however, be supposed that in thus laying to heart the

lessons taught by the war and endeavouring to profit by them, the

Russians were actuated by warlike feelings, and desired to avenge

themselves as soon as possible on their victorious enemies.  On the

contrary, the whole movement and the spirit which animated it were

eminently pacific.  Prince Gortchakof's saying, "La Russie ne boude

pas, elle se recueille," was more than a diplomatic repartee--it

was a true and graphic statement of the case.  Though the Russians

are very inflammable, and can be very violent when their patriotic

feelings are aroused, they are, individually and as a nation,

singularly free from rancour and the spirit of revenge.  After the

termination of hostilities they really bore little malice towards

the Western Powers, except towards Austria, which was believed to

have been treacherous and ungrateful to the country that had saved

her in 1849.  Their patriotism now took the form, not of revenge,

but of a desire to raise their country to the level of the Western

nations.  If they thought of military matters at all, they assumed

that military power would be obtained as a natural and inevitable

result of high civilisation and good government.



As a first step towards the realisation of the vast schemes

contemplated, voluntary associations began to be formed for

industrial and commercial purposes, and a law was issued for the

creation of limited liability companies.  In the space of two years

forty-seven companies of this kind were founded, with a combined

capital of 358 millions of roubles.  To understand the full

significance of these figures, we must know that from the founding

of the first joint-stock company in 1799 down to 1853 only twenty-

six companies had been formed, and their united capital amounted

only to thirty-two millions of roubles.  Thus in the space of two

years (1857-58) eleven times as much capital was subscribed to

joint-stock companies as had been subscribed during half a century

previous to the war.  The most exaggerated expectations were

entertained as to the national and private advantages which must

necessarily result from these undertakings, and it became a

patriotic duty to subscribe liberally.  The periodical literature

depicted in glowing terms the marvellous results that had been

obtained in other countries by the principle of co-operation, and

sanguine readers believed that they had discovered a patriotic way

of speedily becoming rich.



These were, however, mere secondary matters, and the public were

anxiously waiting for the Government to begin the grand reforming

campaign.  When the educated classes awoke to the necessity of

great reforms, there was no clear conception as to how the great

work should be undertaken.  There was so much to be done that it

was no easy matter to decide what should be done first.

Administrative, judicial, social, economical, financial, and

political reforms seemed all equally pressing.  Gradually, however,

it became evident that precedence must be given to the question of

serfage.  It was absurd to speak about progress, humanitarianism,

education, self-government, equality in the eye of the law, and

similar matters, so long as one half of the population was excluded

from the enjoyment of ordinary civil rights.  So long as serfage

existed it was mere mockery to talk about re-organising Russia

according to the latest results of political and social science.

How could a system of even-handed justice be introduced when twenty

millions of the peasantry were subject to the arbitrary will of the

landed proprietors?  How could agricultural or industrial progress

be made without free labour?  How could the Government take active

measures for the spread of national education when it had no direct

control over one-half of the peasantry?  Above all, how could it be

hoped that a great moral regeneration could take place, so long as

the nation voluntarily retained the stigma of serfage and slavery?



All this was very generally felt by the educated classes, but no

one ventured to raise the question until it should be known what

were the views of the Emperor on the subject.  How the question was

gradually raised, how it was treated by the nobles, and how it was

ultimately solved by the famous law of February 19th (March 3d),

1861,* I now propose to relate.





* February 19th according to the old style, which is still used in

Russia, and March 3d according to our method of reckoning.

