





CHAPTER XVII



AMONG THE HERETICS





The Molokanye--My Method of Investigation--Alexandrof-Hai--An

Unexpected Theological Discussion--Doctrines and Ecclesiastical

Organisation of the Molokanye--Moral Supervision and Mutual

Assistance--History of the Sect--A False Prophet--Utilitarian

Christianity--Classification of the Fantastic Sects--The "Khlysti"--

Policy of the Government towards Sectarianism--Two Kinds of

Heresy--Probable Future of the Heretical Sects--Political

Disaffection.





Whilst travelling on the Steppe I heard a great deal about a

peculiar religious sect called the Molokanye, and I felt interested

in them because their religious belief, whatever it was, seemed to

have a beneficial influence on their material welfare.  Of the same

race and placed in the same conditions as the Orthodox peasantry

around them, they were undoubtedly better housed, better clad, more

punctual in the payment of their taxes, and, in a word, more

prosperous.  All my informants agreed in describing them as quiet,

decent, sober people; but regarding their religious doctrines the

evidence was vague and contradictory.  Some described them as

Protestants or Lutherans, whilst others believed them to be the

last remnants of a curious heretical sect which existed in the

early Christian Church.



Desirous of obtaining clear notions on the subject, I determined to

investigate the matter for myself.  At first I found this to be no

easy task.  In the villages through which I passed I found numerous

members of the sect, but they all showed a decided repugnance to

speak about their religious beliefs.  Long accustomed to extortion

and persecution at the hands of the Administration, and suspecting

me to be a secret agent of the Government, they carefully avoided

speaking on any subject beyond the state of the weather and the

prospects of the harvest, and replied to my questions on other

topics as if they had been standing before a Grand Inquisitor.



A few unsuccessful attempts convinced me that it would be

impossible to extract from them their religious beliefs by direct

questioning.  I adopted, therefore, a different system of tactics.

From meagre replies already received I had discovered that their

doctrine had at least a superficial resemblance to Presbyterianism,

and from former experience I was aware that the curiosity of

intelligent Russian peasants is easily excited by descriptions of

foreign countries.  On these two facts I based my plan of campaign.

When I found a Molokan, or some one whom I suspected to be such, I

talked for some time about the weather and the crops, as if I had

no ulterior object in view.  Having fully discussed this matter, I

led the conversation gradually from the weather and crops in Russia

to the weather and crops in Scotland, and then passed slowly from

Scotch agriculture to the Scotch Presbyterian Church.  On nearly

every occasion this policy succeeded.  When the peasant heard that

there was a country where the people interpreted the Scriptures for

themselves, had no bishops, and considered the veneration of Icons

as idolatry, he invariably listened with profound attention; and

when he learned further that in that wonderful country the parishes

annually sent deputies to an assembly in which all matters

pertaining to the Church were freely and publicly discussed, he

almost always gave free expression to his astonishment, and I had

to answer a whole volley of questions.  "Where is that country?"

"Is it to the east, or the west?"  "Is it very far away?"  "If our

Presbyter could only hear all that!"



This last expression was precisely what I wanted, because it gave

me an opportunity of making the acquaintance of the Presbyter, or

pastor, without seeming to desire it; and I knew that a

conversation with that personage, who is always an uneducated

peasant like the others, but is generally more intelligent and

better acquainted with religious doctrine, would certainly be of

use to me.  On more than one occasion I spent a great part of the

night with a Presbyter, and thereby learned much concerning the

religious beliefs and practices of the sect.  After these

interviews I was sure to be treated with confidence and respect by

all the Molokanye in the village, and recommended to the brethren

of the faith in the neighbouring villages through which I intended

to pass.  Several of the more intelligent peasants with whom I

spoke advised me strongly to visit Alexandrof-Hai, a village

situated on the borders of the Kirghiz Steppe.  "We are dark [i.e.,

ignorant] people here," they were wont to say, "and do not know

anything, but in Alexandrof-Hai you will find those who know the

faith, and they will discuss with you."  This prediction was

fulfilled in a somewhat unexpected way.



When returning some weeks later from a visit to the Kirghiz of the

Inner Horde, I arrived one evening at this centre of the Molokan

faith, and was hospitably received by one of the brotherhood.  In

conversing casually with my host on religious subjects I expressed

to him a desire to find some one well read in Holy Writ and well

grounded in the faith, and he promised to do what he could for me

in this respect.  Next morning he kept his promise with a

vengeance.  Immediately after the tea-urn had been removed the door

of the room was opened and twelve peasants were ushered in!  After

the customary salutations with these unexpected visitors, my host

informed me to my astonishment that his friends had come to have a

talk with me about the faith; and without further ceremony he

placed before me a folio Bible in the old Slavonic tongue, in order

that I might read passages in support of my arguments.  As I was

not at all prepared to open a formal theological discussion, I felt

not a little embarrassed, and I could see that my travelling

companions, two Russian friends who cared for none of these things,

were thoroughly enjoying my discomfiture.  There was, however, no

possibility of drawing back.  I had asked for an opportunity of

having a talk with some of the brethren, and now I had got it in a

way that I certainly did not expect.  My friends withdrew--"leaving

me to my fate," as they whispered to me--and the "talk" began.



My fate was by no means so terrible as had been anticipated, but at

first the situation was a little awkward.  Neither party had any

clear ideas as to what the other desired, and my visitors expected

that I was to begin the proceedings.  This expectation was quite

natural and justifiable, for I had inadvertently invited them to

meet me, but I could not make a speech to them, for the best of all

reasons--that I did not know what to say.  If I told them my real

aims, their suspicions would probably be aroused.  My usual

stratagem of the weather and the crops was wholly inapplicable.

For a moment I thought of proposing that a psalm should be sung as

a means of breaking the ice, but I felt that this would give to the

meeting a solemnity which I wished to avoid.  On the whole it

seemed best to begin at once a formal discussion.  I told them,

therefore, that I had spoken with many of their brethren in various

villages, and that I had found what I considered grave errors of

doctrine.  I could not, for instance, agree with them in their

belief that it was unlawful to eat pork.  This was perhaps an

abrupt way of entering on the subject, but it furnished at least a

locus standi--something to talk about--and an animated discussion

immediately ensued.  My opponents first endeavoured to prove their

thesis from the New Testament, and when this argument broke down

they had recourse to the Pentateuch.  From a particular article of

the ceremonial law we passed to the broader question as to how far

the ceremonial law is still binding, and from this to other points

equally important.



If the logic of the peasants was not always unimpeachable, their

knowledge of the Scriptures left nothing to be desired.  In support

of their views they quoted long passages from memory, and whenever

I indicated vaguely any text which I needed, they at once supplied

it verbatim, so that the big folio Bible served merely as an

ornament.  Three or four of them seemed to know the whole of the

New Testament by heart.  The course of our informal debate need not

here be described; suffice it to say that, after four hours of

uninterrupted conversation, we agreed to differ on questions of

detail, and parted from each other without a trace of that ill-

feeling which religious discussion commonly engenders.  Never have

I met men more honest and courteous in debate, more earnest in the

search after truth, more careless of dialectical triumphs, than

these simple, uneducated muzhiks.  If at one or two points in the

discussion a little undue warmth was displayed, I must do my

opponents the justice to say that they were not the offending

party.



This long discussion, as well as numerous discussions which I had

had before and since have had with Molokanye in various parts of

the country, confirmed my first impression that their doctrines

have a strong resemblance to Presbyterianism.  There is, however,

an important difference.  Presbyterianism has an ecclesiastical

organisation and a written creed, and its doctrines have long since

become clearly defined by means of public discussion, polemical

literature, and general assemblies.  The Molokanye, on the

contrary, have had no means of developing their fundamental

principles and forming their vague religious beliefs into a clearly

defined logical system.  Their theology is therefore still in a

half-fluid state, so that it is impossible to predict what form it

will ultimately assume.  "We have not yet thought about that," I

have frequently been told when I inquired about some abstruse

doctrine; "we must talk about it at the meeting next Sunday.  What

is your opinion?"  Besides this, their fundamental principles allow

great latitude for individual and local differences of opinion.

They hold that Holy Writ is the only rule of faith and conduct, but

that it must be taken in the spiritual, and not in the literal,

sense.  As there is no terrestrial authority to which doubtful

points can be referred, each individual is free to adopt the

interpretation which commends itself to his own judgment.  This

will no doubt ultimately lead to a variety of sects, and already

there is a considerable diversity of opinion between different

communities; but this diversity has not yet been recognised, and I

may say that I nowhere found that fanatically dogmatic, quibbling

spirit which is usually the soul of sectarianism.



For their ecclesiastical organisation the Molokanye take as their

model the early Apostolic Church, as depicted in the New Testament,

and uncompromisingly reject all later authorities.  In accordance

with this model they have no hierarchy and no paid clergy, but

choose from among themselves a Presbyter and two assistants--men

well known among the brethren for their exemplary life and their

knowledge of the Scriptures--whose duty it is to watch over the

religious and moral welfare of the flock.  On Sundays they hold

meetings in private houses--they are not allowed to build churches--

and spend two or three hours in psalm singing, prayer, reading the

Scriptures, and friendly conversation on religious subjects.  If

any one has a doctrinal difficulty which he desires to have cleared

up, he states it to the congregation, and some of the others give

their opinions, with the texts on which the opinions are founded.

If the question seems clearly solved by the texts, it is decided;

if not, it is left open.



As in many young sects, there exists among the Molokanye a system

of severe moral supervision.  If a member has been guilty of

drunkenness or any act unbecoming a Christian, he is first

admonished by the Presbyter in private or before the congregation;

and if this does not produce the desired effect, he is excluded for

a longer or shorter period from the meetings and from all

intercourse with the members.  In extreme cases expulsion is

resorted to.  On the other hand, if any one of the members happens

to be, from no fault of his own, in pecuniary difficulties, the

others will assist him.  This system of mutual control and mutual

assistance has no doubt something to do with the fact that the

Molokanye are distinguished from the surrounding population by

their sobriety, uprightness, and material prosperity.



Of the history of the sect my friends in Alexandrof-Hai could tell

me very little, but I have obtained from other quarters some

interesting information.  The founder was a peasant of the province

of Tambof called Uklein, who lived in the reign of Catherine II.,

and gained his living as an itinerant tailor.  For some time he

belonged to the sect of the Dukhobortsi--who are sometimes called

the Russian Quakers, and who have recently become known in Western

Europe through the efforts of Count Tolstoy on their behalf--but he

soon seceded from them, because he could not admit their doctrine

that God dwells in the human soul, and that consequently the chief

source of religious truth is internal enlightenment.  To him it

seemed that religious truth was to be found only in the Scriptures.

With this doctrine he soon made many converts, and one day he

unexpectedly entered the town of Tambof, surrounded by seventy

"Apostles" chanting psalms.  They were all quickly arrested and

imprisoned, and when the affair was reported to St. Petersburg the

Empress Catherine ordered that they should be handed over to the

ecclesiastical authorities, and that in the event of their proving

obdurate to exhortation they should be tried by the Criminal

Courts.  Uklein professed to recant, and was liberated; but he

continued his teaching secretly in the villages, and at the time of

his death he was believed to have no less than five thousand

followers.



As to the actual strength of the sect it is difficult to form even

a conjecture.  Certainly it has many thousand members--probably

several hundred thousand.  Formerly the Government transported them

from the central provinces to the thinly populated outlying

districts, where they had less opportunity of contaminating

Orthodox neighbours; and accordingly we find them in the

southeastern districts of Samara, on the north coast of the Sea of

Azof, in the Crimea, in the Caucasus, and in Siberia.  There are

still, however, very many of them in the central region, especially

in the province of Tambof.



The readiness with which the Molokanye modify their opinions and

beliefs in accordance with what seems to them new light saves them

effectually from bigotry and fanaticism, but it at the same time

exposes them to evils of a different kind, from which they might be

preserved by a few stubborn prejudices.  "False prophets arise

among us," said an old, sober-minded member to me on one occasion,

"and lead many away from the faith."



In 1835, for example, great excitement was produced among them by

rumours that the second advent of Christ was at hand, and that the

Son of Man, coming to judge the world, was about to appear in the

New Jerusalem, somewhere near Mount Ararat.  As Elijah and Enoch

were to appear before the opening of the Millennium, they were

anxiously awaited by the faithful, and at last Elijah appeared, in

the person of a Melitopol peasant called Belozvorof, who announced

that on a given day he would ascend into heaven.  On the day

appointed a great crowd collected, but he failed to keep his

promise, and was handed over to the police as an impostor by the

Molokanye themselves.  Unfortunately they were not always so

sensible as on that occasion.  In the very next year many of them

were persuaded by a certain Lukian Petrof to put on their best

garments and start for the Promised Land in the Caucasus, where the

Millennium was about to begin.



Of these false prophets the most remarkable in recent times was a

man who called himself Ivan Grigorief, a mysterious personage who

had at one time a Turkish and at another an American passport, but

who seemed in all other respects a genuine Russian.  Some years

previously to my visit he appeared at Alexandrof-Hai.  Though he

professed himself to be a good Molokan and was received as such, he

enounced at the weekly meetings many new and startling ideas.  At

first he simply urged his hearers to live like the early

Christians, and have all things in common.  This seemed sound

doctrine to the Molokanye, who profess to take the early Christians

as their model, and some of them thought of at once abolishing

personal property; but when the teacher intimated pretty plainly

that this communism should include free love, a decided opposition

arose, and it was objected that the early Church did not recommend

wholesale adultery and cognate sins.  This was a formidable

objection, but "the prophet" was equal to the occasion.  He

reminded his friends that in accordance with their own doctrine the

Scriptures should be understood, not in the literal, but in the

spiritual, sense--that Christianity had made men free, and every

true Christian ought to use his freedom.



This account of the new doctrine was given to me by an intelligent

Molokan, who had formerly been a peasant and was now a trader, as I

sat one evening in his house in Novo-usensk, the chief town of the

district in which Alexandrof-Hai is situated.  It seemed to me that

the author of this ingenious attempt to conciliate Christianity

with extreme Utilitarianism must be an educated man in disguise.

This conviction I communicated to my host, but he did not agree

with me.



"No, I think not," he replied; "in fact, I am sure he is a peasant,

and I strongly suspect he was at some time a soldier.  He has not

much learning, but he has a wonderful gift of talking; never have I

heard any one speak like him.  He would have talked over the whole

village, had it not been for an old man who was more than a match

for him.  And then he went to Orloff-Hai and there he did talk the

people over."  What he really did in this latter place I never

could clearly ascertain.  Report said that he founded a communistic

association, of which he was himself president and treasurer, and

converted the members to an extraordinary theory of prophetic

succession, invented apparently for his own sensual gratification.

For further information my host advised me to apply either to the

prophet himself, who was at that time confined in the gaol on a

charge of using a forged passport, or to one of his friends, a

certain Mr. I---- , who lived in the town.  As it was a difficult

matter to gain admittance to the prisoner, and I had little time at

my disposal, I adopted the latter alternative.



Mr. I---- was himself a somewhat curious character.  He had been a

student in Moscow, and in consequence of some youthful

indiscretions during the University disturbances had been exiled to

this place.  After waiting in vain some years for a release, he

gave up the idea of entering one of the learned professions,

married a peasant girl, rented a piece of land, bought a pair of

camels, and settled down as a small farmer.*  He had a great deal

to tell about the prophet.





* Here for the first time I saw camels used for agricultural

purposes.  When yoked to a small four-wheeled cart, the "ships of

the desert" seemed decidedly out of place.





Grigorief, it seemed, was really simply a Russian peasant, but he

had been from his youth upwards one of those restless people who

can never long work in harness.  Where his native place was, and

why he left it, he never divulged, for reasons best known to

himself.  He had travelled much, and had been an attentive

observer.  Whether he had ever been in America was doubtful, but he

had certainly been in Turkey, and had fraternised with various

Russian sectarians, who are to be found in considerable numbers

near the Danube.  Here, probably, he acquired many of his peculiar

religious ideas, and conceived his grand scheme of founding a new

religion--of rivalling the Founder of Christianity!  He aimed at

nothing less than this, as he on one occasion confessed, and he did

not see why he should not be successful.  He believed that the

Founder of Christianity had been simply a man like himself, who

understood better than others the people around him and the

circumstances of the time, and he was convinced that he himself had

these qualifications.  One qualification, however, for becoming a

prophet he certainly did not possess: he had no genuine religious

enthusiasm in him--nothing of the martyr spirit about him.  Much of

his own preaching he did not himself believe, and he had a secret

contempt for those who naively accepted it all.  Not only was he

cunning, but he knew he was cunning, and he was conscious that he

was playing an assumed part.  And yet perhaps it would be unjust to

say that he was merely an impostor exclusively occupied with his

own personal advantage.  Though he was naturally a man of sensual

tastes, and could not resist convenient opportunities of gratifying

them, he seemed to believe that his communistic schemes would, if

realised, be beneficial not only to himself, but also to the

people.  Altogether a curious mixture of the prophet, the social

reformer, and the cunning impostor!



Besides the Molokanye, there are in Russia many other heretical

sects.  Some of them are simply Evangelical Protestants, like the

Stundisti, who have adopted the religious conceptions of their

neighbours, the German colonists; whilst others are composed of

wild enthusiasts, who give a loose rein to their excited

imagination, and revel in what the Germans aptly term "der hohere

Blodsinn."  I cannot here attempt to convey even a general idea of

these fantastic sects with their doctrinal and ceremonial

absurdities, but I may offer the following classification of them

for the benefit of those who may desire to study the subject:



1. Sects which take the Scriptures as the basis of their belief,

but interpret and complete the doctrines therein contained by means

of the occasional inspiration or internal enlightenment of their

leading members.



2. Sects which reject interpretation and insist on certain passages

of Scripture being taken in the literal sense.  In one of the best

known of these sects--the Skoptsi, or Eunuchs--fanaticism has led

to physical mutilation.



3. Sects which pay little or no attention to Scripture, and derive

their doctrine from the supposed inspiration of their living

teachers.



4. Sects which believe in the re-incarnation of Christ.



5. Sects which confound religion with nervous excitement, and are

more or less erotic in their character.  The excitement necessary

for prophesying is commonly produced by dancing, jumping,

pirouetting, or self-castigation; and the absurdities spoken at

such times are regarded as the direct expression of divine wisdom.

The religious exercises resemble more or less closely those of the

"dancing dervishes" and "howling dervishes's with which all who

have visited Constantinople are familiar.  There is, however, one

important difference: the dervishes practice their religious

exercises in public, and consequently observe a certain decorum,

whilst these Russian sects assemble in secret, and give free scope

to their excitement, so that most disgusting orgies sometimes take

place at their meetings.



To illustrate the general character of the sects belonging to this

last category, I may quote here a short extract from a description

of the "Khlysti" by one who was initiated into their mysteries:

"Among them men and women alike take upon themselves the calling of

teachers and prophets, and in this character they lead a strict,

ascetic life, refrain from the most ordinary and innocent

pleasures, exhaust themselves by long fasting and wild, ecstatic

religious exercises, and abhor marriage.  Under the excitement

caused by their supposed holiness and inspiration, they call

themselves not only teachers and prophets, but also 'Saviours,'

'Redeemers,' 'Christs,' 'Mothers of God.'  Generally speaking, they

call themselves simply Gods, and pray to each other as to real Gods

and living Christs or Madonnas.  When several of these teachers

come together at a meeting, they dispute with each other in a vain

boasting way as to which of them possesses most grace and power.

In this rivalry they sometimes give each other lusty blows on the

ear, and he who bears the blows most patiently, turning the other

cheek to the smiter, acquires the reputation of having most

holiness."



Another sect belonging to this category is the Jumpers, among whom

the erotic element is disagreeably prominent.  Here is a

description of their religious meetings, which are held during

summer in the forest, and during winter in some out-house or barn:

"After due preparation prayers are read by the chief teacher,

dressed in a white robe and standing in the midst of the

congregation.  At first he reads in an ordinary tone of voice, and

then passes gradually into a merry chant.  When he remarks that the

chanting has sufficiently acted on the hearers, he begins to jump.

The hearers, singing likewise, follow his example.  Their ever-

increasing excitement finds expression in the highest possible

jumps.  This they continue as long as they can--men and women alike

yelling like enraged savages.  When all are thoroughly exhausted,

the leader declares that he hears the angels singing"--and then

begins a scene which cannot be here described.



It is but fair to add that we know very little of these peculiar

sects, and what we do know is furnished by avowed enemies.  It is

very possible, therefore, that some of them are not nearly so

absurd as they are commonly represented, and that many of the

stories told are mere calumnies.



The Government is very hostile to sectarianism, and occasionally

endeavours to suppress it.  This is natural enough as regards these

fantastic sects, but it seems strange that the peaceful,

industrious, honest Molokanye and Stundisti should be put under the

ban.  Why is it that a Russian peasant should be punished for

holding doctrines which are openly professed, with the sanction of

the authorities, by his neighbours, the German colonists?



To understand this the reader must know that according to Russian

conceptions there are two distinct kinds of heresy, distinguished

from each other, not by the doctrines held, but by the nationality

of the holder, it seems to a Russian in the nature of things that

Tartars should be Mahometans, that Poles should be Roman Catholics,

and that Germans should be Protestants; and the mere act of

becoming a Russian subject is not supposed to lay the Tartar, the

Pole, or the German under any obligation to change his faith.

These nationalities are therefore allowed the most perfect freedom

in the exercise of their respective religions, so long as they

refrain from disturbing by propagandism the divinely established

order of things.



This is the received theory, and we must do the Russians the

justice to say that they habitually act up to it.  If the

Government has sometimes attempted to convert alien races, the

motive has always been political, and the efforts have never

awakened much sympathy among the people at large, or even among the

clergy.  In like manner the missionary societies which have

sometimes been formed in imitation of the Western nations have

never received much popular support.  Thus with regard to aliens

this peculiar theory has led to very extensive religious

toleration.  With regard to the Russians themselves the theory has

had a very different effect.  If in the nature of things the Tartar

is a Mahometan, the Pole a Roman Catholic, and the German a

Protestant, it is equally in the nature of things that the Russian

should be a member of the Orthodox Church.  On this point the

written law and public opinion are in perfect accord.  If an

Orthodox Russian becomes a Roman Catholic or a Protestant, he is

amenable to the criminal law, and is at the same time condemned by

public opinion as an apostate and renegade--almost as a traitor.



As to the future of these heretical sects it is impossible to speak

with confidence.  The more gross and fantastic will probably

disappear as primary education spreads among the people; but the

Protestant sects seem to possess much more vitality.  For the

present, at least, they are rapidly spreading.  I have seen large

villages where, according to the testimony of the inhabitants,

there was not a single heretic fifteen years before, and where one-

half of the population had already become Molokanye; and this

change, be it remarked, had taken place without any propagandist

organisation.  The civil and ecclesiastical authorities were well

aware of the existence of the movement, but they were powerless to

prevent it.  The few efforts which they made were without effect,

or worse than useless.  Among the Stundisti corporal punishment was

tried as an antidote--without the concurrence, it is to be hoped,

of the central authorities--and to the Molokanye of the province of

Samara a learned monk was sent in the hope of converting them from

their errors by reason and eloquence.  What effect the birch-twigs

had on the religious convictions of the Stundisti I have not been

able to ascertain, but I assume that they were not very

efficacious, for according to the latest accounts the numbers of

the sect are increasing.  Of the mission in the province of Samara

I happen to know more, and can state on the evidence of many

peasants--some of them Orthodox--that the only immediate effect was

to stir up religious fanaticism, and to induce a certain number of

Orthodox to go over to the heretical camp.



In their public discussions the disputants could find no common

ground on which to argue, for the simple reason that their

fundamental conceptions were different.  The monk spoke of the

Church as the terrestrial representative of Christ and the sole

possessor of truth, whilst his opponents knew nothing of a Church

in this sense, and held simply that all men should live in

accordance with the dictates of Scripture.  Once the monk consented

to argue with them on their own ground, and on that occasion he

sustained a signal defeat, for he could not produce a single

passage recommending the veneration of Icons--a practice which the

Russian peasants consider an essential part of Orthodoxy.  After

this he always insisted on the authority of the early Ecumenical

Councils and the Fathers of the Church--an authority which his

antagonists did not recognise.  Altogether the mission was a

complete failure, and all parties regretted that it had been

undertaken.  "It was a great mistake," remarked to me

confidentially an Orthodox peasant; "a very great mistake.  The

Molokanye are a cunning people.  The monk was no match for them;

they knew the Scriptures a great deal better than he did.  The

Church should not condescend to discuss with heretics."



It is often said that these heretical sects are politically

disaffected, and the Molokanye are thought to be specially

dangerous in this respect.  Perhaps there is a certain foundation

for this opinion, for men are naturally disposed to doubt the

legitimacy of a power that systematically persecutes them.  With

regard to the Molokanye, I believe the accusation to be a

groundless calumny.  Political ideas seemed entirely foreign to

their modes of thought.  During my intercourse with them I often

heard them refer to the police as "wolves which have to be fed,"

but I never heard them speak of the Emperor otherwise than in terms

of filial affection and veneration.


