





CHAPTER III



VOLUNTARY EXILE





Ivanofka--History of the Place--The Steward of the Estate--Slav and

Teutonic Natures--A German's View of the Emancipation--Justices of

the Peace--New School of Morals--The Russian Language--Linguistic

Talent of the Russians--My Teacher--A Big Dose of Current History.





This village, Ivanofka by name, in which I proposed to spend some

months, was rather more picturesque than villages in these northern

forests commonly are.  The peasants' huts, built on both sides of a

straight road, were colourless enough, and the big church, with its

five pear-shaped cupolas rising out of the bright green roof and

its ugly belfry in the Renaissance style, was not by any means

beautiful in itself; but when seen from a little distance,

especially in the soft evening twilight, the whole might have been

made the subject of a very pleasing picture.  From the point that a

landscape-painter would naturally have chosen, the foreground was

formed by a meadow, through which flowed sluggishly a meandering

stream.  On a bit of rising ground to the right, and half concealed

by an intervening cluster of old rich-coloured pines, stood the

manor-house--a big, box-shaped, whitewashed building, with a

verandah in front, overlooking a small plot that might some day

become a flower-garden.  To the left of this stood the village, the

houses grouping prettily with the big church, and a little farther

in this direction was an avenue of graceful birches.  On the

extreme left were fields, bounded by a dark border of fir-trees.

Could the spectator have raised himself a few hundred feet from the

ground, he would have seen that there were fields beyond the

village, and that the whole of this agricultural oasis was imbedded

in a forest stretching in all directions as far as the eye could

reach.



The history of the place may be told in a few words.  In former

times the estate, including the village and all its inhabitants,

had belonged to a monastery, but when, in 1764, the Church lands

were secularised by Catherine, it became the property of the State.

Some years afterwards the Empress granted it, with the serfs and

everything else which it contained, to an old general who had

distinguished himself in the Turkish wars.  From that time it had

remained in the K---- family.  Some time between the years 1820 and

1840 the big church and the mansion-house had been built by the

actual possessor's father, who loved country life, and devoted a

large part of his time and energies to the management of his

estate.  His son, on the contrary, preferred St. Petersburg to the

country, served in one of the public offices, loved passionately

French plays and other products of urban civilisation, and left the

entire management of the property to a German steward, popularly

known as Karl Karl'itch, whom I shall introduce to the reader

presently.



The village annals contained no important events, except bad

harvests, cattle-plagues, and destructive fires, with which the

inhabitants seem to have been periodically visited from time

immemorial.  If good harvests were ever experienced, they must have

faded from the popular recollection.  Then there were certain

ancient traditions which might have been lessened in bulk and

improved in quality by being subjected to searching historical

criticism.  More than once, for instance, a leshie, or wood-sprite,

had been seen in the neighbourhood; and in several households the

domovoi, or brownie, had been known to play strange pranks until he

was properly propitiated.  And as a set-off against these

manifestations of evil powers, there were well-authenticated

stories about a miracle-working image that had mysteriously

appeared on the branch of a tree, and about numerous miraculous

cures that had been effected by means of pilgrimages to holy

shrines.



But it is time to introduce the principal personages of this little

community.  Of these, by far the most important was Karl Karl'itch,

the steward.



First of all I ought, perhaps, to explain how Karl Schmidt, the son

of a well-to-do Bauer in the Prussian village of Schonhausen,

became Karl Karl'itch, the principal personage in the Russian

village of Ivanofka.



About the time of the Crimean War many of the Russian landed

proprietors had become alive to the necessity of improving the

primitive, traditional methods of agriculture, and sought for this

purpose German stewards for their estates.  Among these proprietors

was the owner of Ivanofka.  Through the medium of a friend in

Berlin he succeeded in engaging for a moderate salary a young man

who had just finished his studies in one of the German schools of

agriculture--the institution at Hohenheim, if my memory does not

deceive me.  This young man had arrived in Russia as plain Karl

Schmidt, but his name was soon transformed into Karl Karl'itch, not

from any desire of his own, but in accordance with a curious

Russian custom.  In Russia one usually calls a man not by his

family name, but by his Christian name and patronymic--the latter

being formed from the name of his father.  Thus, if a man's name is

Nicholas, and his father's Christian name is--or was--Ivan, you

address him as Nikolai Ivanovitch (pronounced Ivan'itch); and if

this man should happen to have a sister called Mary, you will

address her--even though she should be married--as Marya Ivanovna

(pronounced Ivanna).



Immediately on his arrival young Schmidt had set himself vigorously

to reorganise the estate and improve the method of agriculture.

Some ploughs, harrows, and other implements which had been imported

at a former period were dragged out of the obscurity in which they

had lain for several years, and an attempt was made to farm on

scientific principles.  The attempt was far from being completely

successful, for the serfs--this was before the Emancipation--could

not be made to work like regularly trained German labourers.  In

spite of all admonitions, threats, and punishments, they persisted

in working slowly, listlessly, inaccurately, and occasionally they

broke the new instruments from carelessness or some more culpable

motive.  Karl Karl'itch was not naturally a hard-hearted man, but

he was very rigid in his notions of duty, and could be cruelly

severe when his orders were not executed with an accuracy and

punctuality that seemed to the Russian rustic mind mere useless

pedantry.  The serfs did not offer him any open opposition, and

were always obsequiously respectful in their demeanour towards him,

but they invariably frustrated his plans by their carelessness and

stolid, passive resistance.



Thus arose that silent conflict and that smouldering mutual enmity

which almost always result from the contact of the Teuton with the

Slav.  The serfs instinctively regretted the good old times, when

they lived under the rough-and-ready patriarchal rule of their

masters, assisted by a native "burmister," or overseer, who was one

of themselves.  The burmister had not always been honest in his

dealings with them, and the master had often, when in anger,

ordered severe punishments to be inflicted; but the burmister had

not attempted to make them change their old habits, and had shut

his eves to many little sins of emission and commission, whilst the

master was always ready to assist them in difficulties, and

commonly treated them in a kindly, familiar way.  As the old

Russian proverb has it, "Where danger is, there too is kindly

forgiveness."  Karl Karl'itch, on the contrary, was the

personification of uncompassionate, inflexible law.  Blind rage and

compassionate kindliness were alike foreign to his system of

government.  If he had any feeling towards the serfs, it was one of

chronic contempt.  The word durak (blockhead) was constantly on his

lips, and when any bit of work was well done, he took it as a

matter of course, and never thought of giving a word of approval or

encouragement.



When it became evident, in 1859, that the emancipation of the serfs

was at hand, Karl Karl'itch confidently predicted that the country

would inevitably go to ruin.  He knew by experience that the

peasants were lazy and improvident, even when they lived under the

tutelage of a master, and with the fear of the rod before their

eyes.  What would they become when this guidance and salutary

restraint should be removed?  The prospect raised terrible

forebodings in the mind of the worthy steward, who had his

employer's interests really at heart; and these forebodings were

considerably increased and intensified when he learned that the

peasants were to receive by law the land which they occupied on

sufferance, and which comprised about a half of the whole arable

land of the estate.  This arrangement he declared to be a dangerous

and unjustifiable infraction of the sacred rights of property,

which savoured strongly of communism, and could have but one

practical result: the emancipated peasants would live by the

cultivation of their own land, and would not consent on any terms

to work for their former master.



In the few months which immediately followed the publication of the

Emancipation Edict in 1861, Karl Karl'itch found much to confirm

his most gloomy apprehensions.  The peasants showed themselves

dissatisfied with the privileges conferred upon them, and sought to

evade the corresponding duties imposed on them by the new law.  In

vain he endeavoured, by exhortations, promises, and threats, to get

the most necessary part of the field-work done, and showed the

peasants the provision of the law enjoining them to obey and work

as of old until some new arrangement should be made.  To all his

appeals they replied that, having been freed by the Tsar, they were

no longer obliged to work for their former master; and he was at

last forced to appeal to the authorities.  This step had a certain

effect, but the field-work was executed that year even worse than

usual, and the harvest suffered in consequence.



Since that time things had gradually improved.  The peasants had

discovered that they could not support themselves and pay their

taxes from the land ceded to them, and had accordingly consented to

till the proprietor's fields for a moderate recompense.  "These

last two years," said Karl Karl'itch to me, with an air of honest

self-satisfaction, "I have been able, after paying all expenses, to

transmit little sums to the young master in St. Petersburg.  It was

certainly not much, but it shows that things are better than they

were.  Still, it is hard, uphill work.  The peasants have not been

improved by liberty.  They now work less and drink more than they

did in the times of serfage, and if you say a word to them they'll

go away, and not work for you at all."  Here Karl Karl'itch

indemnified himself for his recent self-control in the presence of

his workers by using a series of the strongest epithets which the

combined languages of his native and of his adopted country could

supply.  "But laziness and drunkenness are not their only faults.

They let their cattle wander into our fields, and never lose an

opportunity of stealing firewood from the forest."



"But you have now for such matters the rural justices of the

peace," I ventured to suggest.



"The justices of the peace!" . . .  Here Karl Karl'itch used an

inelegant expression, which showed plainly that he was no

unqualified admirer of the new judicial institutions.  "What is the

use of applying to the justices?  The nearest one lives six miles

off, and when I go to him he evidently tries to make me lose as

much time as possible.  I am sure to lose nearly a whole day, and

at the end of it I may find that I have got nothing for my pains.

These justices always try to find some excuse for the peasant, and

when they do condemn, by way of exception, the affair does not end

there.  There is pretty sure to be a pettifogging practitioner

prowling about--some rascally scribe who has been dismissed from

the public offices for pilfering and extorting too openly--and he

is always ready to whisper to the peasant that he should appeal.

The peasant knows that the decision is just, but he is easily

persuaded that by appealing to the Monthly Sessions he gets another

chance in the lottery, and may perhaps draw a prize.  He lets the

rascally scribe, therefore, prepare an appeal for him, and I

receive an invitation to attend the Session of Justices in the

district town on a certain day.



"It is a good five-and-thirty miles to the district town, as you

know, but I get up early, and arrive at eleven o'clock, the hour

stated in the official notice.  A crowd of peasants are hanging

about the door of the court, but the only official present is the

porter.  I enquire of him when my case is likely to come on, and

receive the laconic answer, 'How should I know?'  After half an

hour the secretary arrives.  I repeat my question, and receive the

same answer.  Another half hour passes, and one of the justices

drives up in his tarantass.  Perhaps he is a glib-tongued

gentleman, and assures me that the proceedings will commence at

once: 'Sei tchas! sei tchas!'  Don't believe what the priest or the

dictionary tells you about the meaning of that expression.  The

dictionary will tell you that it means 'immediately,' but that's

all nonsense.  In the mouth of a Russian it means 'in an hour,'

'next week,' 'in a year or two,' 'never'--most commonly 'never.'

Like many other words in Russian, 'sei tchas' can be understood

only after long experience.  A second justice drives up, and then a

third.  No more are required by law, but these gentlemen must first

smoke several cigarettes and discuss all the local news before they

begin work.



"At last they take their seats on the bench--a slightly elevated

platform at one end of the room, behind a table covered with green

baize--and the proceedings commence.  My case is sure to be pretty

far down on the list--the secretary takes, I believe, a malicious

pleasure in watching my impatience--and before it is called the

justices have to retire at least once for refreshments and

cigarettes.  I have to amuse myself by listening to the other

cases, and some of them, I can assure you, are amusing enough.  The

walls of that room must be by this time pretty well saturated with

perjury, and many of the witnesses catch at once the infection.

Perhaps I may tell you some other time a few of the amusing

incidents that I have seen there.  At last my case is called.  It

is as clear as daylight, but the rascally pettifogger is there with

a long-prepared speech, he holds in his hand a small volume of the

codified law, and quotes paragraphs which no amount of human

ingenuity can make to bear upon the subject.  Perhaps the previous

decision is confirmed; perhaps it is reversed; in either case, I

have lost a second day and exhausted more patience than I can

conveniently spare.  And something even worse may happen, as I know

by experience.  Once during a case of mine there was some little

informality--someone inadvertently opened the door of the

consulting-room when the decision was being written, or some other

little incident of the sort occurred, and the rascally pettifogger

complained to the Supreme Court of Revision, which is a part of the

Senate.  The case was all about a few roubles, but it was discussed

in St. Petersburg, and afterwards tried over again by another court

of justices.  Now I have paid my Lehrgeld, and go no more to law."



"Then you must expose yourself to all kinds of extortion?"



"Not so much as you might imagine.  I have my own way of dispensing

justice.  When I catch a peasant's horse or cow in our fields, I

lock it up and make the owner pay a ransom."



"Is it not rather dangerous," I inquired, "to take the law thus

into your own hands?  I have heard that the Russian justices are

extremely severe against any one who has recourse to what our

German jurists call Selbsthulfe."



"That they are!  So long as you are in Russia, you had much better

let yourself be quietly robbed than use any violence against the

robber.  It is less trouble, and it is cheaper in the long run.  If

you do not, you may unexpectedly find yourself some fine morning in

prison!  You must know that many of the young justices belong to

the new school of morals."



"What is that?  I have not heard of any new discoveries lately in

the sphere of speculative ethics."



"Well, to tell you the truth, I am not one of the initiated, and I

can only tell you what I hear.  So far as I have noticed, the

representatives of the new doctrine talk chiefly about Gumannost'

and Tchelovetcheskoe dostoinstvo.  You know what these words mean?"



"Humanity, or rather humanitarianism and human dignity," I replied,

not sorry to give a proof that I was advancing in my studies.



"There, again, you allow your dictionary and your priest to mislead

you.  These terms, when used by a Russian, cover much more than we

understand by them, and those who use them most frequently have

generally a special tenderness for all kinds of malefactors.  In

the old times, malefactors were popularly believed to be bad,

dangerous people; but it has been lately discovered that this is a

delusion.  A young proprietor who lives not far off assures me that

they are the true Protestants, and the most powerful social

reformers!  They protest practically against those imperfections of

social organisation of which they are the involuntary victims.  The

feeble, characterless man quietly submits to his chains; the bold,

generous, strong man breaks his fetters, and helps others to do the

same.  A very ingenious defence of all kinds of rascality, isn't

it?"



"Well, it is a theory that might certainly be carried too far, and

might easily lead to very inconvenient conclusions; but I am not

sure that, theoretically speaking, it does not contain a certain

element of truth.  It ought at least to foster that charity which

we are enjoined to practise towards all men.  But perhaps 'all men'

does not include publicans and sinners?"



On hearing these words Karl Karl'itch turned to me, and every

feature of his honest German face expressed the most undisguised

astonishment.  "Are you, too, a Nihilist?" he inquired, as soon as

he had partially recovered his breath.



"I really don't know what a Nihilist is, but I may assure you that

I am not an 'ist' of any kind.  What is a Nihilist?"



"If you live long in Russia you'll learn that without my telling

you.  As I was saying, I am not at all afraid of the peasants

citing me before the justice.  They know better now.  If they gave

me too much trouble I could starve their cattle."



"Yes, when you catch them in your fields," I remarked, taking no

notice of the abrupt turn which he had given to the conversation.



"I can do it without that.  You must know that, by the Emancipation

Law, the peasants received arable land, but they received little or

no pasturage.  I have the whip hand of them there!"



The remarks of Karl Karl'itch on men and things were to me always

interesting, for he was a shrewd observer, and displayed

occasionally a pleasant, dry humour.  But I very soon discovered

that his opinions were not to be accepted without reserve.  His

strong, inflexible Teutonic nature often prevented him from judging

impartially.  He had no sympathy with the men and the institutions

around him, and consequently he was unable to see things from the

inside.  The specks and blemishes on the surface he perceived

clearly enough, but he had no knowledge of the secret, deep-rooted

causes by which these specks and blemishes were produced.  The

simple fact that a man was a Russian satisfactorily accounted, in

his opinion, for any kind of moral deformity; and his knowledge

turned out to be by no means so extensive as I had at first

supposed.  Though he had been many years in the country, he knew

very little about the life of the peasants beyond that small part

of it which concerned directly his own interests and those of his

employer.  Of the communal organisation, domestic life, religious

beliefs, ceremonial practices, and nomadic habits of his humble

neighbours, he knew little, and the little he happened to know was

far from accurate.  In order to gain a knowledge of these matters

it would be better, I perceived, to consult the priest, or, better

still, the peasants themselves.  But to do this it would be

necessary to understand easily and speak fluently the colloquial

language, and I was still very far from having, acquired the

requisite proficiency.



Even for one who possesses a natural facility for acquiring foreign

tongues, the learning of Russian is by no means an easy task.

Though it is essentially an Aryan language like our own, and

contains only a slight intermixture of Tartar words,--such as

bashlyk (a hood), kalpak (a night-cap), arbuz (a water-melon),

etc.--it has certain sounds unknown to West-European ears, and

difficult for West-European tongues, and its roots, though in great

part derived from the same original stock as those of the Graeco-

Latin and Teutonic languages, are generally not at all easily

recognised.  As an illustration of this, take the Russian word

otets.  Strange as it may at first sight appear, this word is

merely another form of our word father, of the German vater, and of

the French pere.  The syllable ets is the ordinary Russian

termination denoting the agent, corresponding to the English and

German ending er, as we see in such words as--kup-ets (a buyer),

plov-ets (a swimmer), and many others.  The root ot is a mutilated

form of vot, as we see in the word otchina (a paternal

inheritance), which is frequently written votchina.  Now vot is

evidently the same root as the German vat in Vater, and the English

fath in father.  Quod erat demonstrandum.



All this is simple enough, and goes to prove the fundamental

identity, or rather the community of origin, of the Slav and

Teutonic languages; but it will be readily understood that

etymological analogies so carefully disguised are of little

practical use in helping us to acquire a foreign tongue.  Besides

this, the grammatical forms and constructions in Russian are very

peculiar, and present a great many strange irregularities.  As an

illustration of this we may take the future tense.  The Russian

verb has commonly a simple and a frequentative future.  The latter

is always regularly formed by means of an auxiliary with the

infinitive, as in English, but the former is constructed in a

variety of ways, for which no rule can be given, so that the simple

future of each individual verb must be learned by a pure effort of

memory.  In many verbs it is formed by prefixing a preposition, but

it is impossible to determine by rule which preposition should be

used.  Thus idu (I go) becomes poidu; pishu (I write) becomes

napishu; pyu (I drink) becomes vuipyu, and so on.



Closely akin to the difficulties of pronunciation is the difficulty

of accentuating the proper syllable.  In this respect Russian is

like Greek; you can rarely tell a priori on what syllable the

accent falls.  But it is more puzzling than Greek, for two reasons:

firstly, it is not customary to print Russian with accents; and

secondly, no one has yet been able to lay down precise rules for

the transposition of the accent in the various inflections of the

same word, Of this latter peculiarity, let one illustration

suffice.  The word ruka (hand) has the accent on the last syllable,

but in the accusative (ruku) the accent goes back to the first

syllable.  It must not, however, be assumed that in all words of

this type a similar transposition takes place.  The word beda

(misfortune), for instance, as well as very many others, always

retains the accent on the last syllable.



These and many similar difficulties, which need not be here

enumerated, can be mastered only by long practice.  Serious as they

are, they need not frighten any one who is in the habit of learning

foreign tongues.  The ear and the tongue gradually become familiar

with the peculiarities of inflection and accentuation, and practice

fulfils the same function as abstract rules.



It is commonly supposed that Russians have been endowed by Nature

with a peculiar linguistic talent.  Their own language, it is said,

is so difficult that they have no difficulty in acquiring others.

This common belief requires, as it seems to me, some explanation.

That highly educated Russians are better linguists than the

educated classes of Western Europe there can be no possible doubt,

for they almost always speak French, and often English and German

also.  The question, however, is whether this is the result of a

psychological peculiarity, or of other causes.  Now, without

venturing to deny the existence of a natural faculty, I should say

that the other causes have at least exercised a powerful influence.

Any Russian who wishes to be regarded as civilise must possess at

least one foreign language; and, as a consequence of this, the

children of the upper classes are always taught at least French in

their infancy.  Many households comprise a German nurse, a French

tutor, and an English governess; and the children thus become

accustomed from their earliest years to the use of these three

languages.  Besides this, Russian is phonetically very rich and

contains nearly all the sounds which are to be found in West-

European tongues.  Perhaps on the whole it would be well to apply

here the Darwinian theory, and suppose that the Russian Noblesse,

having been obliged for several generations to acquire foreign

languages, have gradually developed a hereditary polyglot talent.



Several circumstances concurred to assist me in my efforts, during

my voluntary exile, to acquire at least such a knowledge of the

language as would enable me to converse freely with the peasantry.

In the first place, my reverend teacher was an agreeable, kindly,

talkative man, who took a great delight in telling interminable

stories, quite independently of any satisfaction which he might

derive from the consciousness of their being understood and

appreciated.  Even when walking alone he was always muttering

something to an imaginary listener.  A stranger meeting him on such

occasions might have supposed that he was holding converse with

unseen spirits, though his broad muscular form and rubicund face

militated strongly against such a supposition; but no man, woman,

or child living within a radius of ten miles would ever have fallen

into this mistake.  Every one in the neighbourhood knew that

"Batushka" (papa), as he was familiarly called, was too prosaical,

practical a man to see things ethereal, that he was an

irrepressible talker, and that when he could not conveniently find

an audience he created one by his own imagination.  This

peculiarity of his rendered me good service.  Though for some time

I understood very little of what he said, and very often misplaced

the positive and negative monosyllables which I hazarded

occasionally by way of encouragement, he talked vigorously all the

same.  Like all garrulous people, he was constantly repeating

himself; but to this I did not object, for the custom--however

disagreeable in ordinary society--was for me highly beneficial, and

when I had already heard a story once or twice before, it was much

easier for me to assume at the proper moment the requisite

expression of countenance.



Another fortunate circumstance was that at Ivanofka there were no

distractions, so that the whole of the day and a great part of the

night could be devoted to study.  My chief amusement was an

occasional walk in the fields with Karl Karl'itch; and even this

mild form of dissipation could not always be obtained, for as soon

as rain had fallen it was difficult to go beyond the verandah--the

mud precluding the possibility of a constitutional.  The nearest

approach to excitement was mushroom-gathering; and in this

occupation my inability to distinguish the edible from the

poisonous species made my efforts unacceptable.  We lived so "far

from the madding crowd" that its din scarcely reached our ears.  A

week or ten days might pass without our receiving any intelligence

from the outer world.  The nearest post-office was in the district

town, and with that distant point we had no regular system of

communication.  Letters and newspapers remained there till called

for, and were brought to us intermittently when some one of our

neighbours happened to pass that way.  Current history was thus

administered to us in big doses.



One very big dose I remember well.  For a much longer time than

usual no volunteer letter-carrier had appeared, and the delay was

more than usually tantalising, because it was known that war had

broken out between France and Germany.  At last a big bundle of a

daily paper called the Golos was brought to me.  Impatient to learn

whether any great battle had been fought, I began by examining the

latest number, and stumbled at once on an article headed, "Latest

Intelligence: the Emperor at Wilhelmshohe!!!"  The large type in

which the heading was printed and the three marks of exclamation

showed plainly that the article was very important.  I began to

read with avidity, but was utterly mystified.  What emperor was

this?  Probably the Tsar or the Emperor of Austria, for there was

no German Emperor in those days.  But no! It was evidently the

Emperor of the French.  And how did Napoleon get to Wilhelmshohe?

The French must have broken through the Rhine defences, and pushed

far into Germany.  But no!  As I read further, I found this theory

equally untenable.  It turned out that the Emperor was surrounded

by Germans, and--a prisoner!  In order to solve the mystery, I had

to go back to the preceding numbers of the paper, and learned, at a

sitting, all about the successive German victories, the defeat and

capitulation of Macmahon's army at Sedan, and the other great

events of that momentous time.  The impression produced can

scarcely be realised by those who have always imbibed current

history in the homeopathic doses administered by the morning and

evening daily papers.



By the useful loquacity of my teacher and the possibility of

devoting all my time to my linguistic studies, I made such rapid

progress in the acquisition of the language that I was able after a

few weeks to understand much of what was said to me, and to express

myself in a vague, roundabout way.  In the latter operation I was

much assisted by a peculiar faculty of divination which the

Russians possess in a high degree.  If a foreigner succeeds in

expressing about one-fourth of an idea, the Russian peasant can

generally fill up the remaining three-fourths from his own

intuition.



As my powers of comprehension increased, my long conversations with

the priest became more and more instructive.  At first his remarks

and stories had for me simply a philological interest, but

gradually I perceived that his talk contained a great deal of

solid, curious information regarding himself and the class to which

he belonged--information of a kind not commonly found in

grammatical exercises.  Some of this I now propose to communicate

to the reader.

