





CHAPTER XXXV



SOCIALIST PROPAGANDA, REVOLUTIONARY AGITATION, AND TERRORISM





Closer Relations with Western Socialism--Attempts to Influence the

Masses--Bakunin and Lavroff--"Going in among the People"--The

Missionaries of Revolutionary Socialism--Distinction between

Propaganda and Agitation--Revolutionary Pamphlets for the Common

People--Aims and Motives of the Propagandists--Failure of

Propaganda--Energetic Repression--Fruitless Attempts at Agitation--

Proposal to Combine with Liberals--Genesis of Terrorism--My

Personal Relations with the Revolutionists--Shadowers and Shadowed--

A Series of Terrorist Crimes--A Revolutionist Congress--

Unsuccessful Attempts to Assassinate the Tsar--Ineffectual Attempt

at Conciliation by Loris Melikof--Assassination of Alexander II.--

The Executive Committee Shows Itself Unpractical--Widespread

Indignation and Severe Repression--Temporary Collapse of the

Revolutionary Movement--A New Revolutionary Movement in Sight.





Count Tolstoy's educational reform had one effect which was not

anticipated: it brought the revolutionists into closer contact with

Western Socialism.  Many students, finding their position in Russia

uncomfortable, determined to go abroad and continue their studies

in foreign universities, where they would be free from the

inconveniences of police supervision and Press-censure.  Those of

the female sex had an additional motive to emigrate, because they

could not complete their studies in Russia, but they had more

difficulty in carrying out their intention, because parents

naturally disliked the idea of their daughters going abroad to lead

a Bohemian life, and they very often obstinately refused to give

their consent.  In such cases the persistent daughter found herself

in a dilemma.  Though she might run away from her family and

possibly earn her own living, she could not cross the frontier

without a passport, and without the parental sanction a passport

could not be obtained.  Of course she might marry and get the

consent of her husband, but most of the young ladies objected to

the trammels of matrimony.  Occasionally the problem was solved by

means of a fictitious marriage, and when a young man could not be

found to co-operate voluntarily in the arrangement, the Terrorist

methods, which the revolutionists adopted a few years later for

other purposes, might be employed.  I have heard of at least one

case in which an ardent female devotee of medical science

threatened to shoot a student who was going abroad if he did not

submit to the matrimonial ceremony and allow her to accompany him

to the frontier as his official wife!



Strange as this story may seem, it contains nothing inherently

improbable.  At that time the energetic young ladies of the

Nihilist school were not to be diverted from their purpose by

trifling obstacles.  We shall meet some of them hereafter,

displaying great courage and tenacity in revolutionary activity.

One of them, for example, attempted to murder the Prefect of St.

Petersburg; and another, a young person of considerable refinement


and great personal charm, gave the signal for the assassination of

Alexander II. and expiated her crime on the scaffold without the

least sign of repentance.



Most of the studious emigres of both sexes went to Zurich, where

female students were admitted to the medical classes.  Here they

made the acquaintance of noted Socialists from various countries

who had settled in Switzerland, and being in search of panaceas for

social regeneration, they naturally fell under their influence, at

the same time they read with avidity the works of Proudhon,

Lassalle, Buchner, Marx, Flerovski, Pfeiffer, and other writers of

"advanced opinions."



Among the apostles of socialism living at that time in Switzerland

they found a sympathetic fellow-countryman in the famous Anarchist,

Bakunin, who had succeeded in escaping from Siberia.  His ideal was

the immediate overthrow of all existing Governments, the

destruction of all administrative organisation, the abolition of

all bourgeois institutions, and the establishment of an entirely

new order of things on the basis of a free federation of productive

Communes, in which all the land should be distributed among those

capable of tilling it and the instruments of production confided to

co-operative associations.  Efforts to obtain mere political

reforms, even of the most radical type, were regarded by him with

contempt as miserable palliatives, which could be of no real,

permanent benefit to the masses, and might be positively injurious

by prolonging the present era of bourgeois domination.



For the dissemination of these principles a special organ called

The Cause of the People (Narodnoye Dyelo) was founded in Geneva in

1868 and was smuggled across the Russian frontier in considerable

quantities.  It aimed at drawing away the young generation from

Academic Nihilism to more practical revolutionary activity, but it

evidently remained to some extent under the old influences, for it

indulged occasionally in very abstract philosophical disquisitions.

In its first number, for example, it published a programme in which

the editors thought it necessary to declare that they were

materialists and atheists, because the belief in God and a future

life, as well as every other kind of idealism, demoralises the

people, inspiring it with mutually contradictory aspirations, and

thereby depriving it of the energy necessary for the conquest of

its natural rights in this world, and the complete organisation of

a free and happy life.  At the end of two years this organ for

moralising the people collapsed from want of funds, but other

periodicals and pamphlets were printed, and the clandestine

relations between the exiles in Switzerland and their friends in

St. Petersburg were maintained without difficulty, notwithstanding

the efforts of the police to cut the connection.  In this way Young

Russia became more and more saturated with the extreme Socialist

theories current in Western Europe.



Thanks partly to this foreign influence and partly to their own

practical experience, the would-be reformers who remained at home

came to understand that academic talking and discussing could bring

about no serious results.  Students alone, however numerous and

however devoted to the cause, could not hope to overthrow or coerce

the Government.  It was childish to suppose that the walls of the

autocratic Jericho would fall by the blasts of academic trumpets.

Attempts at revolution could not be successful without the active

support of the people, and consequently the revolutionary agitation

must be extended to the masses.  So far there was complete

agreement among the revolutionists, but with regard to the modus

operandi emphatic differences of opinion appeared.  Those who were

carried away by the stirring accents of Bakunin imagined that if

the masses could only be made to feel themselves the victims of

administrative and economic oppression, they would rise and free

themselves by a united effort.  According to this view all that was

required was that popular discontent should be excited and that

precautions should be taken to ensure that the explosions of

discontent should take place simultaneously all over the country.

The rest might safely be left, it was thought, to the operation of

natural forces and the inspiration of the moment.  Against this

dangerous illusion warning voices were raised.  Lavroff, for

example, while agreeing with Bakunin that mere political reforms

were of little or no value, and that any genuine improvement in the

condition of the working classes could proceed only from economic

and social reorganisation, maintained stoutly that the revolution,

to be permanent and beneficial, must be accomplished, not by

demagogues directing the ignorant masses, but by the people as a

whole, after it had been enlightened and instructed as to its true

interests.  The preparatory work would necessarily require a whole

generation of educated propagandists, living among the labouring

population rural and urban.



For some time there was a conflict between these two currents of

opinion, but the views of Lavroff, which were simply a practical

development of academic Nihilism, gained far more adherents than

the violent anarchical proposals of Bakunin, and finally the

grandiose scheme of realising gradually the Socialist ideal by

indoctrinating the masses was adopted with enthusiasm.  In St.

Petersburg, Moscow and other large towns the student association

for mutual instruction, to which I have referred in the foregoing

chapter, became centres of popular propaganda, and the academic

Nihilists were transformed into active missionaries.  Scores of

male and female students, impatient to convert the masses to the

gospel of freedom and terrestrial felicity, sought to get into

touch with the common people by settling in the villages as school-

teachers, medical practitioners, midwives, etc., or by working as

common factory hands in the industrial centres.  In order to obtain

employment in the factories and conceal their real purpose, they

procured false passports, in which they were described as belonging

to the lower classes; and even those who settled in the villages

lived generally under assumed names.  Thus was formed a class of

professional revolutionists, sometimes called the Illegals, who

were liable to be arrested at any moment by the police.  As

compensation for the privations and hardships which they had to

endure, they had the consolation of believing that they were

advancing the good cause.  The means they usually employed were

formal conversations and pamphlets expressly written for the

purpose.  The more enthusiastic and persevering of these

missionaries would continue their efforts for months and years,

remaining in communication with the headquarters in the capital or

some provincial town in order to report progress, obtain a fresh

supply of pamphlets, and get their forged passports renewed.  This

extraordinary movement was called "going in among the people," and

it spread among the young generation like an epidemic.  In 1873 it

was suddenly reinforced by a detachment of fresh recruits.  Over a

hundred Russian students were recalled by the Government from

Switzerland, in order to save them from the baneful influence of

Bakunin, Lavroff, and other noted Socialists, and a large

proportion of them joined the ranks of the propagandists.*





* Instances of going in among the people had happened as early as

1864, but they did not become frequent till after 1870.





With regard to the aims and methods of the propagandists, a good

deal of information was obtained in the course of a judicial

inquiry instituted in 1875.  A peasant, who was at the same time a

factory worker, informed the police that certain persons were

distributing revolutionary pamphlets among the factory-hands, and

as a proof of what he said he produced some pamphlets which he had

himself received.  This led to an investigation, which showed that

a number of young men and women, evidently belonging to the

educated classes, were disseminating revolutionary ideas by means

of pamphlets and conversation.  Arrests followed, and it was soon

discovered that these agitators belonged to a large secret

association, which had its centre in Moscow and local branches in

Ivanovo, Tula, and Kief.  In Ivanovo, for instance--a manufacturing

town about a hundred miles to the northeast of Moscow--the police

found a small apartment inhabited by three young men and four young

women, all of whom, though belonging by birth to the educated

classes, had the appearance of ordinary factory workers, prepared

their own food, did with their own hands all the domestic work, and

sought to avoid everything which could distinguish them from the

labouring population.  In the apartment were found 240 copies of

revolutionary pamphlets, a considerable sum of money, a large

amount of correspondence in cypher, and several forged passports.



How many persons the society contained, it is impossible to say,

because a large portion of them eluded the vigilance of the police;

but many were arrested, and ultimately forty-seven were condemned.

Of these, eleven were noble, seven were sons of parish priests, and

the remainder belong to the lower classes--that is to say, the

small officials, burghers, and peasants.  The average age of the

prisoners was twenty-four, the oldest being thirty-six and the

youngest under seventeen!  Only five or six were over twenty-five,

and none of these were ringleaders.  The female element was

represented by no less than fifteen young persons, whose ages were

on an average under twenty-two.  Two of these, to judge by their

photographs, were of refined, prepossessing appearance, and

seemingly little fitted for taking part in wholesale massacres such

as the society talked of organising.



The character and aims of the society were clearly depicted in the

documentary and oral evidence produced at the trial.  According to

the fundamental principles, there should exist among the members

absolute equality, complete mutual responsibility and full

frankness and confidence with regard to the affairs of the

association.  Among the conditions of admission we find that the

candidate should devote himself entirely to revolutionary activity;

that he should be ready to sever all ties, whether of friendship or

of love, for the good cause; that he should possess great powers of

self-sacrifice and the capacity for keeping secrets; and that he

should consent to become, when necessary, a common labourer in a

factory.  The desire to maintain absolute equality is well

illustrated by the article of the statutes regarding the

administration: the office-bearers are not to be chosen by

election, but all members are to be office-bearers in turn, and the

term of office must not exceed one month!



The avowed aim of the society was to destroy the existing social

order, and to replace it by one in which there should be no private

property and no distinctions of class or wealth; or, as it is

expressed in one document, "to found on the ruins of the present

social organisation the Empire of the working classes."  The means

to be employed were indicated in a general way, but each member was

to adapt himself to circumstances and was to devote all his energy

to forwarding the cause of the revolution.  For the guidance of the

inexperienced, the following means were recommended: simple

conversations, dissemination of pamphlets, the exciting of

discontent, the formation of organised groups, the creation of

funds and libraries.  These, taken together, constitute, in the

terminology of revolutionary science, "propaganda," and in addition

to it there should be "agitation."  The technical distinction

between these two processes is that propaganda has a purely

preparatory character, and aims merely at enlightening the masses

regarding the true nature of the revolutionary cause, whereas

agitation aims at exciting an individual or a group to acts which

are considered, in the existing regime, as illegal.  In time of

peace "pure agitation" was to be carried on by means of organised

bands which should frighten the Government and the privileged

classes, draw away the attention of the authorities from less overt

kinds of revolutionary action, raise the spirit of the people and

thereby render it more accessible to revolutionary ideas, obtain

pecuniary means for further activity, and liberate political

prisoners.  In time of insurrection the members should give to all

movements every assistance in their power, and impress on them a

Socialistic character.  The central administration and the local

branches should establish relations with publishers, and take steps

to secure a regular supply of prohibited books from abroad.  Such

are a few characteristic extracts from a document which might

fairly be called a treatise on revolutionology.



As a specimen of the revolutionary pamphlets circulated by the

propagandists and agitators I may give here a brief account of one

which is well known to the political police.  It is entitled

Khitraya Mekhanika (Cunning Machinery), and gives a graphic picture

of the ideas and methods employed.  The mise en scene is extremely

simple.  Two peasants, Stepan and Andrei, are represented as

meeting in a gin-shop and drinking together.  Stepan is described

as good and kindly when he has to do with men of his own class, but

very sharp-tongued when speaking with a foreman or manager.  Always

ready with an answer, he can on occasions silence even an official!

He has travelled all over the Empire, has associated with all sorts

and conditions of men, sees everything most clearly, and is, in

short, a very remarkable man.  One of his excellent qualities is

that, being "enlightened" himself, he is always ready to enlighten

others, and he now finds an opportunity of displaying his powers.

When Andrei, who is still unenlightened, proposes that they should

drink another glass of vodka, he replies that the Tsar, together

with the nobles and traders, bars the way to the throat.  As his

companion does not understand this metaphorical language, he

explains that if there were no Tsars, nobles, or traders, he could

get five glasses of vodka for the sum that he now pays for one

glass.  This naturally suggests wider topics, and Stepan gives

something like a lecture.  The common people, he explains, pay by

far the greater part of the taxation, and at the same time do all

the work; they plough the fields, build the houses and churches,

work in the mills and factories, and in return they are

systematically robbed and beaten.  And what is done with all the

money that is taken from them?  First of all, the Tsar gets nine

millions of roubles--enough to feed half a province--and with that

sum he amuses himself, has hunting-parties, and feasts, eats,

drinks, makes merry, and lives in stone houses.  He gave liberty,

it is true, to the peasants; but we know what the Emancipation

really was.  The best land was taken away and the taxes were

increased, lest the muzhik should get fat and lazy.  The Tsar is

himself the richest landed proprietor and manufacturer in the

country.  He not only robs us as much as he pleases, but he has

sold into slavery (by forming a national debt) our children and

grandchildren.  He takes our sons as soldiers, shuts them up in

barracks so that they should not see their brother-peasants, and

hardens their hearts so that they become wild beasts, ready to rend

their parents.  The nobles and traders likewise rob the poor

peasants.  In short, all the upper classes have invented a bit of

cunning machinery by which the muzhik is made to pay for their

pleasures and luxuries.  The people will one day rise and break

this machinery to pieces.  When that day comes they must break

every part of it, for if one bit escapes destruction all the other

parts of it will immediately grow up again.  All the force is on

the side of the peasants, if they only knew how to use it.

Knowledge will come in time.  They will then destroy this machine,

and perceive that the only real remedy for all social evils is

brotherhood.  People should live like brothers, having no mine and

thine, but all things in common.  When we have created brotherhood,

there will be no riches and no thieves, but right and righteousness

without end.  In conclusion, Stepan addresses a word to "the

torturers": "When the people rise, the Tsar will send troops

against us, and the nobles and capitalists will stake their last

rouble on the result.  If they do not succeed, they must not expect

any quarter from us.  They may conquer us once or twice, but we

shall at last get our own, for there is no power that can withstand

the whole people.  Then we shall cleanse the country of our

persecutors, and establish a brotherhood in which there will be no

mine and thine, but all will work for the common weal.  We shall

construct no cunning machinery, but shall pluck up evil by the

roots, and establish eternal justice!"



The above-mentioned distinction between Propaganda and Agitation,

which plays a considerable part in revolutionary literature, had at

that time more theoretical than practical importance.  The great

majority of those who took an active part in the movement confined

their efforts to indoctrinating the masses with Socialistic and

subversive ideas, and sometimes their methods were rather childish.

As an illustration I may cite an amusing incident related by one of

the boldest and most tenacious of the revolutionists, who

subsequently acquired a certain sense of humour.  He and a friend

were walking one day on a country road, when they were overtaken by

a peasant in his cart.  Ever anxious to sow the good seed, they at

once entered into conversation with the rustic, telling him that he

ought not to pay his taxes, because the tchinovniks robbed the

people, and trying to convince him by quotations from Scripture

that he ought to resist the authorities.  The prudent muzhik

whipped up his horse and tried to get out of hearing, but the two

zealots ran after him and continued the sermon till they were

completely out of breath.  Other propagandists were more practical,

and preached a species of agrarian socialism which the rural

population could understand.  At the time of the Emancipation the

peasants were convinced as I have mentioned in a previous chapter,

that the Tsar meant to give them all the land, and to compensate

the landed proprietors by salaries.  Even when the law was read and

explained to them, they clung obstinately to their old convictions,

and confidently expected that the REAL Emancipation would be

proclaimed shortly.  Taking advantage of this state of things, the

propagandists to whom I refer confirmed the peasants in their

error, and sought in this way to sow discontent against the

proprietors and the Government.  Their watchword was "Land and

Liberty," and they formed for a good many years a distinct group,

under that title (Zemlya i Volya, or more briefly Zemlevoltsi).



In the St. Petersburg group, which aspired to direct and control

this movement, there were one or two men who held different views

as to the real object of propaganda and agitation.  One of these,

Prince Krapotkin, has told the world what his object was at that

time.  He hoped that the Government would be frightened and that

the Autocratic Power, as in France on the eve of the Revolution,

would seek support in the landed proprietors, and call together a

National Assembly.  Thus a constitution would be granted, and

though the first Assembly might be conservative in spirit,

autocracy would be compelled in the long run to yield to

parliamentary pressure.



No such elaborate projects were entertained, I believe, by the

majority of the propagandists.  Their reasoning was much simpler:

"The Government, having become reactionary, tries to prevent us

from enlightening the people; we will do it in spite of the

Government!"  The dangers to which they exposed themselves only

confirmed them in their resolution.  Though they honestly believed

themselves to be Realists and Materialists, they were at heart

romantic Idealists, panting to do something heroic.  They had been

taught by the apostles whom they venerated, from Belinski

downwards, that the man who simply talks about the good of the

people, and does nothing to promote it, is among the most

contemptible of human beings.  No such reproach must be addressed

to them.  If the Government opposed and threatened, that was no

excuse for inactivity.  They must be up and doing.  "Forward!

forward! Let us plunge into the people, identify ourselves with

them, and work for their benefit!  Suffering is in store for us,

but we must endure it with fortitude!"  The type which

Tchernishevski had depicted in his famous novel, under the name of

Rakhmetof--the youth who led an ascetic life and subjected himself

to privation and suffering as a preparation for future

revolutionary activity--now appeared in the flesh.  If we may

credit Bakunin, these Rakhmetofs had not even the consolation of

believing in the possibility of a revolution, but as they could not

and would not remain passive spectators of the misfortunes of the

people, they resolved to go in among the masses in order to share

with them fraternally their sufferings, and at the same time to

teach and prepare, not theoretically, but practically by their

living example.*  This is, I believe, an exaggeration.  The

propagandists were, for the most part of incredibly sanguine

temperament.





* Bakunin: "Gosudarstvennost' i Anarkhiya" ("State Organisation and

Anarchy"), Zurich, 1873.





The success of the propaganda and agitation was not at all in

proportion to the numbers and enthusiasm of those who took part in

it.  Most of these displayed more zeal than mother-wit and

discretion.  Their Socialism was too abstract and scientific to be

understood by rustics, and when they succeeded in making themselves

intelligible they awakened in their hearers more suspicion than

sympathy.  The muzhik is a very matter-of-fact practical person,

totally incapable of understanding what Americans call "hifalutin"

tendencies in speech and conduct, and as he listened to the

preaching of the new Gospel doubts and questionings spontaneously

rose in his mind: "What do those young people, who betray their

gentlefolk origin by their delicate white hands, their foreign

phrases, their ignorance of the common things of everyday peasant

life, really want?  Why are they bearing hardships and taking so

much trouble?  They tell us it is for our good, but we are not such

fools and simpletons as they take us for.  They are not doing it

all for nothing.  What do they expect from us in return?  Whatever

it is, they are evidently evil-doers, and perhaps moshenniki

(swindlers).  Devil take them!" and thereupon the cautious muzhik

turns his back upon his disinterested self-sacrificing teachers, or

goes quietly and denounces them to the police!  It is not only in

Spain that we encounter Don Quixotes and Sancho Panzas!



Occasionally a worse fate befell the missionaries.  If they allowed

themselves, as they sometimes did, to "blaspheme" against religion

or the Tsar, they ran the risk of being maltreated on the spot.  I

have heard of one case in which the punishment for blasphemy was

applied by sturdy peasant matrons.  Even when they escaped such

mishaps they had not much reason to congratulate themselves on

their success.  After three years of arduous labour the hundreds of

apostles could not boast of more than a score or two of converts

among the genuine working classes, and even these few did not all

remain faithful unto death.  Some of them, however, it must be

admitted, laboured and suffered to the end with the courage and

endurance of true martyrs.



It was not merely the indifference or hostility of the masses that

the propagandists had to complain of.  The police soon got on their

track, and did not confine themselves to persuasion and logical

arguments.  Towards the end of 1873 they arrested some members of

the central directory group in St. Petersburg, and in the following

May they discovered in the province of Saratof an affiliated

organisation with which nearly 800 persons were connected, about

one-fifth of them belonging to the female sex.  A few came of well-

to-do families--sons and daughters of minor officials or small

landed proprietors--but the great majority were poor students of

humbler origin, a large contingent being supplied by the sons of

the poor parish clergy.  In other provinces the authorities made

similar discoveries.  Before the end of the year a large proportion

of the propagandists were in prison, and the centralised

organisation, so far as such a thing existed, was destroyed.

Gradually it dawned on the minds even of the Don Quixotes that

pacific propaganda was no longer possible, and that attempts to

continue it could lead only to useless sacrifices.



For a time there was universal discouragement in the revolutionary

ranks; and among those who had escaped arrest there were mutual

recriminations and endless discussions about the causes of failure

and the changes to be made in modes of action.  The practical

results of these recriminations and discussions was that the

partisans of a slow, pacific propaganda retired to the background,

and the more impatient revolutionary agitators took possession of

the movement.  These maintained stoutly that as pacific propaganda

had become impossible, stronger methods must be adopted.  The

masses must be organised so as to offer successful resistance to

the Government.  Conspiracies must therefore be formed, local

disorders provoked, and blood made to flow.  The part of the

country which seemed best adapted for experiments of this kind was

the southern and southeastern region, inhabited by the descendants

of the turbulent Cossack population which had raised formidable

insurrections under Stenka Razin and Pugatcheff in the seventeenth

and eighteenth centuries.  Here, then, the more impatient agitators

began their work.  A Kief group called the Buntari (rioters),

composed of about twenty-five individuals, settled in various

localities as small shopkeepers or horse dealers, or went about as

workmen or peddlers.  One member of the group has given us in his

reminiscences an amusing account of the experiment.  Everywhere the

agitators found the peasants suspicious and inhospitable, and

consequently they had to suffer a great deal of discomfort.  Some

of them at once gave up the task as hopeless.  The others settled

in a village and began operations.  Having made a topographic

survey of the locality, they worked out an ingenious plan of

campaign; but they had no recruits for the future army of

insurrection, and if they had been able to get recruits, they had

no arms for them, and no money wherewith to purchase arms or

anything else.  In these circumstances they gravely appointed a

committee to collect funds, knowing very well that no money would

be forthcoming.  It was as if a shipwrecked crew in an open boat,

having reached the brink of starvation, appointed a committee to

obtain a supply of fresh water and provisions!  In the hope of

obtaining assistance from headquarters, a delegate was sent to St.

Petersburg and Moscow to explain that for the arming of the

population about a quarter of a million of roubles was required.

The delegate brought back thirty second-hand revolvers!  The

revolutionist who confesses all this* recognises that the whole

scheme was childishly unpractical: "We chose the path of popular

insurrection because we had faith in the revolutionary spirit of

the masses, in its power and its invincibility.  That was the weak

side of our position; and the most curious part of it was that we

drew proofs in support of our theory from history--from the

abortive insurrections of Pazin and Pugatcheff, which took place in

an age when the Government had only a small regular army and no

railways or telegraphs!  We did not even think of attempting a

propaganda among the military!"  In the district of Tchigirin the

agitators had a little momentary success, but the result was the

same.  There a student called Stefanovitch pretended that the Tsar

was struggling with the officials to benefit the peasantry, and he

showed the simple rustics a forged imperial manifesto in which they

were ordered to form a society for the purpose of raising an

insurrection against the officials, the nobles, and the priests.

At one moment (April, 1877), the society had about 600 members, but

a few months later it was discovered by the police, and the leaders

and peasants were arrested.





* Debogorio-Mokrievitch.  "Vospominaniya" ("Reminiscences").

Paris, 1894-99.





When it had thus become evident that propaganda and agitation were

alike useless, and when numerous arrests were being made daily, it

became necessary for the revolutionists to reconsider their

position, and some of the more moderate proposed to rally to the

Liberals, as a temporary measure.  Hitherto there had been very

little sympathy and a good deal of openly avowed hostility between

Liberals and revolutionists.  The latter, convinced that they could

overthrow the Autocratic Power by their own unaided efforts, had

looked askance at Liberalism because they believed that

parliamentary discussions and party struggles would impede rather

than facilitate the advent of the Socialist Millennium, and

strengthen the domination of the bourgeoisie without really

improving the condition of the masses.  Now, however, when the need

of allies was felt, it seemed that constitutional government might

be used as a stepping-stone for reaching the Socialist ideal,

because it must grant a certain liberty of the Press and of

association, and it would necessarily abolish the existing

autocratic system of arresting, imprisoning and exiling, on mere

suspicion, without any regular form of legal procedure.  As usual,

an appeal was made to history, and arguments were easily found in

favour of this course of action.  The past of other nations had

shown that in the march of progress there are no sudden leaps and

bounds, and it was therefore absurd to imagine, as the

revolutionists had hitherto done, that Russian Autocracy could be

swallowed by Socialism at a gulp.  There must always be periods of

transition, and it seemed that such a transition period might now

be initiated.  Liberalism might be allowed to destroy, or at least

weaken, Autocracy, and then it might be destroyed in its turn by

Socialism of the most advanced type.



Having adopted this theory of gradual historic development, some of

the more practical revolutionists approached the more advanced

Liberals and urged them to more energetic action; but before

anything could be arranged the more impatient revolutionists--

notably the group called the Narodovoltsi (National-will-ists)--

intervened, denounced what they considered an unholy alliance, and

proposed a policy of terrorism by which the Government would be

frightened into a more conciliatory attitude.  Their idea was that

the officials who displayed most zeal against the revolutionary

movement should be assassinated, and that every act of severity on

the part of the Administration should be answered by an act of

"revolutionary justice."



As it was evident that the choice between these two courses of

action must determine in great measure the future character and

ultimate fate of the movement, there was much discussion between

the two groups; but the question did not long remain in suspense.

Soon the extreme party gained the upper hand, and the Terrorist

policy was adopted.  I shall let the revolutionists themselves

explain this momentous decision.  In a long proclamation published

some years later it is explained thus:





"The revolutionary movement in Russia began with the so-called

'going in among the people.'  The first Russian revolutionists

thought that the freedom of the people could be obtained only by

the people itself, and they imagined that the only thing necessary

was that the people should absorb Socialistic ideas.  To this it

was supposed that the peasantry were naturally inclined, because

they already possess, in the rural Commune, institutions which

contain the seeds of Socialism, and which might serve as a basis

for the reconstruction of society according to Socialist

principles.  The propagandists hoped, therefore, that in the

teachings of West European Socialism the people would recognise its

own instinctive creations in riper and more clearly defined forms

and that it would joyfully accept the new teaching.



"But the people did not understand its friends, and showed itself

hostile to them.  It turned out that institutions born in slavery

could not serve as a foundation for the new construction, and that

the man who was yesterday a serf, though capable of taking part in

disturbances, is not fitted for conscious revolutionary work.  With

pain in their heart the revolutionists had to confess that they

were deceived in their hopes of the people.  Around them were no

social revolutionary forces on which they could lean for support,

and yet they could not reconcile themselves with the existing state

of violence and slavery.  Thereupon awakened a last hope--the hope

of a drowning man who clutches at a straw: a little group of heroic

and self-sacrificing individuals might accomplish with their own

strength the difficult task of freeing Russia from the yoke of

autocracy.  They had to do it themselves, because there was no

other means.  But would they be able to accomplish it?  For them

that question did not exist.  The struggle of that little group

against autocracy was like the heroic means on which a doctor

decides when there is no longer any hope of the patient's recovery.

Terrorism was the only means that remained, and it had the

advantage of giving a natural vent to pent-up feelings, and of

seeming a reaction against the cruel persecutions of the

Government.  The party called the Narodnaya Volya (National Will)

was accordingly formed, and during several years the world

witnessed a spectacle that had never been seen before in history.

The Narodnaya Volya, insignificant in numbers but strong in spirit,

engaged in single combat with the powerful Russian Government.

Neither executions, nor imprisonment with hard labour, nor ordinary

imprisonment and exile, destroyed the energy of the revolutionists.

Under their shots fell, one after the other, the most zealous and

typical representatives of arbitrary action and violence. . . ."





It was at this time, in 1877, when propaganda and agitation among

the masses were being abandoned for the system of terrorism, but

before any assassinations had taken place, that I accidentally came

into personal relations with some prominent adherents of the

revolutionary movement.  One day a young man of sympathetic

appearance, whom I did not know and who brought no credentials,

called on me in St. Petersburg and suggested to me that I might

make public through the English Press what he described as a

revolting act of tyranny and cruelty committed by General Trepof,

the Prefect of the city.  That official, he said, in visiting

recently one of the prisons, had noticed that a young political

prisoner called Bogolubof did not salute him as he passed, and he

had ordered him to be flogged in consequence.  To this I replied

that I had no reason to disbelieve the story, but that I had

equally no reason to accept it as accurate, as it rested solely on

the evidence of a person with whom I was totally unacquainted.  My

informant took the objection in good part, and offered me the names

and addresses of a number of persons who could supply me with any

proofs that I might desire.



At his next visit I told him I had seen several of the persons he

had named, and that I could not help perceiving that they were

closely connected with the revolutionary movement.  I then went on

to suggest that as the sympathisers with that movement constantly

complained that they were systematically misrepresented,

calumniated and caricatured, the leaders ought to give the world an

accurate account of their real doctrines, and in this respect I

should be glad to assist them.  Already I knew something of the

subject, because I had many friends and acquaintances among the

sympathisers, and had often had with them interminable discussions.

With their ideas, so far as I knew them, I felt bound to confess

that I had no manner of sympathy, but I flattered myself, and he

himself had admitted, that I was capable of describing accurately

and criticising impartially doctrines with which I did not agree.

My new acquaintance, whom I may call Dimitry Ivan'itch, was pleased

with the proposal, and after he had consulted with some of his

friends, we came to an agreement by which I should receive all the

materials necessary for writing an accurate account of the

doctrinal side of the movement.  With regard to any conspiracies

that might be in progress, I warned him that he must be strictly

reticent, because if I came accidentally to know of any terrorist

designs, I should consider it my duty to warn the authorities.  For

this reason I declined to attend any secret conclaves, and it was

agreed that I should be instructed without being initiated.



The first step in my instruction was not very satisfactory or

encouraging.  One day Dimitri Ivan'itch brought me a large

manuscript, which contained, he said, the real doctrines of the

revolutionists and the explanation of their methods.  I was

surprised to find that it was written in English, and I perceived

at a glance that it was not at all what I wanted.  As soon as I had

read the first sentence I turned to my friend and said:



"I am very sorry to find, Dimitri Ivan'itch, that you have not kept

your part of the bargain.  We agreed, you may remember, that we

were to act towards each other in absolutely good faith, and here I

find a flagrant bit of bad faith in the very first sentence of the

manuscript which you have brought me.  The document opens with the

statement that a large number of students have been arrested and

imprisoned for distributing books among the people.  That statement

may be true according to the letter, but it is evidently intended

to mislead.  These youths have been arrested, as you must know, not

for distributing ordinary books, as the memorandum suggests, but

for distributing books of a certain kind.  I have read some of

them, and I cannot feel at all surprised that the Government should

object to their being put into the hands of the ignorant masses.

Take, for example, the one entitled Khitraya Mekhanika, and others

of the same type.  The practical teaching they contain is that the

peasants should be ready to rise and cut the throats of the landed

proprietors and officials.  Now, a wholesale massacre of the kind

may or may not be desirable in the interests of Society, and

justifiable according to some new code of higher morality.  That is

a question into which I do not enter.  All I maintain is that the

writer of this memorandum, in speaking of 'books,' meant to mislead

me."



Dimitri Ivan'itch looked puzzled and ashamed.  "Forgive me," he

said; "I am to blame--not for having attempted to deceive you, but

for not having taken precautions.  I have not read the manuscript,

and I could not if I wished, for it is written in English, and I

know no language but my mother tongue.  My friends ought not to

have done this.  Give me back the paper, and I shall take care that

nothing of the sort occurs in future."



This promise was faithfully kept, and I had no further reason to

complain.  Dimitri Ivan'itch gave me a considerable amount of

information, and lent me a valuable collection of revolutionary

pamphlets.  Unfortunately the course of tuition was suddenly

interrupted by unforeseen circumstances, which I may mention as

characteristic of life in St. Petersburg at the time.  My servant,

an excellent young Russian, more honest than intelligent, came to

me one morning with a mysterious air, and warned me to be on my

guard, because there were "bad people" going about.  On being

pressed a little, he explained to me what he meant.  Two strangers

had come to him and, after offering him a few roubles, had asked

him a number of questions about my habits--at what hour I went out

and came home, what persons called on me, and much more of the same

sort.  "They even tried, sir, to get into your sitting-room; but of

course I did not allow them.  I believe they want to rob you!"



It was not difficult to guess who these "bad people" were who took

such a keen interest in my doings, and who wanted to examine my

apartment in my absence.  Any doubts I had on the subject were soon

removed.  On the morrow and following days I noticed that whenever

I went out, and wherever I might walk or drive, I was closely

followed by two unsympathetic-looking individuals--so closely that

when I turned round sharp they ran into me.  The first and second

times this little accident occurred they received a strong volley

of unceremonious vernacular; but when we became better acquainted

we simply smiled at each other knowingly, as the old Roman Augurs

are supposed to have done when they met in public unobserved.

There was no longer any attempt at concealment or mystification.  I

knew I was being shadowed, and the shadowers could not help

perceiving that I knew it.  Yet, strange to say, they were never

changed!



The reader probably assumes that the secret police had somehow got

wind of my relations with the revolutionists.  Such an assumption

presupposes on the part of the police an amount of intelligence and

perspicacity which they do not usually possess.  On this occasion

they were on an entirely wrong scent, and the very day when I first

noticed my shadowers, a high official, who seemed to regard the

whole thing as a good joke, told me confidentially what the wrong

scent was.  At the instigation of an ex-ambassador, from whom I had

the misfortune to differ in matters of foreign policy, the Moscow

Gazette had denounced me publicly by name as a person who was in

the habit of visiting daily the Ministry of Foreign Affairs--

doubtless with the nefarious purpose of obtaining by illegal means

secret political information--and the police had concluded that I

was a fit and proper person to be closely watched.  In reality, my

relations with the Russian Foreign Office, though inconvenient to

the ex-ambassador, were perfectly regular and above-board--

sanctioned, in fact, by Prince Gortchakoff--but the indelicate

attentions of the secret police were none the less extremely

unwelcome, because some intelligent police-agent might get onto the

real scent, and cause me serious inconvenience.  I determined,

therefore, to break off all relations with Dimitri Ivan'itch and

his friends, and postpone my studies to a more convenient season;

but that decision did not entirely extricate me from my

difficulties.  The collection of revolutionary pamphlets was still

in my possession, and I had promised to return it.  For some little

time I did not see how I could keep my promise without compromising

myself or others, but at last--after having had my shadowers

carefully shadowed in order to learn accurately their habits, and

having taken certain elaborate precautions, with which I need not

trouble the reader, as he is not likely ever to require them--I

paid a visit secretly to Dimitri Ivan'itch in his small room,

almost destitute of furniture, handed him the big parcel of

pamphlets, warned him not to visit me again, and bade him farewell.

Thereupon we went our separate ways and I saw him no more.  Whether

he subsequently played a leading part in the movement I never could

ascertain, because I did not know his real name; but if the

conception which I formed of his character was at all accurate, he

probably ended his career in Siberia, for he was not a man to look

back after having put his hand to the plough.  That is a peculiar

trait of the Russian revolutionists of the period in question.

Their passion for realising an impossible ideal was incurable.

Many of them were again and again arrested; and as soon as they

escaped or were liberated they almost invariably went back to their

revolutionary activity and worked energetically until they again

fell into the clutches of the police.



From this digression into the sphere of personal reminiscences I

return now and take up again the thread of the narrative.



We have seen how the propaganda and the agitation had failed,

partly because the masses showed themselves indifferent or hostile,

and partly because the Government adopted vigorous repressive

measures.  We have seen, too, how the leaders found themselves in

face of a formidable dilemma; either they must abandon their

schemes or they must attack their persecutors.  The more energetic

among them, as I have already stated, chose the latter alternative,

and they proceeded at once to carry out their policy.  In the

course of a single year (February, 1878, to February, 1879) a whole

series of terrorist crimes was committed; in Kief an attempt was

made on the life of the Public Prosecutor, and an officer of

gendarmerie was stabbed; in St. Petersburg the Chief of the

Political Police of the Empire (General Mezentsef) was assassinated

in broad daylight in one of the central streets, and a similar

attempt was made on his successor (General Drenteln); at Kharkof

the Governor (Prince Krapotkin) was shot dead when entering his

residence.  During the same period two members of the revolutionary

organisation, accused of treachery, were "executed" by order of

local Committees.  In most cases the perpetrators of the crimes

contrived to escape.  One of them became well known in Western

Europe as an author under the pseudonym of Stepniak.



Terrorism had not the desired effect.  On the contrary, it

stimulated the zeal and activity of the authorities, and in the

course of the winter of 1878-79 hundreds of arrests--some say as

many as 2,000--were made in St. Petersburg alone.  Driven to

desperation, the revolutionists still at large decided that it was

useless to assassinate mere officials; the fons et origo mali must

be reached; a blow must be struck at the Tsar himself!  The first

attempt was made by a young man called Solovyoff, who fired several

shots at Alexander II. as he was walking near the Winter Palace,

but none of them took effect.



This policy of aggressive terrorism did not meet with universal

approval among the revolutionists, and it was determined to discuss

the matter at a Congress of delegates from various local circles.

The meetings were held in June, 1879, two months after Solovyoff's

unsuccessful attempt, at two provincial towns, Lipetsk and

Voronezh.  It was there agreed in principle to confirm the decision

of the Terrorist Narodovoltsi.  As the Liberals were not in a

position to create liberal institutions or to give guarantees for

political rights, which are the essential conditions of any

Socialist agitation, there remained for the revolutionary party no

other course than to destroy the despotic autocracy.  Thereupon a

programme of action was prepared, and an Executive Committee

elected.  From that moment, though there were still many who

preferred milder methods, the Terrorists had the upper hand, and

they at once proceeded to centralise the organisation and to

introduce stricter discipline, with greater precautions to ensure

secrecy.



The Executive Committee imagined that by assassinating the Tsar

autocracy might be destroyed, and several carefully planned

attempts were made.  The first plan was to wreck the train when the

Imperial family were returning to St. Petersburg from the Crimea.

Mines were accordingly laid at three separate points, but they all

failed.  At the last of the three points (near Moscow) a train was

blown up, but it was not the one in which the Imperial family was

travelling.



Not at all discouraged by this failure, nor by the discovery of its

secret printing-press by the police, the Executive Committee next

tried to attain its object by an explosion of dynamite in the

Winter Palace when the Imperial family were assembled at dinner.

The execution was entrusted to a certain Halturin, one of the few

revolutionists of peasant origin.  As an exceptionally clever

carpenter and polisher, he easily found regular employment in the

palace, and he contrived to make a rough plan of the building.

This plan, on which the dining-hall was marked with an ominous red

cross, fell into the hands of the police, and they made what they

considered a careful investigation; but they failed to unravel the

plot and did not discover the dynamite concealed in the carpenters'

sleeping quarters.  Halturin showed wonderful coolness while the

search was going on, and continued to sleep every night on the

explosive, though it caused him excruciating headaches.  When he

was assured by the chemist of the Executive Committee that the

quantity collected was sufficient, he exploded the mine at the

usual dinner hour, and contrived to escape uninjured.*  In the

guardroom immediately above the spot where the dynamite was

exploded ten soldiers were killed and 53 wounded, and in the

dining-hall the floor was wrecked, but the Imperial family escaped

in consequence of not sitting down to dinner at the usual hour.





* After living some time in Roumania he returned to Russia under

the name of Stepanof, and in 1882 he was tried and executed for

complicity in the assassination of General Strebnekof.





For this barbarous act the Executive Committee publicly accepted

full responsibility.  In a proclamation placarded in the streets of

St. Petersburg it declared that, while regretting the death of the

soldiers, it was resolved to carry on the struggle with the

Autocratic Power until the social reforms should be entrusted to a

Constituent Assembly, composed of members freely elected and

furnished with instructions from their constituents.



Finding police-repression so ineffectual, Alexander II. determined

to try the effect of conciliation, and for this purpose he placed

Loris Melikof at the head of the Government, with semi-dictatorial

powers (February, 1880).  The experiment did not succeed.  By the

Terrorists it was regarded as "a hypocritical Liberalism outwardly

and a veiled brutality within," while in the official world it was

condemned as an act of culpable weakness on the part of the

autocracy.  One consequence of it was that the Executive Committee

was encouraged to continue its efforts, and, as the police became

much less active, it was enabled to improve the revolutionary

organisation.  In a circular sent to the affiliated provincial

associations it explained that the only source of legislation must

be the national will,* and as the Government would never accept

such a principle, its hand must be forced by a great popular

insurrection, for which all available forces should be organised.

The peasantry, as experience had shown, could not yet be relied on,

but efforts should be made to enrol the workmen of the towns.

Great importance was attached to propaganda in the army; but as few

conversions had been made among the rank and file, attention was to

be directed chiefly to the officers, who would be able to carry

their subordinates with them at the critical moment.





* Hence the designation Narodovoltsi (which, as we have seen, means

literally National-will-ists) adopted by this section.





While thus recommending the scheme of destroying autocracy by means

of a popular insurrection in the distant future, the Committee had

not abandoned more expeditious methods, and it was at that moment

hatching a plot for the assassination of the Tsar.  During the

winter months his Majesty was in the habit of holding on Sundays a

small parade in the riding-school near the Michael Square in St.

Petersburg.  On Sunday, March 3d, 1881, the streets by which he

usually returned to the Palace had been undermined at two places,

and on an alternative route several conspirators were posted with

hand-grenades concealed under their great coats.  The Emperor chose

the alternative route.  Here, at a signal given by Sophia Perovski,

the first grenade was thrown by a student called Ryssakoff, but it

merely wounded some members of the escort.  The Emperor stopped and

got out of his sledge, and as he was making inquiries about the

wounded soldiers a second grenade was thrown by a youth called

Grinevitski, with fatal effect.  Alexander II. was conveyed

hurriedly to the Winter Palace, and died almost immediately.



By this act the members of the Executive Committee proved their

energy and their talent as conspirators, but they at the same time

showed their shortsightedness and their political incapacity; for

they had made no preparations for immediately seizing the power

which they so ardently coveted--with the intention of using it, of

course, entirely for the public good.  If the facts were not so

well authenticated, we might dismiss the whole story as incredible.

A group of young people, certainly not more than thirty or forty in

number, without any organised material force behind them, without

any influential accomplices in the army or the official world,

without any prospect of support from the masses, and with no plan

for immediate action after the assassination, deliberately provoked

the crisis for which they were so hopelessly unprepared.  It has

been suggested that they expected the Liberals to seize the Supreme

Power, but this explanation is evidently an afterthought, because

they knew that the Liberals were as unprepared as themselves and

they regarded them at that time as dangerous rivals.  Besides this,

the explanation is quite irreconcilable with the proclamation

issued by the Executive Committee immediately afterwards.  The most

charitable way of explaining the conduct of the conspirators is to

suppose that they were actuated more by blind hatred of the

autocracy and its agents than by political calculations of a

practical kind--that they acted simply like a wounded bull in the

arena, which shuts its eyes and recklessly charges its tormentors.



The murder of the Emperor had not at all the effect which the

Narodovoltsi anticipated.  On the contrary, it destroyed their

hopes of success.  Many people of liberal convictions who

sympathised vaguely with the revolutionary movement without taking

part in it, and who did not condemn very severely the attacks on

police officials, were horrified when they found that the would-be

reformers did not spare even the sacred person of the Tsar.  At the

same time, the police officials, who had become lax and inefficient

under the conciliatory regime of Loris Melikof, recovered their old

zeal, and displayed such inordinate activity that the revolutionary

organisation was paralysed and in great measure destroyed.  Six of

the regicides were condemned to death, and five of them publicly

executed, amongst the latter Sophia Perovski, one of the most

active and personally sympathetic personages among the

revolutionists.  Scores of those who had taken an active part in

the movement were in prison or in exile.  For a short time the

propaganda was continued among military and naval officers, and

various attempts at reorganisation, especially in the southern

provinces, were made, but they all failed.  A certain Degaief, who

had taken part in the formation of military circles, turned

informer, and aided the police.  By his treachery not only a

considerable number of officers, but also Vera Filipof, a young

lady of remarkable ability and courage, who was the leading spirit

in the attempts at reorganisation, were arrested.  There were still

a number of leaders living abroad, and from time to time they sent

emissaries to revive the propaganda, but these efforts were all

fruitless.  One of the active members of the revolutionary party,

Leo Deutsch, who has since published his Memoirs, relates how the

tide of revolution ebbed rapidly at this time.  "Both in Russia and

abroad," he says, "I had seen how the earlier enthusiasm had given

way to scepticism; men had lost faith, though many of them would

not allow that it was so.  It was clear to me that a reaction had

set in for many years."  Of the attempts to resuscitate the

movement he says: "The untried and unskilfully managed societies

were run to death before they could undertake anything definite,

and the unity and interdependence which characterised the original

band of members had disappeared."  With regard to the want of

unity, another prominent revolutionist (Maslof) wrote to a friend

(Dragomanof) at Geneva in 1882 in terms of bitter complaint.  He

accused the Executive Committee of trying to play the part of chief

of the whole revolutionary party, and declared that its

centralising tendencies were more despotic than those of the

Government.  Distributing orders among its adherents without

initiating them into its plans, it insisted on unquestioning

obedience.  The Socialist youth, ardent adherents of Federalism,

were indignant at this treatment, and began to understand that the

Committee used them simply as chair a canon.  The writer described

in vivid colours the mutual hostility which reigned among various

fractions of the party, and which manifested itself in accusations

and even in denunciations; and he predicted that the Narodnaya

Volya, which had organised the various acts of terrorism

culminating in the assassination of the Emperor, would never

develop into a powerful revolutionary party.  It had sunk into the

slough of untruth, and it could only continue to deceive the

Government and the public.



In the mutual recriminations several interesting admissions were

made.  It was recognised that neither the educated classes nor the

common people were capable of bringing about a revolution: the

former were not numerous enough, and the latter were devoted to the

Tsar and did not sympathise with the revolutionary movement, though

they might perhaps be induced to rise at a moment of crisis.  It

was considered doubtful whether such a rising was desirable,

because the masses, being insufficiently prepared, might turn

against the educated minority.  In no case could a popular

insurrection attain the object which the Socialists had in view,

because the power would either remain in the hands of the Tsar--

thanks to the devotion of the common people--or it would fall into

the hands of the Liberals, who would oppress the masses worse than

the autocratic Government had done.  Further, it was recognised

that acts of terrorism were worse than useless, because they were

misunderstood by the ignorant, and tended to inflame the masses

against the leaders.  It seemed necessary, therefore, to return to

a pacific propaganda.  Tikhomirof, who was nominally directing the

movement from abroad, became utterly discouraged, and wrote in 1884

to one of his emissaries in Russia (Lopatin): "You now see Russia,

and can convince yourself that it does not possess the material for

a vast work of reorganisation. . . .  I advise you seriously not to

make superhuman efforts and not to make a scandal in attempting the

impossible. . . .  If you do not want to satisfy yourself with

trifles, come away and await better times."



In examining the material relating to this period one sees clearly

that the revolutionary movement had got into a vicious circle.  As

pacific propaganda had become impossible, in consequence of the

opposition of the authorities and the vigilance of the police, the

Government could be overturned only by a general insurrection; but

the general insurrection could not be prepared without pacific

propaganda.  As for terrorism, it had become discredited.

Tikhomirof himself came to the conclusion that the terrorist idea

was altogether a mistake, not only morally, but also from the point

of view of political expediency.  A party, he explained, has either

the force to overthrow the Government, or it has not; in the former

case it has no need of political assassination, and in the latter

the assassinations have no effect, because Governments are not so

stupid as to let themselves be frightened by those who cannot

overthrow them.  Plainly there was nothing to be done but to wait

for better times, as he had suggested, and the better times did not

seem to be within measurable distance.  He himself, after

publishing a brochure entitled "Why I Ceased to Be a

Revolutionist," made his peace with the Government, and others

followed his example.*  In one prison nine made formal

recantations, among them Emilianof, who held a reserve bomb ready

when Alexander II. was assassinated.  Occasional acts of terrorism

showed that there was still fire under the smouldering embers, but

they were few and far between.  The last serious incident of the

kind during this period was the regicide conspiracy of Sheviryoff

in March, 1887.  The conspirators, carrying the bombs, were

arrested in the principal street of St. Petersburg, and five of

them were hanged.  The railway accident of Borki, which happened in

the following year, and in which the Imperial family had a very

narrow escape, ought perhaps to be added to the list, because there

is reason to believe that it was the work of revolutionists.





* Tikhomirof subsequently worked against the Social Democrats in

Moscow in the interests of the Government.





By this time all the cooler heads among the revolutionists,

especially those who were living abroad in personal safety, had

come to understand that the Socialist ideal could not be attained

by popular insurrection, terrorism, or conspiracies, and

consequently that further activity on the old lines was absurd.

Those of them who did not abandon the enterprise in despair

reverted to the idea that Autocratic Power, impregnable against

frontal attacks, might be destroyed by prolonged siege operations.

This change of tactics is reflected in the revolutionary

literature.  In 1889, for example, the editor of the Svobodnaya

Rossia declared that the aim of the movement now was political

freedom--not only as a stepping-stone to social reorganisation, but

as a good in itself.  This is, he explains, the only possible

revolution at present in Russia.  "For the moment there can be no

other immediate practical aim.  Ulterior aims are not abandoned,

but they are not at present within reach. . .  The revolutionists

of the seventies and the eighties did not succeed in creating among

the peasantry or the town workmen anything which had even the

appearance of a force capable of struggling with the Government;

and the revolutionists of the future will have no greater success

until they have obtained such political rights as personal

inviolability.  Our immediate aim, therefore, is a National

Assembly controlled by local self-government, and this can be

brought about only by a union of all the revolutionary forces."



There were still indications, it is true, that the old spirit of

terrorism was not yet quite extinct: Captain Zolotykhin, for

example, an officer of the Moscow secret police, was assassinated

by a female revolutionist in 1890.  But such incidents were merely

the last fitful sputterings of a lamp that was going out for want

of oil.  In 1892 Stepniak declared it evident to all that the

professional revolutionists could not alone overthrow autocracy,

however great their energy and heroism; and he arrived at the same

conclusion as the writer just quoted.  Of course, immediate success

was not to be expected.  "It is only from the evolutionist's point

of view that the struggle with autocracy has a meaning.  From any

other standpoint it must seem a sanguinary farce--a mere exercise

in the art of self-sacrifice!"  Such are the conclusions arrived at

in 1892 by a man who had been in 1878 one of the leading

terrorists, and who had with his own hand assassinated General

Mezentsef, Chief of the Political Police.



Thus the revolutionary movement, after passing through four stages,

which I may call the academic, the propagandist, the

insurrectionary, and the terrorist, had failed to accomplish its

object.  One of those who had taken an active part in it, and who,

after spending two years in Siberia as a political exile, escaped

and settled in Western Europe, could write thus: "Our revolutionary

movement is dead, and we who are still alive stand by the grave of

our beautiful departed and discuss what is wanting to her.  One of

us thinks that her nose should be improved; another suggests a

change in her chin or her hair.  We do not notice the essential

that what our beautiful departed wants is life; that it is not a

matter of hair or eyebrows, but of a living soul, which formerly

concealed all defects, and made her beautiful, and which now has

flown away.  However we may invent changes and improvements, all

these things are utterly insignificant in comparison with what is

really wanting, and what we cannot give; for who can breathe a

living soul into a corpse?"



In truth, the movement which I have endeavoured to describe was at

an end; but another movement, having the same ultimate object, was

coming into existence, and it constitutes one of the essential

factors of the present situation.  Some of the exiles in

Switzerland and Paris had become acquainted with the social-

democratic and labour movements in Western Europe, and they

believed that the strategy and tactics employed in these movements

might be adopted in Russia.  How far they have succeeded in

carrying out this policy I shall relate presently; but before

entering on this subject, I must explain how the application of

such a policy had been rendered possible by changes in the economic

conditions.  Russia had begun to create rapidly a great

manufacturing industry and an industrial proletariat.  This will

form the subject of the next chapter.

