




CHAPTER XIX



CHURCH AND STATE





The Russian Orthodox Church--Russia Outside of the Mediaeval Papal

Commonwealth--Influence of the Greek Church--Ecclesiastical History

of Russia--Relations between Church and State--Eastern Orthodoxy

and the Russian National Church--The Synod--Ecclesiastical

Grumbling--Local Ecclesiastical Administration--The Black Clergy

and the Monasteries--The Character of the Eastern Church Reflected

in the History of Religious Art--Practical Consequences--The Union

Scheme.





From the curious world of heretics and Dissenters let us pass now

to the Russian Orthodox Church, to which the great majority of the

Russian people belong.  It has played an important part in the

national history, and has exercised a powerful influence in the

formation of the national character.



Russians are in the habit of patriotically and proudly

congratulating themselves on the fact that their forefathers always

resisted successfully the aggressive tendencies of the Papacy, but

it may be doubted whether, from a worldly point of view, the

freedom from Papal authority has been an unmixed blessing for the

country.  If the Popes failed to realise their grand design of

creating a vast European empire based on theocratic principles,

they succeeded at least in inspiring with a feeling of brotherhood

and a vague consciousness of common interest all the nations which

acknowledged their spiritual supremacy.  These nations, whilst

remaining politically independent and frequently coming into

hostile contact with each other, all looked to Rome as the capital

of the Christian world, and to the Pope as the highest terrestrial

authority.  Though the Church did not annihilate nationality, it

made a wide breach in the political barriers, and formed a channel

for international communication by which the social and

intellectual progress of each nation became known to all the other

members of the great Christian confederacy.  Throughout the length

and breadth of the Papal Commonwealth educated men had a common

language, a common literature, a common scientific method, and to a

certain extent a common jurisprudence.  Western Christendom was

thus all through the Middle Ages not merely an abstract conception

or a geographical expression: if not a political, it was at least a

religious and intellectual unit, and all the countries of which it

was composed benefited more or less by the connection.



For centuries Russia stood outside of this religious and

intellectual confederation, for her Church connected her not with

Rome, but with Constantinople, and Papal Europe looked upon her as

belonging to the barbarous East.  When the Mongol hosts swept over

her plains, burnt her towns and villages, and finally incorporated

her into the great empire of Genghis khan, the so-called Christian

world took no interest in the struggle except in so far as its own

safety was threatened.  And as time wore on, the barriers which

separated the two great sections of Christendom became more and

more formidable.  The aggressive pretensions and ambitious schemes

of the Vatican produced in the Greek Orthodox world a profound

antipathy to the Roman Catholic Church and to Western influence of

every kind.  So strong was this aversion that when the nations of

the West awakened in the fifteenth and sixteenth centuries from

their intellectual lethargy and began to move forward on the path

of intellectual and material progress, Russia not only remained

unmoved, but looked on the new civilisation with suspicion and fear

as a thing heretical and accursed.  We have here one of the chief

reasons why Russia, at the present day, is in many respects less

civilised than the nations of Western Europe.



But it is not merely in this negative way that the acceptance of

Christianity from Constantinople has affected the fate of Russia.

The Greek Church, whilst excluding Roman Catholic civilisation,

exerted at the same time a powerful positive influence on the

historical development of the nation.



The Church of the West inherited from old Rome something of that

logical, juridical, administrative spirit which had created the

Roman law, and something of that ambition and dogged, energetic

perseverance that had formed nearly the whole known world into a

great centralised empire.  The Bishops of Rome early conceived the

design of reconstructing that old empire on a new basis, and long

strove to create a universal Christian theocratic State, in which

kings and other civil authorities should be the subordinates of

Christ's Vicar upon earth.  The Eastern Church, on the contrary,

has remained true to her Byzantine traditions, and has never

dreamed of such lofty pretensions.  Accustomed to lean on the civil

power, she has always been content to play a secondary part, and

has never strenuously resisted the formation of national churches.



For about two centuries after the introduction of Christianity--

from 988 to 1240--Russia formed, ecclesiastically speaking, part of

the Patriarchate of Constantinople.  The metropolitans and the

bishops were Greek by birth and education, and the ecclesiastical

administration was guided and controlled by the Byzantine

Patriarchs.  But from the time of the Mongol invasion, when

communication with Constantinople became more difficult and

educated native priests had become more numerous, this complete

dependence on the Patriarch of Constantinople ceased.  The Princes

gradually arrogated to themselves the right of choosing the

Metropolitan of Kief--who was at that time the chief ecclesiastical

dignitary in Russia--and merely sent their nominees to

Constantinople for consecration.  About 1448 this formality came to

be dispensed with, and the Metropolitan was commonly consecrated by

a Council of Russian bishops.  A further step in the direction of

ecclesiastical autonomy was taken in 1589, when the Tsar succeeded

in procuring the consecration of a Russian Patriarch, equal in

dignity and authority to the Patriarchs of Constantinople,

Jerusalem, Antioch, and Alexandria.



In all matters of external form the Patriarch of Moscow was a very

important personage.  He exercised a certain influence in civil as

well as ecclesiastical affairs, bore the official title of "Great

Lord" (Veliki Gosudar), which had previously been reserved for the

civil head of the State, and habitually received from the people

scarcely less veneration than the Tsar himself.  But in reality he

possessed very little independent power.  The Tsar was the real

ruler in ecclesiastical as well as in civil affairs.*





* As this is frequently denied by Russians, it may be well to quote

one authority out of many that might be cited.  Bishop Makarii,

whose erudition and good faith are alike above suspicion, says of

Dmitri of the Don: "He arrogated to himself full, unconditional

power over the Head of the Russian Church, and through him over the

whole Russian Church itself."  ("Istoriya Russkoi Tserkvi," V., p.

101.)  This is said of a Grand Prince who had strong rivals and had

to treat the Church as an ally.  When the Grand Princes became

Tsars and had no longer any rivals, their power was certainly not

diminished.  Any further confirmation that may be required will be

found in the Life of the famous Patriarch Nikon.





The Russian Patriarchate came to an end in the time of Peter the

Great.  Peter wished, among other things, to reform the

ecclesiastical administration, and to introduce into his country

many novelties which the majority of the clergy and of the people

regarded as heretical; and he clearly perceived that a bigoted,

energetic Patriarch might throw considerable obstacles in his way,

and cause him infinite annoyance.  Though such a Patriarch might be

deposed without any flagrant violation of the canonical

formalities, the operation would necessarily be attended with great

trouble and loss of time.  Peter was no friend of roundabout,

tortuous methods, and preferred to remove the difficulty in his

usual thorough, violent fashion.  When the Patriarch Adrian died,

the customary short interregnum was prolonged for twenty years, and

when the people had thus become accustomed to having no Patriarch,

it was announced that no more Patriarchs would be elected.  Their

place was supplied by an ecclesiastical council, or Synod, in

which, as a contemporary explained, "the mainspring was Peter's

power, and the pendulum his understanding."  The great autocrat

justly considered that such a council could be much more easily

managed than a stubborn Patriarch, and the wisdom of the measure

has been duly appreciated by succeeding sovereigns.  Though the

idea of re-establishing the Patriarchate has more than once been

raised, it has never been carried into execution.  The Holy Synod

remains the highest ecclesiastical authority.



But the Emperor?  What is his relation to the Synod and to the

Church in general?



This is a question about which zealous Orthodox Russians are

extremely sensitive.  If a foreigner ventures to hint in their

presence that the Emperor seems to have a considerable influence in

the Church, he may inadvertently produce a little outburst of

patriotic warmth and virtuous indignation.  The truth is that many

Russians have a pet theory on this subject, and have at the same

time a dim consciousness that the theory is not quite in accordance

with reality.  They hold theoretically that the Orthodox Church has

no "Head" but Christ, and is in some peculiar undefined sense

entirely independent of all terrestrial authority.  In this respect

it is often contrasted with the Anglican Church, much to the

disadvantage of the latter; and the supposed differences between

the two are made a theme for semi-religious, semi-patriotic

exultation.  Khomiakof, for instance, in one of his most vigorous

poems, predicts that God will one day take the destiny of the world

out of the hands of England in order to give it to Russia, and he

adduces as one of the reasons for this transfer the fact that

England "has chained, with sacrilegious hand, the Church of God to

the pedestal of the vain earthly power."  So far the theory.  As to

the facts, it is unquestionable that the Tsar exercises a much

greater influence in ecclesiastical affairs than the King and

Parliament in England.  All who know the internal history of Russia

are aware that the Government does not draw a clear line of

distinction between the temporal and the spiritual, and that it

occasionally uses the ecclesiastical organisation for political

purposes.



What, then, are the relations between Church and State?



To avoid confusion, we must carefully distinguish between the

Eastern Orthodox Church as a whole and that section of it which is

known as the Russian Church.



The Eastern Orthodox Church* is, properly speaking, a confederation

of independent churches without any central authority--a unity

founded on the possession of a common dogma and on the theoretical

but now unrealisable possibility of holding Ecumenical Councils.

The Russian National Church is one of the members of this

ecclesiastical confederation.  In matters of faith it is bound by

the decisions of the ancient Ecumenical Councils, but in all other

respects it enjoys complete independence and autonomy.





* Or Greek Orthodox Church, as it is sometimes called.





In relation to the Orthodox Church as a whole the Emperor of Russia

is nothing more than a simple member, and can no more interfere

with its dogmas or ceremonial than a King of Italy or an Emperor of

the French could modify Roman Catholic theology; but in relation to

the Russian National Church his position is peculiar.  He is

described in one of the fundamental laws as "the supreme defender

and preserver of the dogmas of the dominant faith," and immediately

afterwards it is said that "the autocratic power acts in the

ecclesiastical administration by means of the most Holy Governing

Synod, created by it."*  This describes very fairly the relations

between the Emperor and the Church.  He is merely the defender of

the dogmas, and cannot in the least modify them; but he is at the

same time the chief administrator, and uses the Synod as an

instrument.





* Svod Zakonov I., 42, 43.





Some ingenious people who wish to prove that the creation of the

Synod was not an innovation represent the institution as a

resuscitation of the ancient local councils; but this view is

utterly untenable.  The Synod is not a council of deputies from

various sections of the Church, but a permanent college, or

ecclesiastical senate, the members of which are appointed and

dismissed by the Emperor as he thinks fit.  It has no independent

legislative authority, for its legislative projects do not become

law till they have received the Imperial sanction; and they are

always published, not in the name of the Church, but in the name of

the Supreme Power.  Even in matters of simple administration it is

not independent, for all its resolutions require the consent of the

Procureur, a layman nominated by his Majesty.  In theory this

functionary protests only against those resolutions which are not

in accordance with the civil law of the country; but as he alone

has the right to address the Emperor directly on ecclesiastical

concerns, and as all communications between the Emperor and the

Synod pass through his hands, he possesses in reality considerable

power.  Besides this, he can always influence the individual

members by holding out prospects of advancement and decorations,

and if this device fails, he can make refractory members retire,

and fill up their places with men of more pliant disposition.  A

Council constituted in this way cannot, of course, display much

independence of thought or action, especially in a country like

Russia, where no one ventures to oppose openly the Imperial will.



It must not, however, be supposed that the Russian ecclesiastics

regard the Imperial authority with jealousy or dislike.  They are

all most loyal subjects, and warm adherents of autocracy.  Those

ideas of ecclesiastical independence which are so common in Western

Europe, and that spirit of opposition to the civil power which

animates the Roman Catholic clergy, are entirely foreign to their

minds.  If a bishop sometimes complains to an intimate friend that

he has been brought to St. Petersburg and made a member of the

Synod merely to append his signature to official papers and to give

his consent to foregone conclusions, his displeasure is directed,

not against the Emperor, but against the Procureur.  He is full of

loyalty and devotion to the Tsar, and has no desire to see his

Majesty excluded from all influence in ecclesiastical affairs; but

he feels saddened and humiliated when he finds that the whole

government of the Church is in the hands of a lay functionary, who

may be a military man, and who looks at all matters from a layman's

point of view.



This close connection between Church and State and the thoroughly

national character of the Russian Church is well illustrated by the

history of the local ecclesiastical administration.  The civil and

the ecclesiastical administration have always had the same

character and have always been modified by the same influences.

The terrorism which was largely used by the Muscovite Tsars and

brought to a climax by Peter the Great appeared equally in both.

In the episcopal circulars, as in the Imperial ukazes, we find

frequent mention of "most cruel corporal punishment," "cruel

punishment with whips, so that the delinquent and others may not

acquire the habit of practising such insolence," and much more of

the same kind.  And these terribly severe measures were sometimes

directed against very venial offences.  The Bishop of Vologda, for

instance, in 1748 decrees "cruel corporal punishment" against

priests who wear coarse and ragged clothes,* and the records of the

Consistorial courts contain abundant proof that such decrees were

rigorously executed.  When Catherine II. introduced a more humane

spirit into the civil administration, corporal punishment was at

once abolished in the Consistorial courts, and the procedure was

modified according to the accepted maxims of civil jurisprudence.

But I must not weary the reader with tiresome historical details.

Suffice it to say that, from the time of Peter the Great downwards,

the character of all the more energetic sovereigns is reflected in

the history of the ecclesiastical administration.





* Znamenski, "Prikhodskoe Dukhovenstvo v Rossii so vremeni reformy

Petra," Kazan, 1873.





Each province, or "government," forms a diocese, and the bishop,

like the civil governor, has a Council which theoretically controls

his power, but practically has no controlling influence whatever.

The Consistorial Council, which has in the theory of ecclesiastical

procedure a very imposing appearance, is in reality the bishop's

chancellerie, and its members are little more than secretaries,

whose chief object is to make themselves agreeable to their

superior.  And it must be confessed that, so long as they remain

what they are, the less power they possess the better it will be

for those who have the misfortune to be under their jurisdiction.

The higher dignitaries have at least larger aims and a certain

consciousness of the dignity of their position; but the lower

officials, who have no such healthy restraints and receive

ridiculously small salaries, grossly misuse the little authority

which they possess, and habitually pilfer and extort in the most

shameless manner.  The Consistories are, in fact, what the public

offices were in the time of Nicholas I.



The higher ecclesiastical administration has always been in the

hands of the monks, or "Black Clergy," as they are commonly termed,

who form a large and influential class.  The monks who first

settled in Russia were, like those who first visited north-western

Europe, men of the earnest, ascetic, missionary type.  Filled with

zeal for the glory of God and the salvation of souls, they took

little or no thought for the morrow, and devoutly believed that

their Heavenly Father, without whose knowledge no sparrow falls to

the ground, would provide for their humble wants.  Poor, clad in

rags, eating the most simple fare, and ever ready to share what

they had with any one poorer than themselves, they performed

faithfully and earnestly the work which their Master had given them

to do.  But this ideal of monastic life soon gave way in Russia, as

in the West, to practices less simple and austere.  By the liberal

donations and bequests of the faithful the monasteries became rich

in gold, in silver, in precious stones, and above all in land and

serfs.  Troitsa, for instance, possessed at one time 120,000 serfs

and a proportionate amount of land, and it is said that at the

beginning of the eighteenth century more than a fourth of the

entire population had fallen under the jurisdiction of the Church.

Many of the monasteries engaged in commerce, and the monks were, if

we may credit Fletcher, who visited Russia in 1588, the most

intelligent merchants of the country.



During the eighteenth century the Church lands were secularised,

and the serfs of the Church became serfs of the State.  This was a

severe blow for the monasteries, but it did not prove fatal, as

many people predicted.  Some monasteries were abolished and others

were reduced to extreme poverty, but many survived and prospered.

These could no longer possess serfs, but they had still three

sources of revenue: a limited amount of real property, Government

subsidies, and the voluntary offerings of the faithful.  At present

there are about 500 monastic establishments, and the great majority

of them, though not wealthy, have revenues more than sufficient to

satisfy all the requirements of an ascetic life.



Thus in Russia, as in Western Europe, the history of monastic

institutions is composed of three chapters, which may be briefly

entitled: asceticism and missionary enterprise; wealth, luxury, and

corruption; secularisation of property and decline.  But between

Eastern and Western monasticism there is at least one marked

difference.  The monasticism of the West made at various epochs of

its history a vigorous, spontaneous effort at self-regeneration,

which found expression in the foundation of separate Orders, each

of which proposed to itself some special aim--some special sphere

of usefulness.  In Russia we find no similar phenomenon.  Here the

monasteries never deviated from the rules of St. Basil, which

restrict the members to religious ceremonies, prayer, and

contemplation.  From time to time a solitary individual raised his

voice against the prevailing abuses, or retired from his monastery

to spend the remainder of his days in ascetic solitude; but neither

in the monastic population as a whole, nor in any particular

monastery, do we find at any time a spontaneous, vigorous movement

towards reform.  During the last two hundred years reforms have

certainly been effected, but they have all been the work of the

civil power, and in the realisation of them the monks have shown

little more than the virtue of resignation.  Here, as elsewhere, we

have evidence of that inertness, apathy, and want of spontaneous

vigour which form one of the most characteristic traits of Russian

national life.  In this, as in other departments of national

activity, the spring of action has lain not in the people, but in

the Government.



It is only fair to the monks to state that in their dislike to

progress and change of every kind they merely reflect the

traditional spirit of the Church to which they belong.  The Russian

Church, like the Eastern Orthodox Church generally, is essentially

conservative.  Anything in the nature of a religious revival is

foreign to her traditions and character.  Quieta non movere is her

fundamental principle of conduct.  She prides herself as being

above terrestrial influences.



The modifications that have been made in her administrative

organisation have not affected her inner nature.  In spirit and

character she is now what she was under the Patriarchs in the time

of the Muscovite Tsars, holding fast to the promise that no jot or

tittle shall pass from the law till all be fulfilled.  To those who

talk about the requirements of modern life and modern science she

turns a deaf ear.  Partly from the predominance which she gives to

the ceremonial element, partly from the fact that her chief aim is

to preserve unmodified the doctrine and ceremonial as determined by

the early Ecumenical Councils, and partly from the low state of

general culture among the clergy, she has ever remained outside of

the intellectual movements.  The attempts of the Roman Catholic

Church to develop the traditional dogmas by definition and

deduction, and the efforts of Protestants to reconcile their creeds

with progressive science and the ever-varying intellectual currents

of the time, are alike foreign to her nature.  Hence she has

produced no profound theological treatises conceived in a

philosophical spirit, and has made no attempt to combat the spirit

of infidelity in its modern forms.  Profoundly convinced that her

position is impregnable, she has "let the nations rave," and

scarcely deigned to cast a glance at their intellectual and

religious struggles.  In a word, she is "in the world, but not of

it."



If we wish to see represented in a visible form the peculiar

characteristics of the Russian Church, we have only to glance at

Russian religious art, and compare it with that of Western Europe.

In the West, from the time of the Renaissance downwards, religious

art has kept pace with artistic progress.  Gradually it emancipated

itself from archaic forms and childish symbolism, converted the

lifeless typical figures into living individuals, lit up their dull

eyes and expressionless faces with human intelligence and human

feeling, and finally aimed at archaeological accuracy in costume

and other details.  Thus in the West the Icon grew slowly into the

naturalistic portrait, and the rude symbolical groups developed

gradually into highly-finished historical pictures.  In Russia the

history of religious art has been entirely different.  Instead of

distinctive schools of painting and great religious artists, there

has been merely an anonymous traditional craft, destitute of any

artistic individuality.  In all the productions of this craft the

old Byzantine forms have been faithfully and rigorously preserved,

and we can see reflected in the modern Icons--stiff, archaic,

expressionless--the immobility of the Eastern Church in general,

and of the Russian Church in particular.



To the Roman Catholic, who struggles against science as soon as it

contradicts traditional conceptions, and to the Protestant, who

strives to bring his religious beliefs into accordance with his

scientific knowledge, the Russian Church may seem to resemble an

antediluvian petrifaction, or a cumbrous line-of-battle ship that

has been long stranded.  It must be confessed, however, that the

serene inactivity for which she is distinguished has had very

valuable practical consequences.  The Russian clergy have neither

that haughty, aggressive intolerance which characterises their

Roman Catholic brethren, nor that bitter, uncharitable, sectarian

spirit which is too often to be found among Protestants.  They

allow not only to heretics, but also to members of their own

communion, the most complete intellectual freedom, and never think

of anathematising any one for his scientific or unscientific

opinions.  All that they demand is that those who have been born

within the pale of Orthodoxy should show the Church a certain

nominal allegiance; and in this matter of allegiance they are by no

mean very exacting.  So long as a member refrains from openly

attacking the Church and from going over to another confession, he

may entirely neglect all religious ordinances and publicly profess

scientific theories logically inconsistent with any kind of

dogmatic religious belief without the slightest danger of incurring

ecclesiastical censure.



This apathetic tolerance may be partly explained by the national

character, but it is also to some extent due to the peculiar

relations between Church and State.  The government vigilantly

protects the Church from attack, and at the same time prevents her

from attacking her enemies.  Hence religious questions are never

discussed in the Press, and the ecclesiastical literature is all

historical, homiletic, or devotional.  The authorities allow public

oral discussions to be held during Lent in the Kremlin of Moscow

between members of the State Church and Old Ritualists; but these

debates are not theological in our sense of the term.  They turn

exclusively on details of Church history, and on the minutiae of

ceremonial observance.



A few years ago there was a good deal of vague talk about a

possible union of the Russian and Anglican Churches.  If by "union"

is meant simply union in the bonds of brotherly love, there can be,

of course, no objection to any amount of such pia desideria; but if

anything more real and practical is intended, the project is an

absurdity.  A real union of the Russian and Anglican Churches would

be as difficult of realisation, and is as undesirable, as a union

of the Russian Council of State and the British House of Commons.*





* I suppose that the more serious partisans of the union scheme

mean union with the Eastern Orthodox, and not with the Russian,

Church.  To them the above remarks are not addressed.  Their scheme

is, in my opinion, unrealisable and undesirable, but it contains

nothing absurd.


