




CHAPTER VI



A PEASANT FAMILY OF THE OLD TYPE





Ivan Petroff--His Past Life--Co-operative Associations--

Constitution of a Peasant's Household--Predominance of Economic

Conceptions over those of Blood-relationship--Peasant Marriages--

Advantages of Living in Large Families--Its Defects--Family

Disruptions and their Consequences.





My illness had at least one good result.  It brought me into

contact with the feldsher, and through him, after my recovery, I

made the acquaintance of several peasants living in the village.

Of these by far the most interesting was an old man called Ivan

Petroff.



Ivan must have been about sixty years of age, but was still robust

and strong, and had the reputation of being able to mow more hay in

a given time than any other peasant in the village.  His head would

have made a line study for a portrait-painter.  Like Russian

peasants in genera], he wore his hair parted in the middle--a

custom which perhaps owes its origin to the religious pictures.

The reverend appearance given to his face by his long fair beard,

slightly tinged with grey, was in part counteracted by his eyes,

which had a strange twinkle in them--whether of humour or of

roguery, it was difficult to say.  Under all circumstances--whether

in his light, nondescript summer costume, or in his warm sheep-

skin, or in the long, glossy, dark-blue, double-breasted coat which

he put on occasionally on Sundays and holidays--he always looked a

well-fed, respectable, prosperous member of society; whilst his

imperturbable composure, and the entire absence of obsequiousness

or truculence in his manner, indicated plainly that he possessed no

small amount of calm, deep-rooted self-respect.  A stranger, on

seeing him, might readily have leaped to the conclusion that he

must be the Village Elder, but in reality he was a simple member of

the Commune, like his neighbour, poor Zakhar Leshkof, who never let

slip an opportunity of getting drunk, was always in debt, and, on

the whole, possessed a more than dubious reputation.



Ivan had, it is true, been Village Elder some years before.  When

elected by the Village Assembly, against his own wishes, he had

said quietly, "Very well, children; I will serve my three years";

and at the end of that period, when the Assembly wished to re-elect

him, he had answered firmly, "No, children; I have served my term.

It is now the turn of some one who is younger, and has more time.

There's Peter Alekseyef, a good fellow, and an honest; you may

choose him."  And the Assembly chose the peasant indicated; for

Ivan, though a simple member of the Commune, had more influence in

Communal affairs than any other half-dozen members put together.

No grave matter was decided without his being consulted, and there

was at least one instance on record of the Village Assembly

postponing deliberations for a week because he happened to be

absent in St. Petersburg.



No stranger casually meeting Ivan would ever for a moment have

suspected that that big man, of calm, commanding aspect, had been

during a great part of his life a serf.  And yet a serf he had been

from his birth till he was about thirty years of age--not merely a

serf of the State, but the serf of a proprietor who had lived

habitually on his property.  For thirty years of his life he had

been dependent on the arbitrary will of a master who had the legal

power to flog him as often and as severely as he considered

desirable.  In reality he had never been subjected to corporal

punishment, for the proprietor to whom he had belonged had been,

though in some respects severe, a just and intelligent master.



Ivan's bright, sympathetic face had early attracted the master's

attention, and it was decided that he should learn a trade.  For

this purpose he was sent to Moscow, and apprenticed there to a

carpenter.  After four years of apprenticeship he was able not only

to earn his own bread, but to help the household in the payment of

their taxes, and to pay annually to his master a fixed yearly sum--

first ten, then twenty, then thirty, and ultimately, for some years

immediately before the Emancipation, seventy roubles.  In return

for this annual sum he was free to work and wander about as he

pleased, and for some years he had made ample use of his

conditional liberty.  I never succeeded in extracting from him a

chronological account of his travels, but I could gather from his

occasional remarks that he had wandered over a great part of

European Russia.  Evidently he had been in his youth what is

colloquially termed "a roving blade," and had by no means confined

himself to the trade which he had learned during his four years of

apprenticeship.  Once he had helped to navigate a raft from Vetluga

to Astrakhan, a distance of about two thousand miles.  At another

time he had been at Archangel and Onega, on the shores of the White

Sea.  St. Petersburg and Moscow were both well known to him, and he

had visited Odessa.



The precise nature of Ivan's occupations during these wanderings I

could not ascertain; for, with all his openness of manner, he was

extremely reticent regarding his commercial affairs.  To all my

inquiries on this topic he was wont to reply vaguely, "Lesnoe

dyelo"--that is to say, "Timber business"; and from this I

concluded that his chief occupation had been that of a timber

merchant.  Indeed, when I knew him, though he was no longer a

regular trader, he was always ready to buy any bit of forest that

could be bought in the vicinity for a reasonable price.



During all this nomadic period of his life Ivan had never entirely

severed his connection with his native village or with agricultural

life.  When about the age of twenty he had spent several months at

home, taking part in the field labour, and had married a wife--a

strong, healthy young woman, who had been selected for him by his

mother, and strongly recommended to him on account of her good

character and her physical strength.  In the opinion of Ivan's

mother, beauty was a kind of luxury which only nobles and rich

merchants could afford, and ordinary comeliness was a very

secondary consideration--so secondary as to be left almost entirely

out of sight.  This was likewise the opinion of Ivan's wife.  She

had never been comely herself, she used to say, but she had been a

good wife to her husband.  He had never complained about her want

of good looks, and had never gone after those who were considered

good-looking.  In expressing this opinion she always first bent

forward, then drew herself up to her full length, and finally gave

a little jerky nod sideways, so as to clench the statement.  Then

Ivan's bright eye would twinkle more brightly than usual, and he

would ask her how she knew that--reminding her that he was not

always at home.  This was Ivan's stereotyped mode of teasing his

wife, and every time he employed it he was called an "old

scarecrow," or something of the kind.



Perhaps, however, Ivan's jocular remark had more significance in it

than his wife cared to admit, for during the first years of their

married life they had seen very little of each other.  A few days

after the marriage, when according to our notions the honeymoon

should be at its height, Ivan had gone to Moscow for several

months, leaving his young bride to the care of his father and

mother.  The young bride did not consider this an extraordinary

hardship, for many of her companions had been treated in the same

way, and according to public opinion in that part of the country

there was nothing abnormal in the proceeding.  Indeed, it may be

said in general that there is very little romance or sentimentality

about Russian peasant marriages.  In this as in other respects the

Russian peasantry are, as a class, extremely practical and matter-

of-fact in their conceptions and habits, and are not at all prone

to indulge in sublime, ethereal sentiments of any kind.  They have

little or nothing of what may be termed the Hermann and Dorothea

element in their composition, and consequently know very little

about those sentimental, romantic ideas which we habitually

associate with the preliminary steps to matrimony.  Even those

authors who endeavour to idealise peasant life have rarely ventured

to make their story turn on a sentimental love affair.  Certainly

in real life the wife is taken as a helpmate, or in plain language

a worker, rather than as a companion, and the mother-in-law leaves

her very little time to indulge in fruitless dreaming.



As time wore on, and his father became older and frailer, Ivan's

visits to his native place became longer and more frequent, and

when the old man was at last incapable of work, Ivan settled down

permanently and undertook the direction of the household.  In the

meantime his own children had been growing up.  When I knew the

family it comprised--besides two daughters who had married early

and gone to live with their parents-in-law--Ivan and his wife, two

sons, three daughters-in-law, and an indefinite and frequently

varying number of grandchildren.  The fact that there were three

daughters-in-law and only two sons was the result of the

Conscription, which had taken away the youngest son shortly after

his marriage.  The two who remained spent only a small part of the

year at home.  The one was a carpenter and the other a bricklayer,

and both wandered about the country in search of employment, as

their father had done in his younger days.  There was, however, one

difference.  The father had always shown a leaning towards

commercial transactions, rather than the simple practice of his

handicraft, and consequently he had usually lived and travelled

alone.  The sons, on the contrary, confined themselves to their

handicrafts, and were always during the working season members of

an artel.



The artel in its various forms is a curious institution.  Those to

which Ivan's sons belonged were simply temporary, itinerant

associations of workmen, who during the summer lived together, fed

together, worked together, and periodically divided amongst

themselves the profits.  This is the primitive form of the

institution, and is now not very often met with.  Here, as

elsewhere, capital has made itself felt, and destroyed that

equality which exists among the members of an artel in the above

sense of the word.  Instead of forming themselves into a temporary

association, the workmen now generally make an engagement with a

contractor who has a little capital, and receive from him fixed

monthly wages.  The only association which exists in this case is

for the purchase and preparation of provisions, and even these

duties are very often left to the contractor.



In some of the larger towns there are artels of a much more complex

kind--permanent associations, possessing a large capital, and

pecuniarily responsible for the acts of the individual members.  Of

these, by far the most celebrated is that of the Bank Porters.

These men have unlimited opportunities of stealing, and are often

entrusted with the guarding or transporting of enormous sums; but

the banker has no cause for anxiety, because he knows that if any

defalcations occur they will be made good to him by the artel.

Such accidents very rarely happen, and the fact is by no means so

extraordinary as many people suppose.  The artel, being responsible

for the individuals of which it is composed, is very careful in

admitting new members, and a man when admitted is closely watched,

not only by the regularly constituted office-bearers, but also by

all his fellow-members who have an opportunity of observing him.

If he begins to spend money too freely or to neglect his duties,

though his employer may know nothing of the fact, suspicions are at

once aroused among his fellow-members, and an investigation ensues--

ending in summary expulsion if the suspicions prove to have been

well founded.  Mutual responsibility, in short, creates a very

effective system of mutual supervision.



Of Ivan's sons, the one who was a carpenter visited his family only

occasionally, and at irregular intervals; the bricklayer, on the

contrary, as building is impossible in Russia during the cold

weather, spent the greater part of the winter at home.  Both of

them paid a large part of their earnings into the family treasury,

over which their father exercised uncontrolled authority.  If he

wished to make any considerable outlay, he consulted his sons on

the subject; but as he was a prudent, intelligent man, and enjoyed

the respect and confidence of the family, he never met with any

strong opposition.  All the field work was performed by him with

the assistance of his daughters-in-law; only at harvest time he

hired one or two labourers to help him.



Ivan's household was a good specimen of the Russian peasant family

of the old type.  Previous to the Emancipation in 1861 there were

many households of this kind, containing the representatives of

three generations.  All the members, young and old, lived together

in patriarchal fashion under the direction and authority of the

Head of the House, called usually the Khozain--that is to say, the

Administrator; or, in some districts, the Bolshak, which means

literally "the Big One."  Generally speaking, this important

position was occupied by the grandfather, or, if he was dead, by

the eldest brother, but the rule was not very strictly observed.

If, for instance, the grandfather became infirm, or if the eldest

brother was incapacitated by disorderly habits or other cause, the

place of authority was taken by some other member--it might be by a

woman--who was a good manager, and possessed the greatest moral

influence.



The relations between the Head of the Household and the other

members depended on custom and personal character, and they

consequently varied greatly in different families.  If the Big One

was an intelligent man, of decided, energetic character, like my

friend Ivan, there was probably perfect discipline in the

household, except perhaps in the matter of female tongues, which do

not readily submit to the authority even of their owners; but very

often it happened that the Big One was not thoroughly well fitted

for his post, and in that case endless quarrels and bickerings

inevitably took place.  Those quarrels were generally caused and

fomented by the female members of the family--a fact which will not

seem strange if we try to realise how difficult it must be for

several sisters-in-law to live together, with their children and a

mother-in-law, within the narrow limits of a peasant's household.

The complaints of the young bride, who finds that her mother-in-law

puts all the hard work on her shoulders, form a favourite motive in

the popular poetry.



The house, with its appurtenances, the cattle, the agricultural

implements, the grain and other products, the money gained from the

sale of these products--in a word, the house and nearly everything

it contained--were the joint property of the family.  Hence nothing

was bought or sold by any member--not even by the Big One himself,

unless he possessed an unusual amount of authority--without the

express or tacit consent of the other grown-up males, and all the

money that was earned was put into the common purse.  When one of

the sons left home to work elsewhere, he was expected to bring or

send home all his earnings, except what he required for food,

lodgings, and other necessary expenses; and if he understood the

word "necessary" in too lax a sense, he had to listen to very

plain-spoken reproaches when he returned.  During his absence,

which might last for a whole year or several years, his wife and

children remained in the house as before, and the money which he

earned could be devoted to the payment of the family taxes.



The peasant household of the old type is thus a primitive labour

association, of which the members have all things in common, and it

is not a little remarkable that the peasant conceives it as such

rather than as a family.  This is shown by the customary

terminology, for the Head of the Household is not called by any

word corresponding to Paterfamilias, but is termed, as I have said,

Khozain, or Administrator--a word that is applied equally to a

farmer, a shopkeeper or the head of an industrial undertaking, and

does not at all convey the idea of blood-relationship.  It is

likewise shown by what takes place when a household is broken up.

On such occasions the degree of blood-relationship is not taken

into consideration in the distribution of the property.  All the

adult male members share equally.  Illegitimate and adopted sons,

if they have contributed their share of labour, have the same

rights as the sons born in lawful wedlock.  The married daughter,

on the contrary--being regarded as belonging to her husband's

family--and the son who has previously separated himself from the

household, are excluded from the succession.  Strictly speaking,

the succession or inheritance is confined to the wearing apparel

and any little personal effects of a deceased member.  The house

and all that it contains belong to the little household community;

and, consequently, when it is broken up, by the death of the

Khozain or other cause, the members do not inherit, but merely

appropriate individually what they had hitherto possessed

collectively.  Thus there is properly no inheritance or succession,

but simply liquidation and distribution of the property among the

members.  The written law of inheritance founded on the conception

of personal property, is quite unknown to the peasantry, and quite

inapplicable to their mode of life.  In this way a large and most

important section of the Code remains a dead letter for about four-

fifths of the population.



This predominance of practical economic considerations is

exemplified also by the way in which marriages are arranged in

these large families.  In the primitive system of agriculture

usually practised in Russia, the natural labour-unit--if I may use

such a term--comprises a man, a woman, and a horse.  As soon,

therefore, as a boy becomes an able-bodied labourer he ought to be

provided with the two accessories necessary for the completion of

the labour-unit.  To procure a horse, either by purchase or by

rearing a foal, is the duty of the Head of the House; to procure a

wife for the youth is the duty of "the female Big One" (Bolshukha).

And the chief consideration in determining the choice is in both

cases the same.  Prudent domestic administrators are not to be

tempted by showy horses or beautiful brides; what they seek is not

beauty, but physical strength and capacity for work.  When the

youth reaches the age of eighteen he is informed that he ought to

marry at once, and as soon as he gives his consent negotiations are

opened with the parents of some eligible young person.  In the

larger villages the negotiations are sometimes facilitated by

certain old women called svakhi, who occupy themselves specially

with this kind of mediation; but very often the affair is arranged

directly by, or through the agency of, some common friend of the

two houses.



Care must of course be taken that there is no legal obstacle, and

these obstacles are not always easily avoided in a small village,

the inhabitants of which have been long in the habit of

intermarrying.  According to Russian ecclesiastical law, not only

is marriage between first-cousins illegal, but affinity is

considered as equivalent to consanguinity--that is to say a mother-

in-law and a sister-in-law are regarded as a mother and a sister--

and even the fictitious relationship created by standing together

at the baptismal font as godfather and godmother is legally

recognised, and may constitute a bar to matrimony.  If all the

preliminary negotiations are successful, the marriage takes place,

and the bridegroom brings his bride home to the house of which he

is a member.  She brings nothing with her as a dowry except her

trousseau, but she brings a pair of good strong arms, and thereby

enriches her adopted family.  Of course it happens occasionally--

for human nature is everywhere essentially the same--that a young

peasant falls in love with one of his former playmates, and brings

his little romance to a happy conclusion at the altar; but such

cases are very rare, and as a rule it may be said that the

marriages of the Russian peasantry are arranged under the influence

of economic rather than sentimental considerations.



The custom of living in large families has many economic

advantages.  We all know the edifying fable of the dying man who

showed to his sons by means of a piece of wicker-work the

advantages of living together and assisting each other.  In

ordinary times the necessary expenses of a large household of ten

members are considerably less than the combined expenses of two

households comprising five members each, and when a "black day"

comes a large family can bear temporary adversity much more

successfully than a small one.  These are principles of world-wide

application, but in the life of the Russian peasantry they have a

peculiar force.  Each adult peasant possesses, as I shall hereafter

explain, a share of the Communal land, but this share is not

sufficient to occupy all his time and working power.  One married

pair can easily cultivate two shares--at least in all provinces

where the peasant allotments are not very large.  Now, if a family

is composed of two married couples, one of the men can go elsewhere

and earn money, whilst the other, with his wife and sister-in-law,

can cultivate the two combined shares of land.  If, on the contrary

a family consists merely of one pair with their children, the man

must either remain at home--in which case he may have difficulty in

finding work for the whole of his time--or he must leave home, and

entrust the cultivation of his share of the land to his wife, whose

time must be in great part devoted to domestic affairs.



In the time of serfage the proprietors clearly perceived these and

similar advantages, and compelled their serfs to live together in

large families.  No family could be broken up without the

proprietor's consent, and this consent was not easily obtained

unless the family had assumed quite abnormal proportions and was

permanently disturbed by domestic dissension.  In the matrimonial

affairs of the serfs, too, the majority of the proprietors

systematically exercised a certain supervision, not necessarily

from any paltry meddling spirit, but because their own material

interests were thereby affected.  A proprietor would not, for

instance, allow the daughter of one of his serfs to marry a serf

belonging to another proprietor--because he would thereby lose a

female labourer--unless some compensation were offered.  The

compensation might be a sum of money, or the affair might be

arranged on the principle of reciprocity by the master of the

bridegroom allowing one of his female serfs to marry a serf

belonging to the master of the bride.



However advantageous the custom of living in large families may

appear when regarded from the economic point of view, it has very

serious defects, both theoretical and practical.



That families connected by the ties of blood-relationship and

marriage can easily live together in harmony is one of those social

axioms which are accepted universally and believed by nobody.  We

all know by our own experience, or by that of others, that the

friendly relations of two such families are greatly endangered by

proximity of habitation.  To live in the same street is not

advisable; to occupy adjoining houses is positively dangerous; and

to live under the same roof is certainly fatal to prolonged amity.

There may be the very best intentions on both sides, and the

arrangement may be inaugurated by the most gushing expressions of

undying affection and by the discovery of innumerable secret

affinities, but neither affinities, affection, nor good intentions

can withstand the constant friction and occasional jerks which

inevitably ensue.



Now the reader must endeavour to realise that Russian peasants,

even when clad in sheep-skins, are human beings like ourselves.

Though they are often represented as abstract entities--as figures

in a table of statistics or dots on a diagram--they have in reality

"organs, dimensions, senses, affections, passions."  If not exactly

"fed with the same food," they are at least "hurt with the same

weapons, subject to the same diseases, healed by the same means,"

and liable to be irritated by the same annoyances as we are.  And

those of them who live in large families are subjected to a kind of

probation that most of us have never dreamed of.   The families

comprising a large household not only live together, but have

nearly all things in common.  Each member works, not for himself,

but for the household, and all that he earns is expected to go into

the family treasury.  The arrangement almost inevitably leads to

one of two results--either there are continual dissensions, or

order is preserved by a powerful domestic tyranny.



It is quite natural, therefore, that when the authority of the

landed proprietors was abolished in 1861, the large peasant

families almost all crumbled to pieces.  The arbitrary rule of the

Khozain was based on, and maintained by, the arbitrary rule of the

proprietor, and both naturally fell together.  Households like that

of our friend Ivan were preserved only in exceptional cases, where

the Head of the House happened to possess an unusual amount of

moral influence over the other members.



This change has unquestionably had a prejudicial influence on the

material welfare of the peasantry, but it must have added

considerably to their domestic comfort, and may perhaps produce

good moral results.  For the present, however, the evil

consequences are by far the most prominent.  Every married peasant

strives to have a house of his own, and many of them, in order to

defray the necessary expenses, have been obliged to contract debts.

This is a very serious matter.  Even if the peasants could obtain

money at five or six per cent., the position of the debtors would

be bad enough, but it is in reality much worse, for the village

usurers consider twenty or twenty-five per cent. a by no means

exorbitant rate of interest.  A laudable attempt has been made to

remedy this state of things by village banks, but these have proved

successful only in certain exceptional localities.  As a rule the

peasant who contracts debts has a hard struggle to pay the interest

in ordinary times, and when some misfortune overtakes him--when,

for instance, the harvest is bad or his horse is stolen--he

probably falls hopelessly into pecuniary embarrassments.  I have

seen peasants not specially addicted to drunkenness or other

ruinous habits sink to a helpless state of insolvency.  Fortunately

for such insolvent debtors, they are treated by the law with

extreme leniency.  Their house, their share of the common land,

their agricultural implements, their horse--in a word, all that is

necessary for their subsistence, is exempt from sequestration.  The

Commune, however, may bring strong pressure to bear on those who do

not pay their taxes.  When I lived among the peasantry in the

seventies, corporal punishment inflicted by order of the Commune

was among the means usually employed; and though the custom was

recently prohibited by an Imperial decree of Nicholas II, I am not

at all sure that it has entirely disappeared.

