






CHAPTER XXIII



SOCIAL CLASSES





Do Social Classes or Castes Exist in Russia?--Well-marked Social

Types--Classes Recognised by the Legislation and the Official

Statistics--Origin and Gradual Formation of these Classes--

Peculiarity in the Historical Development of Russia--Political Life

and Political Parties.





In the preceding pages I have repeatedly used the expression

"social classes," and probably more than once the reader has felt

inclined to ask, What are social classes in the Russian sense of

the term?  It may be well, therefore, before going farther, to

answer this question.



If the question were put to a Russian it is not at all unlikely

that he would reply somewhat in this fashion: "In Russia there are

no social classes, and there never have been any.  That fact

constitutes one of the most striking peculiarities of her

historical development, and one of the surest foundations of her

future greatness.  We know nothing, and have never known anything,

of those class distinctions and class enmities which in Western

Europe have often rudely shaken society in past times, and imperil

its existence in the future."



This statement will not be readily accepted by the traveller who

visits Russia with no preconceived ideas and forms his opinions

from his own observations.  To him it seems that class distinctions

form one of the most prominent characteristics of Russian society.

In a few days he learns to distinguish the various classes by their

outward appearance.  He easily recognises the French-speaking

nobles in West-European costume; the burly, bearded merchant in

black cloth cap and long, shiny, double-breasted coat; the priest

with his uncut hair and flowing robes; the peasant with his full,

fair beard and unsavoury, greasy sheepskin.  Meeting everywhere

those well-marked types, he naturally assumes that Russian society

is composed of exclusive castes; and this first impression will be

fully confirmed by a glance at the Code.  On examining that

monumental work, he finds that an entire volume--and by no means

the smallest--is devoted to the rights and obligations of the

various classes.  From this he concludes that the classes have a

legal as well as an actual existence.  To make assurance doubly

sure he turns to official statistics, and there he finds the

following table:





Hereditary nobles........652,887

Personal nobles..........374,367

Clerical classes.........695,905

Town classes...........7,196,005

Rural classes.........63,840,291

Military classes.......4,767,703

Foreigners...............153,185

                      ----------

                      77,680,293*





* Livron: "Statistitcheskoe Obozrenie Rossiiskoi Imperii," St.

Petersburg, 1875.  The above figures include the whole Empire.  The

figures according to the latest census (1897) are not yet

available.





Armed with these materials, the traveller goes to his Russian

friends who have assured him that their country knows nothing of

class distinctions.  He is confident of being able to convince them

that they have been labouring under a strange delusion, but he will

be disappointed.  They will tell him that these laws and statistics

prove nothing, and that the categories therein mentioned are mere

administrative fictions.



This apparent contradiction is to be explained by the equivocal

meaning of the Russian terms Sosloviya and Sostoyaniya, which are

commonly translated "social classes."  If by these terms are meant

"castes" in the Oriental sense, then it may be confidently asserted

that such do not exist in Russia.  Between the nobles, the clergy,

the burghers, and the peasants there are no distinctions of race

and no impassable barriers.  The peasant often becomes a merchant,

and there are many cases on record of peasants and sons of parish

priests becoming nobles.  Until very recently the parish clergy

composed, as we have seen, a peculiar and exclusive class, with

many of the characteristics of a caste; but this has been changed,

and it may now be said that in Russia there are no castes in the

Oriental sense.



If the word Sosloviya be taken to mean an organised political unit

with an esprit de corps and a clearly conceived political aim, it

may likewise be admitted that there are none in Russia.  As there

has been for centuries no political life among the subjects of the

Tsars, there have been no political parties.



On the other hand, to say that social classes have never existed in

Russia and that the categories which appear in the legislation and

in the official statistics are mere administrative fictions, is a

piece of gross exaggeration.



From the very beginning of Russian history we can detect

unmistakably the existence of social classes, such as the Princes,

the Boyars, the armed followers of the Princes, the peasantry, the

slaves, and various others; and one of the oldest legal documents

which we possess--the "Russian Right" (Russkaya Pravda) of the

Grand Prince Yaroslaff (1019-1054)--contains irrefragable proof, in

the penalties attached to various crimes, that these classes were

formally recognised by the legislation.  Since that time they have

frequently changed their character, but they have never at any

period ceased to exist.



In ancient times, when there was very little administrative

regulation, the classes had perhaps no clearly defined boundaries,

and the peculiarities which distinguished them from each other were

actual rather than legal--lying in the mode of life and social

position rather than in peculiar obligations and privileges.  But

as the autocratic power developed and strove to transform the

nation into a State with a highly centralised administration, the

legal element in the social distinctions became more and more

prominent.  For financial and other purposes the people had to be

divided into various categories.  The actual distinctions were of

course taken as the basis of the legal classification, but the

classifying had more than a merely formal significance.  The

necessity of clearly defining the different groups entailed the

necessity of elevating and strengthening the barriers which already

existed between them, and the difficulty of passing from one group

to another was thereby increased.



In this work of classification Peter the Great especially

distinguished himself.  With his insatiable passion for regulation,

he raised formidable barriers between the different categories, and

defined the obligations of each with microscopic minuteness.  After

his death the work was carried on in the same spirit, and the

tendency reached its climax in the reign of Nicholas, when the

number of students to be received in the universities was

determined by Imperial ukaz!



In the reign of Catherine a new element was introduced into the

official conception of social classes.  Down to her time the

Government had thought merely of class obligations; under the

influence of Western ideas she introduced the conception of class

rights.  She wished, as we have seen, to have in her Empire a

Noblesse and tiers-etat like those which existed in France, and for

this purpose she granted, first to the Dvoryanstvo and afterwards

to the towns, an Imperial Charter, or Bill of Rights.  Succeeding

sovereigns have acted in the same spirit, and the Code now confers

on each class numerous privileges as well as numerous obligations.



Thus, we see, the oft-repeated assertion that the Russian social

classes are simply artificial categories created by the legislature

is to a certain extent true, but is by no means accurate.  The

social groups, such as peasants, landed proprietors, and the like,

came into existence in Russia, as in other countries, by the simple

force of circumstances.  The legislature merely recognised and

developed the social distinctions which already existed.  The legal

status, obligations, and rights of each group were minutely defined

and regulated, and legal barriers were added to the actual barriers

which separated the groups from each other.



What is peculiar in the historical development of Russia is this:

until lately she remained an almost exclusively agricultural Empire

with abundance of unoccupied land.  Her history presents,

therefore, few of those conflicts which result from the variety of

social conditions and the intensified struggle for existence.

Certain social groups were, indeed, formed in the course of time,

but they were never allowed to fight out their own battles.  The

irresistible autocratic power kept them always in check and

fashioned them into whatever form it thought proper, defining

minutely and carefully their obligations, their rights, their

mutual relations, and their respective positions in the political

organisation.  Hence we find in the history of Russia almost no

trace of those class hatreds which appear so conspicuously in the

history of Western Europe.*





* This is, I believe, the true explanation of an important fact,

which the Slavophils endeavoured to explain by an ill-authenticated

legend (vide supra p.151).





The practical consequence of all this is that in Russia at the

present day there is very little caste spirit or caste prejudice.

Within half-a-dozen years after the emancipation of the serfs,

proprietors and peasants, forgetting apparently their old

relationship of master and serf, were working amicably together in

the new local administration, and not a few similar curious facts

might be cited.  The confident anticipation of many Russians that

their country will one day enjoy political life without political

parties is, if not a contradiction in terms, at least a Utopian

absurdity; but we may be sure that when political parties do appear

they will be very different from those which exist in Germany,

France, and England.



Meanwhile, let us see how the country is governed without political

parties and without political life in the West-European sense of

the term.  This will form the subject of our next chapter.

