





CHAPTER XXII



PROPRIETORS OF THE MODERN SCHOOL





A Russian Petit Maitre--His House and Surroundings--Abortive

Attempts to Improve Agriculture and the Condition of the Serfs-- A

Comparison--A "Liberal" Tchinovnik--His Idea of Progress--A Justice

of the Peace--His Opinion of Russian Literature, Tchinovniks, and

Petits Maitres--His Supposed and Real Character--An Extreme

Radical--Disorders in the Universities--Administrative Procedure--

Russia's Capacity for Accomplishing Political and Social

Evolutions--A Court Dignitary in his Country House.





Hitherto I have presented to the reader old-fashioned types which

were common enough thirty years ago, when I first resided in

Russia, but which are rapidly disappearing.  Let me now present a

few of the modern school.



In the same district as Ivan Ivan'itch and the General lives Victor

Alexandr'itch L----.  As we approach his house we can at once

perceive that he differs from the majority of his neighbours.  The

gate is painted and moves easily on its hinges, the fence is in

good repair, the short avenue leading up to the front door is well

kept, and in the garden we can perceive at a glance that more

attention is paid to flowers than to vegetables.  The house is of

wood, and not large, but it has some architectural pretensions in

the form of a great, pseudo-Doric wooden portico that covers three-

fourths of the façade.  In the interior we remark everywhere the

influence of Western civilisation.  Victor Alexandr'itch is by no

means richer than Ivan Ivan'itch, but his rooms are much more

luxuriously furnished.  The furniture is of a lighter model, more

comfortable, and in a much better state of preservation.  Instead

of the bare, scantily furnished sitting-room, with the old-

fashioned barrel-organ which played only six airs, we find an

elegant drawing-room, with a piano by one of the most approved

makers, and numerous articles of foreign manufacture, comprising a

small buhl table and two bits of genuine old Wedgwood.  The

servants are clean, and dressed in European costume.  The master,

too, is very different in appearance.  He pays great attention to

his toilette, wearing a dressing-gown only in the early morning,

and a fashionable lounging coat during the rest of the day.  The

Turkish pipes which his grandfather loved he holds in abhorrence,

and habitually smokes cigarettes.  With his wife and daughters he

always speaks French, and calls them by French or English names.



But the part of the house which most strikingly illustrates the

difference between old and new is "le cabinet de monsieur."  In the

cabinet of Ivan Ivan'itch the furniture consists of a broad sofa

which serves as a bed, a few deal chairs, and a clumsy deal table,

on which are generally to be found a bundle of greasy papers, an

old chipped ink-bottle, a pen, and a calendar.  The cabinet of

Victor Alexandr'itch has an entirely different appearance.  It is

small, but at once comfortable and elegant.  The principal objects

which it contains are a library-table, with ink-stand, presse-

papier, paper-knives, and other articles in keeping, and in the

opposite corner a large bookcase.  The collection of books is

remarkable, not from the number of volumes or the presence of rare

editions, but from the variety of the subjects.  History, art,

fiction, the drama, political economy, and agriculture are

represented in about equal proportions.  Some of the works are in

Russian, others in German, a large number in French, and a few in

Italian.  The collection illustrates the former life and present

occupations of the owner.



The father of Victor Alexandr'itch was a landed proprietor who had

made a successful career in the civil service, and desired that his

son should follow the same profession.  For this purpose Victor was

first carefully trained at home, and then sent to the University of

Moscow, where he spent four years as a student of law.  From the

University he passed to the Ministry of the Interior in St.

Petersburg, but he found the monotonous routine of official life

not at all suited to his taste, and very soon sent in his

resignation.  The death of his father had made him proprietor of an

estate, and thither he retired, hoping to find there plenty of

occupation more congenial than the writing of official papers.



At the University of Moscow he had attended lectures on history and

philosophy, and had got through a large amount of desultory

reading.  The chief result of his studies was the acquisition of

many ill-digested general principles, and certain vague, generous,

humanitarian aspirations.  With this intellectual capital he hoped

to lead a useful life in the country.  When he had repaired and

furnished the house he set himself to improve the estate.  In the

course of his promiscuous reading he had stumbled on some

descriptions of English and Tuscan agriculture, and had there

learned what wonders might be effected by a rational system of

farming.  Why should not Russia follow the example of England and

Tuscany?  By proper drainage, plentiful manure, good ploughs, and

the cultivation of artificial grasses, the production might be

multiplied tenfold; and by the introduction of agricultural

machines the manual labour might be greatly diminished.  All this

seemed as simple as a sum in arithmetic, and Victor Alexandr'itch,

more scholarum rei familiaris ignarus, without a moment's

hesitation expended his ready money in procuring from England a

threshing-machine, ploughs, harrows, and other implements of the

newest model.



The arrival of these was an event that was long remembered.  The

peasants examined them with attention, not unmixed with wonder, but

said nothing.  When the master explained to them the advantages of

the new instruments, they still remained silent.  Only one old man,

gazing at the threshing-machine, remarked, in an audible "aside,"

"A cunning people, these Germans!"*  On being asked for their

opinion, they replied vaguely, "How should we know?  It OUGHT to be

so."  But when their master had retired, and was explaining to his

wife and the French governess that the chief obstacle to progress

in Russia was the apathetic indolence and conservative spirit of

the peasantry, they expressed their opinions more freely.  "These

may be all very well for the Germans, but they won't do for us.

How are our little horses to drag these big ploughs?  And as for

that [the threshing-machine], it's of no use."  Further examination

and reflection confirmed this first impression, and it was

unanimously decided that no good would come of the new-fangled

inventions.





* The Russian peasant comprehends all the inhabitants of Western

Europe under the term Nyemtsi, which in the language of the

educated designates only Germans.  The rest of humanity is composed

of Pravoslavniye (Greek Orthodox), Busurmanye (Mahometans), and

Poliacki (Poles).





These apprehensions proved to be only too well founded.  The

ploughs were much too heavy for the peasants' small horses, and the

threshing-machine broke down at the first attempt to use it.  For

the purchase of lighter implements or stronger horses there was no

ready money, and for the repairing of the threshing-machine there

was not an engineer within a radius of a hundred and fifty miles.

The experiment was, in short, a complete failure, and the new

purchases were put away out of sight.



For some weeks after this incident Victor Alexandr'itch felt very

despondent, and spoke more than usual about the apathy and

stupidity of the peasantry.  His faith in infallible science was

somewhat shaken, and his benevolent aspirations were for a time

laid aside.  But this eclipse of faith was not of long duration.

Gradually he recovered his normal condition, and began to form new

schemes.  From the study of certain works on political economy he

learned that the system of communal property was ruinous to the

fertility of the soil, and that free labour was always more

productive than serfage.  By the light of these principles he

discovered why the peasantry in Russia were so poor, and by what

means their condition could he ameliorated.  The Communal land

should he divided into family lots, and the serfs, instead of being

forced to work for the proprietor, should pay a yearly sum as rent.

The advantages of this change he perceived clearly--as clearly as

he had formerly perceived the advantages of English agricultural

implements--and he determined to make the experiment on his own

estate.



His first step was to call together the more intelligent and

influential of his serfs, and to explain to them his project; but

his efforts at explanation were eminently unsuccessful.  Even with

regard to ordinary current affairs he could not express himself in

that simple, homely language with which alone the peasants are

familiar, and when he spoke on abstract subjects he naturally

became quite unintelligible to his uneducated audience.  The serfs

listened attentively, but understood nothing.  He might as well

have spoken to them, as he often did in another kind of society,

about the comparative excellence of Italian and German music.  At a

second attempt he had rather more success.  The peasants came to

understand that what he wished was to break up the Mir, or rural

Commune, and to put them all on obrok--that is to say, make them

pay a yearly sum instead of giving him a certain amount of

agricultural labour.  Much to his astonishment, his scheme did not

meet with any sympathy.  As to being put on obrok, the serfs did

not much object, though they preferred to remain as they were; but

his proposal to break up the Mir astonished and bewildered them.

They regarded it as a sea-captain might regard the proposal of a

scientific wiseacre to knock a hole in the ship's bottom in order

to make her sail faster.  Though they did not say much, he was

intelligent enough to see that they would offer a strenuous passive

resistance, and as he did not wish to act tyrannically, he let the

matter drop.  Thus a second benevolent scheme was shipwrecked.

Many other schemes had a similar fate, and Victor Alexandr'itch

began to perceive that it was very difficult to do good in this

world, especially when the persons to be benefited were Russian

peasants.



In reality the fault lay less with the serfs than with their

master.  Victor Alexandr'itch was by no means a stupid man.  On the

contrary, he had more than average talents.  Few men were more

capable of grasping a new idea and forming a scheme for its

realisation, and few men could play more dexterously with abstract

principles.  What he wanted was the power of dealing with concrete

facts.  The principles which he had acquired from University

lectures and desultory reading were far too vague and abstract for

practical use.  He had studied abstract science without gaining any

technical knowledge of details, and consequently when he stood face

to face with real life he was like a student who, having studied

mechanics in text-books, is suddenly placed in a workshop and

ordered to construct a machine.  Only there was one difference:

Victor Alexandr'itch was not ordered to do anything.  Voluntarily,

without any apparent necessity, he set himself to work with tools

which he could not handle.  It was this that chiefly puzzled the

peasants.  Why should he trouble himself with these new schemes,

when he might live comfortably as he was?  In some of his projects

they could detect a desire to increase the revenue, but in others

they could discover no such motive.  In these latter they

attributed his conduct to pure caprice, and put it into the same

category as those mad pranks in which proprietors of jovial humour

sometimes indulged.



In the last years of serfage there were a good many landed

proprietors like Victor Alexandr'itch--men who wished to do

something beneficent, and did not know how to do it.  When serfage

was being abolished the majority of these men took an active part

in the great work and rendered valuable service to their country.

Victor Alexandr'itch acted otherwise.  At first he sympathised

warmly with the proposed emancipation and wrote several articles on

the advantages of free labour, but when the Government took the

matter into its own hands he declared that the officials had

deceived and slighted the Noblesse, and he went over to the

opposition.  Before the Imperial Edict was signed he went abroad,

and travelled for three years in Germany, France, and Italy.

Shortly after his return he married a pretty, accomplished young

lady, the daughter of an eminent official in St. Petersburg, and

since that time he has lived in his country-house.



Though a man of education and culture, Victor Alexandr'itch spends

his time in almost as indolent a way as the men of the old school.

He rises somewhat later, and instead of sitting by the open window

and gazing into the courtyard, he turns over the pages of a book or

periodical.  Instead of dining at midday and supping at nine

o'clock, he takes dejeuner at twelve and dines at five.  He spends

less time in sitting in the verandah and pacing up and down with

his hands behind his back, for he can vary the operation of time-

killing by occasionally writing a letter, or by standing behind his

wife at the piano while she plays selections from Mozart and

Beethoven.  But these peculiarities are merely variations in

detail.  If there is any essential difference between the lives of

Victor Alexandr'itch and of Ivan Ivan'itch, it is in the fact that

the former never goes out into the fields to see how the work is

done, and never troubles himself with the state of the weather, the

condition of the crops, and cognate subjects.  He leaves the

management of his estate entirely to his steward, and refers to

that personage all peasants who come to him with complaints or

petitions.  Though he takes a deep interest in the peasant as an

impersonal, abstract entity, and loves to contemplate concrete

examples of the genus in the works of certain popular authors, he

does not like to have any direct relations with peasants in the

flesh.  If he has to speak with them he always feels awkward, and

suffers from the odour of their sheepskins.  Ivan Ivan'itch is ever

ready to talk with the peasants, and give them sound, practical

advice or severe admonitions; and in the old times he was apt, in

moments of irritation, to supplement his admonitions by a free use

of his fists.  Victor Alexandr'itch, on the contrary, never could

give any advice except vague commonplace, and as to using his fist,

he would have shrunk from that, not only from respect to

humanitarian principles, but also from motives which belong to the

region of aesthetic sensitiveness.



This difference between the two men has an important influence on

their pecuniary affairs.  The stewards of both steal from their

masters; but that of Ivan Ivan'itch steals with difficulty, and to

a very limited extent, whereas that of Victor Alexandr'itch steals

regularly and methodically, and counts his gains, not by kopecks,

but by roubles.  Though the two estates are of about the same size

and value, they give a very different revenue.  The rough,

practical man has a much larger income than his elegant, well-

educated neighbour, and at the same time spends very much less.

The consequences of this, if not at present visible, must some day

become painfully apparent.  Ivan Ivan'itch will doubtless leave to

his children an unencumbered estate and a certain amount of

capital.  The children of Victor Alexandr'itch have a different

prospect.  He has already begun to mortgage his property and to cut

down the timber, and he always finds a deficit at the end of the

year.  What will become of his wife and children when the estate

comes to be sold for payment of the mortgage, it is difficult to

predict.  He thinks very little of that eventuality, and when his

thoughts happen to wander in that direction he consoles himself

with the thought that before the crash comes he will have inherited

a fortune from a rich uncle who has no children.



The proprietors of the old school lead the same uniform, monotonous

life year after year, with very little variation.  Victor

Alexandr'itch, on the contrary, feels the need of a periodical

return to "civilised society," and accordingly spends a few weeks

every winter in St. Petersburg.  During the summer months he has

the society of his brother--un homme tout a fait civilise--who

possesses an estate a few miles off.



This brother, Vladimir Alexandr'itch, was educated in the School of

Law in St. Petersburg, and has since risen rapidly in the service.

He holds now a prominent position in one of the Ministries, and has

the honourary court title of "Chambellan de sa Majeste."  He is a

marked man in the higher circles of the Administration, and will,

it is thought, some day become Minister.  Though an adherent of

enlightened views, and a professed "Liberal," he contrives to keep

on very good terms with those who imagine themselves to be

"Conservatives."  In this he is assisted by his soft, oily manner.

If you express an opinion to him he will always begin by telling

you that you are quite right; and if he ends by showing you that

you are quite wrong, he will at least make you feel that your error

is not only excusable, but in some way highly creditable to your

intellectual acuteness or goodness of heart.  In spite of his

Liberalism he is a staunch Monarchist, and considers that the time

has not yet come for the Emperor to grant a Constitution.  He

recognises that the present order of things has its defects, but

thinks that, on the whole, it acts very well, and would act much

better if certain high officials were removed, and more energetic

men put in their places.  Like all genuine St. Petersburg

tchinovniks (officials), he has great faith in the miraculous power

of Imperial ukazes and Ministerial circulars, and believes that

national progress consists in multiplying these documents, and

centralising the Administration, so as to give them more effect.

As a supplementary means of progress he highly approves of

aesthetic culture, and he can speak with some eloquence of the

humanising influence of the fine arts.  For his own part he is well

acquainted with French and English classics, and particularly

admires Macaulay, whom he declares to have been not only a great

writer, but also a great statesman.  Among writers of fiction he

gives the palm to George Eliot, and speaks of the novelists of his

own country, and, indeed, of Russian literature as a whole, in the

most disparaging terms.



A very different estimate of Russian literature is held by

Alexander Ivan'itch N----, formerly arbiter in peasant affairs, and

afterwards justice of the peace.  Discussions on this subject often

take place between the two.  The admirer of Macaulay declares that

Russia has, properly speaking, no literature whatever, and that the

works which bear the names of Russian authors are nothing but a

feeble echo of the literature of Western Europe.  "Imitators," he

is wont to say, "skilful imitators, we have produced in abundance.

But where is there a man of original genius?  What is our famous

poet Zhukofski?  A translator.  What is Pushkin?  A clever pupil of

the romantic school.  What is Lermontoff?  A feeble imitator of

Byron.  What is Gogol?"



At this point Alexander Ivan'itch invariable intervenes.  He is

ready to sacrifice all the pseudo-classic and romantic poetry, and,

in fact, the whole of Russian literature anterior to about the year

1840, but he will not allow anything disrespectful to be said of

Gogol, who about that time founded the Russian realistic school.

"Gogol," he holds, "was a great and original genius.  Gogol not

only created a new kind of literature; he at the same time

transformed the reading public, and inaugurated a new era in the

intellectual development of the nation.  By his humorous, satirical

sketches he swept away the metaphysical dreaming and foolish

romantic affectation then in fashion, and taught men to see their

country as it was, in all its hideous ugliness.  With his help the

young generation perceived the rottenness of the Administration,

and the meanness, stupidity, dishonesty, and worthlessness of the

landed proprietors, whom he made the special butt of his ridicule.

The recognition of defects produced a desire for reform.  From

laughing at the proprietors there was but one step to despising

them, and when we learned to despise the proprietors we naturally

came to sympathise with the serfs.  Thus the Emancipation was

prepared by the literature; and when the great question had to be

solved, it was the literature that discovered a satisfactory

solution."



This is a subject on which Alexander Ivan'itch feels very strongly,

and on which he always speaks with warmth.  He knows a good deal

regarding the intellectual movement which began about 1840, and

culminated in the great reforms of the sixties.  As a University

student he troubled himself very little with serious academic work,

but he read with intense interest all the leading periodicals, and

adopted the doctrine of Belinski that art should not be cultivated

for its own sake, but should be made subservient to social

progress.  This belief was confirmed by a perusal of some of George

Sand's earlier works, which were for him a kind of revelation.

Social questions engrossed his thoughts, and all other subjects

seemed puny by comparison.  When the Emancipation question was

raised he saw an opportunity of applying some of his theories, and

threw himself enthusiastically into the new movement as an ardent

abolitionist.  When the law was passed he helped to put it into

execution by serving for three years as an Arbiter of the Peace.

Now he is an old man, but he has preserved some of his youthful

enthusiasm, attends regularly the annual assemblies of the Zemstvo,

and takes a lively interest in all public affairs.



As an ardent partisan of local self-government he habitually scoffs

at the centralised bureaucracy, which he proclaims to be the great

bane of his unhappy country.  "These tchinovniks," he is wont to

say in moments of excitement, "who live in St. Petersburg and

govern the Empire, know about as much of Russia as they do of

China.  They live in a world of official documents, and are

hopelessly ignorant of the real wants and interests of the people.

So long as all the required formalities are duly observed they are

perfectly satisfied.  The people may be allowed to die of

starvation if only the fact do not appear in the official reports.

Powerless to do any good themselves, they are powerful enough to

prevent others from working for the public good, and are extremely

jealous of all private initiative.  How have they acted, for

instance, towards the Zemstvo?  The Zemstvo is really a good

institution, and might have done great things if it had been left

alone, but as soon as it began to show a little independent energy

the officials at once clipped its wings and then strangled it.

Towards the Press they have acted in the same way.  They are afraid

of the Press, because they fear above all things a healthy public

opinion, which the Press alone can create.  Everything that

disturbs the habitual routine alarms them.  Russia cannot make any

real progress so long as she is ruled by these cursed tchinovniks."



Scarcely less pernicious than the tchinovnik, in the eyes of our

would-be reformer, is the baritch--that is to say, the pampered,

capricious, spoiled child of mature years, whose life is spent in

elegant indolence and fine talking.  Our friend Victor

Alexandr'itch is commonly selected as a representative of this

type.  "Look at him!" exclaims Alexander Ivan'itch.  "What a

useless, contemptible member of society!  In spite of his generous

aspirations he never succeeds in doing anything useful to himself

or to others.  When the peasant question was raised and there was

work to be done, he went abroad and talked liberalism in Paris and

Baden-Baden.  Though he reads, or at least professes to read, books

on agriculture, and is always ready to discourse on the best means

of preventing the exhaustion of the soil, he knows less of farming

than a peasant-boy of twelve, and when he goes into the fields he

can hardly distinguish rye from oats.  Instead of babbling about

German and Italian music, he would do well to learn a little about

practical farming, and look after his estate."



Whilst Alexander Ivan'itch thus censures his neighbours, he is

himself not without detractors.  Some staid old proprietors regard

him as a dangerous man, and quote expressions of his which seem to

indicate that his notions of property are somewhat loose.  Many

consider that his liberalism is of a very violent kind, and that he

has strong republican sympathies.  In his decisions as Justice he

often leaned, it is said, to the side of the peasants against the

proprietors.  Then he was always trying to induce the peasants of

the neighbouring villages to found schools, and he had wonderful

ideas about the best method of teaching children.  These and

similar facts make many people believe that he has very advanced

ideas, and one old gentleman habitually calls him--half in joke and

half in earnest--"our friend the communist."



In reality Alexander Ivan'itch has nothing of the communist about

him.  Though he loudly denounces the tchinovnik spirit--or, as we

should say, red-tape in all its forms--and is an ardent partisan of

local self-government, he is one of the last men in the world to

take part in any revolutionary movement, he would like to see the

Central Government enlightened and controlled by public opinion and

by a national representation, but he believes that this can only be

effected by voluntary concessions on the part of the autocratic

power.  He has, perhaps, a sentimental love of the peasantry, and

is always ready to advocate its interests; but he has come too much

in contact with individual peasants to accept those idealised

descriptions in which some popular writers indulge, and it may

safely be asserted that the accusation of his voluntarily favouring

peasants at the expense of the proprietors is wholly unfounded.

Alexander Ivan'itch is, in fact, a quiet, sensible man, who is

capable of generous enthusiasm, and is not at all satisfied with

the existing state of things; but he is not a dreamer and a

revolutionnaire, as some of his neighbours assert.



I am afraid I cannot say as much for his younger brother Nikolai,

who lives with him.  Nikolai Ivan'itch is a tall, slender man,

about sixty years of age, with emaciated face, bilious complexion

and long black hair--evidently a person of excitable, nervous

temperament.  When he speaks he articulates rapidly, and uses more

gesticulation than is common among his countrymen.  His favourite

subject of conversation, or rather of discourse, for he more

frequently preaches than talks, is the lamentable state of the

country and the worthlessness of the Government.  Against the

Government he has a great many causes for complaint, and one or two

of a personal kind.  In 1861 he was a student in the University of

St. Petersburg.  At that time there was a great deal of public

excitement all over Russia, and especially in the capital.  The

serfs had just been emancipated, and other important reforms had

been undertaken.  There was a general conviction among the young

generation--and it must be added among many older men--that the

autocratic, paternal system of government was at an end, and that

Russia was about to be reorganised according to the most advanced

principles of political and social science.  The students, sharing

this conviction, wished to be freed from all academical authority,

and to organise a kind of academic self-government.  They desired

especially the right of holding public meetings for the discussion

of their common affairs.  The authorities would not allow this, and

issued a list of rules prohibiting meetings and raising the class-

fees, so as practically to exclude many of the poorer students.

This was felt to be a wanton insult to the spirit of the new era.

In spite of the prohibition, indignation meetings were held, and

fiery speeches made by male and female orators, first in the class-

rooms, and afterwards in the courtyard of the University.  On one

occasion a long procession marched through the principal streets to

the house of the Curator.  Never had such a spectacle been seen

before in St. Petersburg.  Timid people feared that it was the

commencement of a revolution, and dreamed about barricades.  At

last the authorities took energetic measures; about three hundred

students were arrested, and of these, thirty-two were expelled from

the University.



Among those who were expelled was Nicolai Ivan'itch.  All his hopes

of becoming a professor, as he had intended, were thereby

shipwrecked, and he had to look out for some other profession.  A

literary career now seemed the most promising, and certainly the

most congenial to his tastes.  It would enable him to gratify his

ambition of being a public man, and give him opportunities of

attacking and annoying his persecutors.  He had already written

occasionally for one of the leading periodicals, and now he became

a regular contributor.  His stock of positive knowledge was not

very large, but he had the power of writing fluently and of making

his readers believe that he had an unlimited store of political

wisdom which the Press-censure prevented him from publishing.

Besides this, he had the talent of saying sharp, satirical things

about those in authority, in such a way that even a Press censor

could not easily raise objections.  Articles written in this style

were sure at that time to be popular, and his had a very great

success.  He became a known man in literary circles, and for a time

all went well.  But gradually he became less cautious, whilst the

authorities became more vigilant.  Some copies of a violent

seditious proclamation fell into the hands of the police, and it

was generally believed that the document proceeded from the coterie

to which he belonged.  From that moment he was carefully watched,

till one night he was unexpectedly roused from his sleep by a

gendarme and conveyed to the fortress.



When a man is arrested in this way for a real or supposed political

offence, there are two modes of dealing with him.  He may be tried

before a regular tribunal, or he may be dealt with "by

administrative procedure" (administrativnym poryadkom).  In the

former case he will, if convicted, be condemned to imprisonment for

a certain term; or, if the offence be of a graver nature, he may be

transported to Siberia either for a fixed period or for life.  By

the administrative procedure he is simply removed without a trial

to some distant town, and compelled to live there under police

supervision during his Majesty's pleasure.  Nikolai Ivan'itch was

treated "administratively," because the authorities, though

convinced that he was a dangerous character, could not find

sufficient evidence to procure his conviction before a court of

justice.  For five years he lived under police supervision in a

small town near the White Sea, and then one day he was informed,

without any explanation, that he might go and live anywhere he

pleased except in St. Petersburg and Moscow.



Since that time he has lived with his brother, and spends his time

in brooding over his grievances and bewailing his shattered

illusions.  He has lost none of that fluency which gained him an

ephemeral literary reputation, and can speak by the hour on

political and social questions to any one who will listen to him.

It is extremely difficult, however, to follow his discourses, and

utterly impossible to retain them in the memory.  They belong to

what may be called political metaphysics--for though he professes

to hold metaphysics in abhorrence, he is himself a thorough

metaphysician in his modes of thought.  He lives, indeed, in a

world of abstract conceptions, in which he can scarcely perceive

concrete facts, and his arguments are always a kind of clever

juggling with such equivocal, conventional terms as aristocracy,

bourgeoisie, monarchy, and the like.  At concrete facts he arrives,

not directly by observation, but by deductions from general

principles, so that his facts can never by any possibility

contradict his theories.  Then he has certain axioms which he

tacitly assumes, and on which all his arguments are based; as, for

instance, that everything to which the term "liberal" can be

applied must necessarily be good at all times and under all

conditions.



Among a mass of vague conceptions which it is impossible to reduce

to any clearly defined form he has a few ideas which are perhaps

not strictly true, but which are at least intelligible.  Among

these is his conviction that Russia has let slip a magnificent

opportunity of distancing all Europe on the road of progress.  She

might, he thinks, at the time of the Emancipation, have boldly

accepted all the most advanced principles of political and social

science, and have completely reorganised the political and social

structure in accordance with them.  Other nations could not take

such a step, because they are old and decrepit, filled with

stubborn, hereditary prejudices, and cursed with an aristocracy and

a bourgeoisie; but Russia is young, knows nothing of social castes,

and has no deep-rooted prejudices to contend with.  The population

is like potter's clay, which can be made to assume any form that

science may recommend.  Alexander II. began a magnificent

sociological experiment, but he stopped half-way.



Some day, he believes, the experiment will be completed, but not by

the autocratic power.  In his opinion autocracy is "played out,"

and must give way to Parliamentary institutions.  For him a

Constitution is a kind of omnipotent fetish.  You may try to

explain to him that a Parliamentary regime, whatever its advantages

may be, necessarily produces political parties and political

conflicts, and is not nearly so suitable for grand sociological

experiments as a good paternal despotism.  You may try to convince

him that, though it may be difficult to convert an autocrat, it is

infinitely more difficult to convert a House of Commons.  But all

your efforts will be in vain.  He will assure you that a Russian

Parliament would be something quite different from what Parliaments

commonly are.  It would contain no parties, for Russia has no

social castes, and would be guided entirely by scientific

considerations--as free from prejudice and personal influences as a

philosopher speculating on the nature of the Infinite!  In short,

he evidently imagines that a national Parliament would be composed

of himself and his friends, and that the nation would calmly submit

to their ukazes, as it has hitherto submitted to the ukazes of the

Tsars.



Pending the advent of this political Millennium, when unimpassioned

science is to reign supreme, Nikolai Ivan'itch allows himself the

luxury of indulging in some very decided political animosities, and

he hates with the fervour of a fanatic.  Firstly and chiefly, he

hates what he calls the bourgeoisie--he is obliged to use the

French word, because his native language does not contain an

equivalent term--and especially capitalists of all sorts and

dimensions.  Next, he hates aristocracy, especially a form of

aristocracy called Feudalism.  To these abstract terms he does not

attach a very precise meaning, but he hates the entities which they

are supposed to represent quite as heartily as if they were

personal enemies.  Among the things which he hates in his own

country, the Autocratic Power holds the first place.  Next, as an

emanation from the Autocratic Power, come the tchinovniks, and

especially the gendarmes.  Then come the landed proprietors.

Though he is himself a landed proprietor, he regards the class as

cumberers of the ground, and thinks that all their land should be

confiscated and distributed among the peasantry.



All proprietors have the misfortune to come under his sweeping

denunciations, because they are inconsistent with his ideal of a

peasant Empire, but he recognises amongst them degrees of

depravity.  Some are simply obstructive, whilst others are actively

prejudicial to the public welfare.  Among these latter a special

object of aversion is Prince S----, because he not only possesses

very large estates, but at the same time has aristocratic

pretensions, and calls himself Conservative.



Prince S---- is by far the most important man in the district.  His

family is one of the oldest in the country, but he does not owe his

influence to his pedigree, for pedigree pure and simple does not

count for much in Russia.  He is influential and respected because

he is a great land-holder with a high official position, and

belongs by birth to that group of families which forms the

permanent nucleus of the ever-changing Court society.  His father

and grandfather were important personages in the Administration and

at Court, and his sons and grandsons will probably in this respect

follow in the footsteps of their ancestors.  Though in the eye of

the law all nobles are equal, and, theoretically speaking,

promotion is gained exclusively by personal merit, yet, in reality,

those who have friends at Court rise more easily and more rapidly.



The Prince has had a prosperous but not very eventful life.  He was

educated, first at home, under an English tutor, and afterwards in

the Corps des Pages.  On leaving this institution he entered a

regiment of the Guards, and rose steadily to high military rank.

His activity, however, has been chiefly in the civil

administration, and he now has a seat in the Council of State.

Though he has always taken a certain interest in public affairs, he

did not play an important part in any of the great reforms.  When

the peasant question was raised he sympathised with the idea of

Emancipation, but did not at all sympathise with the idea of giving

land to the emancipated serfs and preserving the Communal

institutions.  What he desired was that the proprietors should

liberate their serfs without any pecuniary indemnity, and should

receive in return a certain share of political power.  His scheme

was not adopted, but he has not relinquished the hope that the

great landed proprietors may somehow obtain a social and political

position similar to that of the great land-owners in England.



Official duties and social relations compel the Prince to live for

a large part of the year in the capital.  He spends only a few

weeks yearly on his estate.  The house is large, and fitted up in

the English style, with a view to combining elegance and comfort.

It contains several spacious apartments, a library, and a billiard-

room.  There is an extensive park, an immense garden with hot

houses, numerous horses and carriages, and a legion of servants.

In the drawing-room is a plentiful supply of English and French

books, newspapers, and periodicals, including the Journal de St.

Petersbourg, which gives the news of the day.



The family have, in short, all the conveniences and comforts which

money and refinement can procure, but it cannot be said that they

greatly enjoy the time spent in the country.  The Princess has no

decided objection to it.  She is devoted to a little grandchild, is

fond of reading and correspondence, amuses herself with a school

and hospital which she has founded for the peasantry, and

occasionally drives over to see her friend, the Countess N----, who

lives about fifteen miles off.



The Prince, however, finds country life excessively dull.  He does

not care for riding or shooting, and he finds nothing else to do.

He knows nothing about the management of his estate, and holds

consultations with the steward merely pro forma--this estate and

the others which he possesses in different provinces being ruled by

a head-steward in St. Petersburg, in whom he has the most complete

confidence.  In the vicinity there is no one with whom he cares to

associate.  Naturally he is not a sociable man, and he has acquired

a stiff, formal, reserved manner that is rarely met with in Russia.

This manner repels the neighbouring proprietors--a fact that he

does not at all regret, for they do not belong to his monde, and

they have in their manners and habits a free-and-easy rusticity

which is positively disagreeable to him.  His relations with them

are therefore confined to formal calls.  The greater part of the

day he spends in listless loitering, frequently yawning, regretting

the routine of St. Petersburg life--the pleasant chats with his

colleagues, the opera, the ballet, the French theatre, and the

quiet rubber at the Club Anglais.  His spirits rise as the day of

his departure approaches, and when he drives off to the station he

looks bright and cheerful.  If he consulted merely his own tastes

he would never visit his estates at all, and would spend his summer

holidays in Germany, France, or Switzerland, as he did in his

bachelor days; but as a large landowner he considers it right to

sacrifice his personal inclinations to the duties of his position.



There is, by the way, another princely magnate in the district, and

I ought perhaps to introduce him to my readers, because he

represents worthily a new type.  Like Prince S----, of whom I have

just spoken, he is a great land-owner and a descendant of the half-

mythical Rurik; but he has no official rank, and does not possess a

single grand cordon.  In that respect he has followed in the

footsteps of his father and grandfather, who had something of the

frondeur spirit, and preferred the position of a grand seigneur and

a country gentleman to that of a tchinovnik and a courtier.  In the

Liberal camp he is regarded as a Conservative, but he has little in

common with the Krepostnik, who declares that the reforms of the

last half-century were a mistake, that everything is going to the

bad, that the emancipated serfs are all sluggards, drunkards, and

thieves, that the local self-government is an ingenious machine for

wasting money, and that the reformed law-courts have conferred

benefits only on the lawyers.  On the contrary, he recognises the

necessity and beneficent results of the reforms, and with regard to

the future he has none of the despairing pessimism of the

incorrigible old Tory.



But in order that real progress should be made, he thinks that

certain current and fashionable errors must be avoided, and among

these errors he places, in the first rank, the views and principles

of the advanced Liberals, who have a blind admiration for Western

Europe, and for what they are pleased to call the results of

science.  Like the Liberals of the West, these gentlemen assume

that the best form of government is constitutionalism, monarchical

or republican, on a broad democratic basis, and towards the

realisation of this ideal all their efforts are directed.  Not so

our Conservative friend.  While admitting that democratic

Parliamentary institutions may be the best form of government for

the more advanced nations of the West, he maintains that the only

firm foundation for the Russian Empire, and the only solid

guarantee of its future prosperity, is the Autocratic Power, which

is the sole genuine representative of the national spirit.  Looking

at the past from this point of view, he perceives that the Tsars

have ever identified themselves with the nation, and have always

understood, in part instinctively and in part by reflection, what

the nation really required.  Whenever the infiltration of Western

ideas threatened to swamp the national individuality, the

Autocratic Power intervened and averted the danger by timely

precautions.  Something of the kind may be observed, he believes,

at present, when the Liberals are clamouring for a Parliament and a

Constitution; but the Autocratic Power is on the alert, and is

making itself acquainted with the needs of the people by means far

more effectual than could be supplied by oratorical politicians.



With the efforts of the Zemstvo in this direction, and with the

activity of the Zemstvo generally, the Prince has little sympathy,

partly because the institution is in the hands of the Liberals and

is guided by their unpractical ideas, and partly because it enables

some ambitious outsiders to acquire the influence in local affairs

which ought to be exercised by the old-established noble families

of the neighbourhood.  What he would like to see is an enlightened,

influential gentry working in conjunction with the Autocratic Power

for the good of the country.  If Russia could produce a few hundred

thousand men like himself, his ideal might perhaps be realised.

For the present, such men are extremely rare--I should have

difficulty in naming a dozen of them--and aristocratic ideas are

extremely unpopular among the great majority of the educated

classes.  When a Russian indulges in political speculation, he is

pretty sure to show himself thoroughly democratic, with a strong

leaning to socialism.



The Prince belongs to the highest rank of the Russian Noblesse.  If

we wish to get an idea of the lowest rank, we can find in the

neighbourhood a number of poor, uneducated men, who live in small,

squalid houses, and are not easily to be distinguished from

peasants.  They are nobles, like his Highness; but, unlike him,

they enjoy no social consideration, and their landed property

consists of a few acres of land which barely supply them with the

first necessaries of life.  If we went to other parts of the

country we might find men in this condition bearing the title of

Prince!  This is the natural result of the Russian law of

inheritance, which does not recognise the principle of

primogeniture with regard to titles and estates.  All the sons of a

Prince are Princes, and at his death his property, movable and

immovable, is divided amongst them.
