






CHAPTER XXVIII



THE SERFS





The Rural Population in Ancient Times--The Peasantry in the

Eighteenth Century--How Was This Change Effected?--The Common

Explanation Inaccurate--Serfage the Result of Permanent Economic

and Political Causes--Origin of the Adscriptio Glebae--Its

Consequences--Serf Insurrection--Turning-point in the History of

Serfage--Serfage in Russia and in Western Europe--State Peasants--

Numbers and Geographical Distribution of the Serf Population--Serf

Dues--Legal and Actual Power of the Proprietors--The Serfs' Means

of Defence--Fugitives--Domestic Serfs--Strange Advertisements in

the Moscow Gazette--Moral Influence of Serfage.





Before proceeding to describe the Emancipation, it may be well to

explain briefly how the Russian peasants became serfs, and what

serfage in Russia really was.



In the earliest period of Russian history the rural population was

composed of three distinct classes.  At the bottom of the scale

stood the slaves, who were very numerous.  Their numbers were

continually augmented by prisoners of war, by freemen who

voluntarily sold themselves as slaves, by insolvent debtors, and by

certain categories of criminals.  Immediately above the slaves were

the free agricultural labourers, who had no permanent domicile, but

wandered about the country and settled temporarily where they

happened to find work and satisfactory remuneration.  In the third

place, distinct from these two classes, and in some respects higher

in the social scale, were the peasants properly so called.*





* My chief authority for the early history of the peasantry has

been Belaef, "Krestyanye na Rusi," Moscow, 1860; a most able and

conscientious work.





These peasants proper, who may be roughly described as small

farmers or cottiers, were distinguished from the free agricultural

labourers in two respects: they were possessors of land in property

or usufruct, and they were members of a rural Commune.  The

Communes were free primitive corporations which elected their

office-bearers from among the heads of families, and sent delegates

to act as judges or assessors in the Prince's Court.  Some of the

Communes possessed land of their own, whilst others were settled on

the estates of the landed proprietors or on the extensive domains

of the monasteries.  In the latter case the peasant paid a fixed

yearly rent in money, in produce, or in labour, according to the

terms of his contract with the proprietor or the monastery; but he

did not thereby sacrifice in any way his personal liberty.  As soon

as he had fulfilled the engagements stipulated in the contract and

had settled accounts with the owner of the land, he was free to

change his domicile as he pleased.



If we turn now from these early times to the eighteenth century, we

find that the position of the rural population has entirely changed

in the interval.  The distinction between slaves, agricultural

labourers, and peasants has completely disappeared.  All three

categories have melted together into a common class, called serfs,

who are regarded as the property of the landed proprietors or of

the State.  "The proprietors sell their peasants and domestic

servants not even in families, but one by one, like cattle, as is

done nowhere else in the whole world, from which practice there is

not a little wailing."*  And yet the Government, whilst professing

to regret the existence of the practice, takes no energetic

measures to prevent it.  On the contrary, it deprives the serfs of

all legal protection, and expressly commands that if any serf shall

dare to present a petition against his master, he shall be punished

with the knout and transported for life to the mines of Nertchinsk.

(Ukaz of August 22d, 1767.**)





* These words are taken from an Imperial ukaz of April 15th, 1721.

Polnoye Sobranye Zakonov, No. 3,770.



** This is an ukaz of the liberal and tolerant Catherine!  How she

reconciled it with her respect and admiration for Beccaria's humane

views on criminal law she does not explain.





How did this important change take place, and how is it to be

explained?



If we ask any educated Russian who has never specially occupied

himself with historical investigations regarding the origin of

serfage in Russia, he will probably reply somewhat in this fashion:



"In Russia slavery has never existed (!), and even serfage in the

West-European sense has never been recognised by law!  In ancient

times the rural population was completely free, and every peasant

might change his domicile on St. George's Day--that is to say, at

the end of the agricultural year.  This right of migration was

abolished by Tsar Boris Godunof--who, by the way, was half a Tartar

and more than half a usurper--and herein lies the essence of

serfage in the Russian sense.  The peasants have never been the

property of the landed proprietors, but have always been personally

free; and the only legal restriction on their liberty was that they

were not allowed to change their domicile without the permission of

the proprietor.  If so-called serfs were sometimes sold, the

practice was simply an abuse not justified by legislation."



This simple explanation, in which may be detected a note of

patriotic pride, is almost universally accepted in Russia; but it

contains, like most popular conceptions of the distant past, a

curious mixture of fact and fiction.  Serious historical

investigation tends to show that the power of the proprietors over

the peasants came into existence, not suddenly, as the result of an

ukaz, but gradually, as a consequence of permanent economic and

political causes, and that Boris Godunof was not more to blame than

many of his predecessors and successors.*





* See especially Pobedonostsef, in the Russki Vestnik, 1858, No.

11, and "Istoritcheskiya izsledovaniya i statyi" (St. Petersburg,

1876), by the same author; also Pogodin, in the Russkaya Beseda,

1858, No. 4.





Although the peasants in ancient Russia were free to wander about

as they chose, there appeared at a very early period--long before

the reign of Boris Godunof--a decided tendency in the Princes, in

the proprietors, and in the Communes, to prevent migration.  This

tendency will be easily understood if we remember that land without

labourers is useless, and that in Russia at that time the

population was small in comparison with the amount of reclaimed and

easily reclaimable land.  The Prince desired to have as many

inhabitants as possible in his principality, because the amount of

his regular revenues depended on the number of the population.  The

landed proprietor desired to have as many peasants as possible on

his estate, to till for him the land which he reserved for his own

use, and to pay him for the remainder a yearly rent in money,

produce, or labour.  The free Communes desired to have a number of

members sufficient to keep the whole of the Communal land under

cultivation, because each Commune had to pay yearly to the Prince a

fixed sum in money or agricultural produce, and the greater the

number of able-bodied members, the less each individual had to pay.

To use the language of political economy, the Princes, the landed

proprietors, and the free Communes all appeared as buyers in the

labour market; and the demand was far in excess of the supply.

Nowadays when young colonies or landed proprietors in an outlying

corner of the world are similarly in need of labour, they seek to

supply the want by organising a regular system of importing

labourers--using illegal violent means, such as kidnapping

expeditions, merely as an exceptional expedient.  In old Russia any

such regularly organised system was impossible, and consequently

illegal or violent measures were not the exception, but the rule.

The chief practical advantage of the frequent military expeditions

for those who took part in them was the acquisition of prisoners of

war, who were commonly transformed into slaves by their captors.

If it be true, as some assert, that only unbaptised prisoners were

legally considered lawful booty, it is certain that in practice,

before the unification of the principalities under the Tsars of

Moscow, little distinction was made in this respect between

unbaptised foreigners and Orthodox Russians.*  A similar method was

sometimes employed for the acquisition of free peasants: the more

powerful proprietors organised kidnapping expeditions, and carried

off by force the peasants settled on the land of their weaker

neighbours.





* On this subject see Tchitcherin, "Opyty po istorii Russkago

prava," Moscow, 1858, p. 162 et seq.; and Lokhvitski, "O plennykh

po drevnemu Russkomu pravu," Moscow, 1855.





Under these circumstances it was only natural that those who

possessed this valuable commodity should do all in their power to

keep it.  Many, if not all, of the free Communes adopted the simple

measure of refusing to allow a member to depart until he had found

some one to take his place.  The proprietors never, so far as we

know, laid down formally such a principle, but in practice they did

all in their power to retain the peasants actually settled on their

estates.  For this purpose some simply employed force, whilst

others acted under cover of legal formalities.  The peasant who

accepted land from a proprietor rarely brought with him the

necessary implements, cattle, and capital to begin at once his

occupations, and to feed himself and his family till the ensuing

harvest.  He was obliged, therefore, to borrow from his landlord,

and the debt thus contracted was easily converted into a means of

preventing his departure if he wished to change his domicile.  We

need not enter into further details.  The proprietors were the

capitalists of the time.  Frequent bad harvests, plagues, fires,

military raids, and similar misfortunes often reduced even

prosperous peasants to beggary.  The muzhik was probably then, as

now, only too ready to accept a loan without taking the necessary

precautions for repaying it.  The laws relating to debt were

terribly severe, and there was no powerful judicial organisation to

protect the weak.  If we remember all this, we shall not be

surprised to learn that a considerable part of the peasantry were

practically serfs before serfage was recognised by law.



So long as the country was broken up into independent

principalities, and each land-owner was almost an independent

Prince on his estate, the peasants easily found a remedy for these

abuses in flight.  They fled to a neighbouring proprietor who could

protect them from their former landlord and his claims, or they

took refuge in a neighbouring principality, where they were, of

course, still safer.  All this was changed when the independent

principalities were transformed into the Tsardom of Muscovy.  The

Tsars had new reasons for opposing the migration of the peasants

and new means for preventing it.  The old Princes had simply given

grants of land to those who served them, and left the grantee to do

with his land what seemed good to him; the Tsars, on the contrary,

gave to those who served them merely the usufruct of a certain

quantity of land, and carefully proportioned the quantity to the

rank and the obligations of the receiver.  In this change there was

plainly a new reason for fixing the peasants to the soil.  The real

value of a grant depended not so much on the amount of land as on

the number of peasants settled on it, and hence any migration of

the population was tantamount to a removal of the ancient

landmarks--that is to say, to a disturbance of the arrangements

made by the Tsar.  Suppose, for instance, that the Tsar granted to

a Boyar or some lesser dignitary an estate on which were settled

twenty peasant families, and that afterwards ten of these emigrated

to neighbouring proprietors.  In this case the recipient might

justly complain that he had lost half of his estate--though the

amount of land was in no way diminished--and that he was

consequently unable to fulfil his obligations.  Such complaints

would be rarely, if ever, made by the great dignitaries, for they

had the means of attracting peasants to their estates;* but the

small proprietors had good reason to complain, and the Tsar was

bound to remove their grievances.  The attaching of the peasants to

the soil was, in fact, the natural consequence of feudal tenures--

an integral part of the Muscovite political system.  The Tsar

compelled the nobles to serve him, and was unable to pay them in

money.  He was obliged, therefore, to procure for them some other

means of livelihood.  Evidently the simplest method of solving the

difficulty was to give them land, with a certain number of

labourers, and to prevent the labourers from migrating.





* There are plain indications in the documents of the time that the

great dignitaries were at first hostile to the adscriptio glebae.

We find a similar phenomenon at a much more recent date in Little

Russia.  Long after serfage had been legalised in that region by

Catherine II., the great proprietors, such as Rumyantsef,

Razumofski, Bezborodko, continued to attract to their estates the

peasants of the smaller proprietors.  See the article of Pogodin in

the Russkaya Beseda, 1858, No. 4, p. 154.





Towards the free Communes the Tsar had to act in the same way for

similar reasons.  The Communes, like the nobles, had obligations to

the Sovereign, and could not fulfil them if the peasants were

allowed to migrate from one locality to another.  They were, in a

certain sense, the property of the Tsar, and it was only natural

that the Tsar should do for himself what he had done for his

nobles.



With these new reasons for fixing the peasants to the soil came, as

has been said, new means of preventing migration.  Formerly it was

an easy matter to flee to a neighbouring principality, but now all

the principalities were combined under one ruler, and the

foundations of a centralised administration were laid.  Severe

fugitive laws were issued against those who attempted to change

their domicile and against the proprietors who should harbour the

runaways.  Unless the peasant chose to face the difficulties of

"squatting" in the inhospitable northern forests, or resolved to

brave the dangers of the steppe, he could nowhere escape the heavy

hand of Moscow.*





* The above account of the origin of serfage in Russia is founded

on a careful examination of the evidence which we possess on the

subject, but I must not conceal the fact that some of the

statements are founded on inference rather than on direct,

unequivocal documentary evidence.  The whole question is one of

great difficulty, and will in all probability not be satisfactorily

solved until a large number of the old local Land-Registers

(Pistsoviya Knigi) have been published and carefully studied.





The indirect consequences of thus attaching the peasants to the

soil did not at once become apparent.  The serf retained all the

civil rights he had hitherto enjoyed, except that of changing his

domicile.  He could still appear before the courts of law as a free

man, freely engage in trade or industry, enter into all manner of

contracts, and rent land for cultivation.



But as time wore on, the change in the legal relation between the

two classes became apparent in real life.  In attaching the

peasantry to the soil, the Government had been so thoroughly

engrossed with the direct financial aim that it entirely

overlooked, or wilfully shut its eyes to, the ulterior consequences

which must necessarily flow from the policy it adopted.  It was

evident that as soon as the relation between proprietor and peasant

was removed from the region of voluntary contract by being rendered

indissoluble, the weaker of the two parties legally tied together

must fall completely under the power of the stronger, unless

energetically protected by the law and the Administration.  To this

inevitable consequence the Government paid no attention.  So far

from endeavouring to protect the peasantry from the oppression of

the proprietors, it did not even determine by law the mutual

obligations which ought to exist between the two classes.  Taking

advantage of this omission, the proprietors soon began to impose

whatever obligations they thought fit; and as they had no legal

means of enforcing fulfilment, they gradually introduced a

patriarchal jurisdiction similar to that which they exercised over

their slaves, with fines and corporal punishment as means of

coercion.  From this they ere long proceeded a step further, and

began to sell their peasants without the land on which they were

settled.  At first this was merely a flagrant abuse unsanctioned by

law, for the peasant had never been declared the private property

of the landed proprietor; but the Government tacitly sanctioned the

practice, and even exacted dues on such sales, as on the sale of

slaves.  Finally the right to sell peasants without land was

formally recognised by various Imperial ukazes.*





* For instance, the ukazes of October 13th, 1675, and June 25th,

1682.  See Belaef, pp. 203-209.





The old Communal organisation still existed on the estates of the

proprietors, and had never been legally deprived of its authority,

but it was now powerless to protect the members.  The proprietor

could easily overcome any active resistance by selling or

converting into domestic servants the peasants who dared to oppose

his will.



The peasantry had thus sunk to the condition of serfs, practically

deprived of legal protection and subject to the arbitrary will of

the proprietors; but they were still in some respects legally and

actually distinguished from the slaves on the one hand and the

"free wandering people" on the other.  These distinctions were

obliterated by Peter the Great and his immediate successors.



To effect his great civil and military reforms, Peter required an

annual revenue such as his predecessors had never dreamed of, and

he was consequently always on the look-out for some new object of

taxation.  When looking about for this purpose, his eye naturally

fell on the slaves, the domestic servants, and the free

agricultural labourers.  None of these classes paid taxes--a fact

which stood in flagrant contradiction with his fundamental

principle of polity, that every subject should in some way serve

the State.  He caused, therefore, a national census to be taken, in

which all the various classes of the rural population--slaves,

domestic servants, agricultural labourers, peasants--should be

inscribed in one category; and he imposed equally on all the

members of this category a poll-tax, in lieu of the former land-

tax, which had lain exclusively on the peasants.  To facilitate the

collection of this tax the proprietors were made responsible for

their serfs; and the "free wandering people" who did not wish to

enter the army were ordered, under pain of being sent to the

galleys, to inscribe themselves as members of a Commune or as serfs

to some proprietor.



These measures had a considerable influence, if not on the actual

position of the peasantry, at least on the legal conceptions

regarding them.  By making the proprietor pay the poll-tax for his

serfs, as if they were slaves or cattle, the law seemed to sanction

the idea that they were part of his goods and chattels.  Besides

this, it introduced the entirely new principle that any member of

the rural population not legally attached to the land or to a

proprietor should be regarded as a vagrant, and treated

accordingly.  Thus the principle that every subject should in some

way serve the State had found its complete realisation.  There was

no longer any room in Russia for free men.



The change in the position of the peasantry, together with the

hardships and oppression by which it was accompanied, naturally

increased fugitivism and vagrancy.  Thousands of serfs ran away

from their masters and fled to the steppe or sought enrolment in

the army.  To prevent this the Government considered it necessary

to take severe and energetic measures.  The serfs were forbidden to

enlist without the permission of their masters, and those who

persisted in presenting themselves for enrolment were to be beaten

"cruelly" (zhestoko) with the knout, and sent to the mines.*  The

proprietors, on the other hand, received the right to transport

without trial their unruly serfs to Siberia, and even to send them

to the mines for life.**





* Ukaz of June 2d, 1742.



** See ukaz of January 17th, 1765, and of January 28th, 1766.





If these stringent measures had any effect it was not of long

duration, for there soon appeared among the serfs a still stronger

spirit of discontent and insubordination, which threatened to

produce a general agrarian rising, and actually did create a

movement resembling in many respects the Jacquerie in France and

the Peasant War in Germany.  A glance at the causes of this

movement will help us to understand the real nature of serfage in

Russia.



Up to this point serfage had, in spite of its flagrant abuses, a

certain theoretical justification.  It was, as we have seen, merely

a part of a general political system in which obligatory service

was imposed on all classes of the population.  The serfs served the

nobles in order that the nobles might serve the Tsar.  In 1762 this

theory was entirely overturned by a manifesto of Peter III.

abolishing the obligatory service of the Noblesse.  According to

strict justice this act ought to have been followed by the

liberation of the serfs, for if the nobles were no longer obliged

to serve the State they had no just claim to the service of the

peasants.  The Government had so completely forgotten the original

meaning of serfage that it never thought of carrying out the

measure to its logical consequences, but the peasantry held

tenaciously to the ancient conceptions, and looked impatiently for

a second manifesto liberating them from the power of the

proprietors.  Reports were spread that such a manifesto really

existed, and was being concealed by the nobles.  A spirit of

insubordination accordingly appeared among the rural population,

and local insurrections broke out in several parts of the Empire.



At this critical moment Peter III. was dethroned and assassinated

by a Court conspiracy.  The peasants, who, of course, knew nothing

of the real motives of the conspirators, supposed that the Tsar had

been assassinated by those who wished to preserve serfage, and

believed him to be a martyr in the cause of Emancipation.  At the

news of the catastrophe their hopes of Emancipation fell, but soon

they were revived by new rumours.  The Tsar, it was said, had

escaped from the conspirators and was in hiding.  Soon he would

appear among his faithful peasants, and with their aid would regain

his throne and punish the wicked oppressors.  Anxiously he was

awaited, and at last the glad tidings came that he had appeared in

the Don country, that thousands of Cossacks had joined his

standard, that he was everywhere putting the proprietors to death

without mercy, and that he would soon arrive in the ancient

capital!



Peter III. was in reality in his grave, but there was a terrible

element of truth in these reports.  A pretender, a Cossack called

Pugatchef, had really appeared on the Don, and had assumed the role

which the peasants expected the late Tsar to play.  Advancing

through the country of the Lower Volga, he took several places of

importance, put to death all the proprietors he could find,

defeated on more than one occasion the troops sent against him, and

threatened to advance into the heart of the Empire.  It seemed as

if the old troublous times were about to be renewed--as if the

country was once more to be pillaged by those wild Cossacks of the

southern steppe.  But the pretender showed himself incapable of

playing the part he had assumed.  His inhuman cruelty estranged

many who would otherwise have followed him, and he was too

deficient in decision and energy to take advantage of favourable

circumstances.  If it be true that he conceived the idea of

creating a peasant empire (muzhitskoe tsarstvo), he was not the man

to realise such a scheme.  After a series of mistakes and defeats

he was taken prisoner, and the insurrection was quelled.*





*Whilst living among the Bashkirs of the province of Samara in 1872

I found some interesting traditions regarding this pretender.

Though nearly a century had elapsed since his death (1775), his

name, his personal appearance, and his exploits were well known

even to the younger generation.  My informants firmly believed that

he was not an impostor, but the genuine Tsar, dethroned by his

ambitious consort, and that he never was taken prisoner, but "went

away into foreign lands."  When I asked whether he was still alive,

and whether he might not one day return, they replied that they did

not know.





Meanwhile Peter III. had been succeeded by his consort, Catherine

II.  As she had no legal right to the throne, and was by birth a

foreigner, she could not gain the affections of the people, and was

obliged to court the favour of the Noblesse.  In such a difficult

position she could not venture to apply her humane principles to

the question of serfage.  Even during the first years of her reign,

when she had no reason to fear agrarian disturbances, she increased

rather than diminished the power of the proprietors over their

serfs, and the Pugatchef affair confirmed her in this line of

policy.  During her reign serfage may be said to have reached its

climax.  The serfs were regarded by the law as part of the master's

immovable property*--as part of the working capital of the estate--

and as such they were bought, sold, and given as presents** in

hundreds and thousands, sometimes with the land, and sometimes

without it, sometimes in families, and sometimes individually.  The

only legal restriction was that they should not be offered for sale

at the time of the conscription, and that they should at no time be

sold publicly by auction, because such a custom was considered as

"unbecoming in a European State."  In all other respects the serfs

might be treated as private property; and this view is to be found

not only in the legislation, but also in the popular conceptions.

It became customary--a custom that continued down to the year 1861--

to compute a noble's fortune, not by his yearly revenue or the

extent of his estate, but by the number of his serfs.  Instead of

saying that a man had so many hundreds or thousands a year, or so

many acres, it was commonly said that he had so many hundreds or

thousands of "souls."  And over these "souls" he exercised the most

unlimited authority.  The serfs had no legal means of self-defence.

The Government feared that the granting to them of judicial or

administrative protection would inevitably awaken in them a spirit

of insubordination, and hence it was ordered that those who

presented complaints should be punished with the knout and sent to

the mines.***  It was only in extreme cases, when some instance of

atrocious cruelty happened to reach the ears of the Sovereign, that

the authorities interfered with the proprietor's jurisdiction, and

these cases had not the slightest influence on the proprietors in

general.****





* See ukaz of October 7th, 1792.



** As an example of making presents of serfs, the following may be

cited.  Count Panin presented some of his subordinates for an

Imperial recompense, and on receiving a refusal, made them a

present of 4000 serfs from his own estates.--Belaef, p. 320.



*** See the ukazes of August 22d, 1767, and March 30th, 1781.



**** Perhaps the most horrible case on record is that of a certain

lady called Saltykof, who was brought to justice in 1768.

According to the ukaz regarding her crimes, she had killed by

inhuman tortures in the course of ten or eleven years about a

hundred of her serfs, chiefly of the female sex, and among them

several young girls of eleven and twelve years of age.  According

to popular belief her cruelty proceeded from cannibal propensities,

but this was not confirmed by the judicial investigation.  Details

in the Russki Arkhiv, 1865, pp. 644-652.  The atrocities practised

on the estate of Count Araktcheyef, the favourite of Alexander I.

at the commencement of last century, have been frequently

described, and are scarcely less revolting.





The last years of the eighteenth century may be regarded as the

turning-point in the history of serfage.  Up till that time the

power of the proprietors had steadily increased, and the area of

serfage had rapidly expanded.  Under the Emperor Paul (1796-1801)

we find the first decided symptoms of a reaction.  He regarded the

proprietors as his most efficient officers of police, but he

desired to limit their authority, and for this purpose issued an

ukaz to the effect that the serfs should not be forced to work for

their masters more than three days in the week.  With the accession

of Alexander I., in 1801, commenced a long series of abortive

projects for a general emancipation, and endless attempts to

correct the more glaring abuses; and during the reign of Nicholas

no less than six committees were formed at different times to

consider the question.  But the practical result of these efforts

was extremely small.  The custom of giving grants of land with

peasants was abolished; certain slight restrictions were placed on

the authority of the proprietors; a number of the worst specimens

of the class were removed from the administration of their estates;

a few who were convicted of atrocious cruelty were exiled to

Siberia;* and some thousands of serfs were actually emancipated;

but no decisive radical measures were attempted, and the serfs did

not receive even the right of making formal complaints.  Serfage

had, in fact, come to be regarded as a vital part of the State

organisation, and the only sure basis for autocracy.  It was

therefore treated tenderly, and the rights and protection accorded

by various ukazes were almost entirely illusory.





*Speranski, for instance, when Governor of the province of Penza,

brought to justice, among others, a proprietor who had caused one

of his serfs to be flogged to death, and a lady who had murdered a

serf boy by pricking him with a pen-knife because he had neglected

to take proper care of a tame rabbit committed to his charge!--

Korff, "Zhizn Speranskago," II., p. 127, note.





If we compare the development of serfage in Russia and in Western

Europe, we find very many points in common, but in Russia the

movement had certain peculiarities.  One of the most important of

these was caused by the rapid development of the Autocratic Power.

In feudal Europe, where there was no strong central authority to

control the Noblesse, the free rural Communes entirely, or almost

entirely, disappeared.  They were either appropriated by the nobles

or voluntarily submitted to powerful landed proprietors or to

monasteries, and in this way the whole of the reclaimed land, with

a few rare exceptions, became the property of the nobles or of the

Church.  In Russia we find the same movement, but it was arrested

by the Imperial power before all the land had been appropriated.

The nobles could reduce to serfage the peasants settled on their

estates, but they could not take possession of the free Communes,

because such an appropriation would have infringed the rights and

diminished the revenues of the Tsar.  Down to the commencement of

the last century, it is true, large grants of land with serfs were

made to favoured individuals among the Noblesse, and in the reign

of Paul (1796-1801) a considerable number of estates were affected

to the use of the Imperial family under the name of appanages

(Udyelniya imteniya); but on the other hand, the extensive Church

lands, when secularised by Catherine II., were not distributed

among the nobles, as in many other countries, but were transformed

into State Domains.  Thus, at the date of the Emancipation (1861),

by far the greater part of the territory belonged to the State, and

one-half of the rural population were so-called State Peasants

(Gosudarstvenniye krestyanye).



Regarding the condition of these State Peasants, or Peasants of the

Domains, as they are sometimes called, I may say briefly that they

were, in a certain sense, serfs, being attached to the soil like

the others; but their condition was, as a rule, somewhat better

than the serfs in the narrower acceptation of the term.  They had

to suffer much from the tyranny and extortion of the special

administration under which they lived, but they had more land and

more liberty than was commonly enjoyed on the estates of resident

proprietors, and their position was much less precarious.  It is

often asserted that the officials of the Domains were worse than

the serf-owners, because they had not the same interest in the

prosperity of the peasantry; but this a priori reasoning does not

stand the test of experience.



It is not a little interesting to observe the numerical proportion

and geographical distribution of these two rural classes.  In

European Russia, as a whole, about three-eighths of the population

were composed of serfs belonging to the nobles;* but if we take the

provinces separately we find great variations from this average.

In five provinces the serfs were less than three per cent., while

in others they formed more than seventy per cent. of the

population!  This is not an accidental phenomenon.  In the

geographical distribution of serfage we can see reflected the

origin and history of the institution.





* The exact numbers, according to official data, were--



Entire Population                                 60,909,309

Peasantry of all Classes                          49,486,665



Of these latter there were--



State Peasants                                    23,138,191

Peasants on the Lands of Proprietors              23,022,390

Peasants of the Appanages and other Departments    3,326,084

                                                  ----------

                                                  49,486,665





If we were to construct a map showing the geographical distribution

of the serf population, we should at once perceive that serfage

radiated from Moscow.  Starting from that city as a centre and

travelling in any direction towards the confines of the Empire, we

find that, after making allowance for a few disturbing local

influences, the proportion of serfs regularly declines in the

successive provinces traversed.  In the region representing the old

Muscovite Tsardom they form considerably more than a half of the

rural population.  Immediately to the south and east of this, in

the territory that was gradually annexed during the seventeenth and

first half of the eighteenth century, the proportion varies from

twenty-five to fifty per cent., and in the more recently annexed

provinces it steadily decreases till it almost reaches zero.



We may perceive, too, that the percentage of serfs decreases

towards the north much more rapidly than towards the east and

south.  This points to the essentially agricultural nature of

serfage in its infancy.  In the south and east there was abundance

of rich "black earth" celebrated for its fertility, and the nobles

in quest of estates naturally preferred this region to the

inhospitable north, with its poor soil and severe climate.



A more careful examination of the supposed map* would bring out

other interesting facts.  Let me notice one by way of illustration.

Had serfage been the result of conquest we should have found the

Slavonic race settled on the State Domains, and the Finnish and

Tartar tribes supplying the serfs of the nobles.  In reality we

find quite the reverse; the Finns and Tartars were nearly all State

Peasants, and the serfs of the proprietors were nearly all of

Slavonic race.  This is to be accounted for by the fact that the

Finnish and Tartar tribes inhabit chiefly the outlying regions, in

which serfage never attained such dimensions as in the centre of

the Empire.





* Such a map was actually constructed by Troinitski ("Krepostnoe

Naseleniye v Rossii," St. Petersburg, 1861), but it is not nearly

so graphic as is might have been.





The dues paid by the serfs were of three kinds: labour, money, and

farm produce.  The last-named is so unimportant that it may be

dismissed in a few words.  It consisted chiefly of eggs, chickens,

lambs, mushrooms, wild berries, and linen cloth.  The amount of

these various products depended entirely on the will of the master.

The other two kinds of dues, as more important, we must examine

more closely.



When a proprietor had abundance of fertile land and wished to farm

on his own account, he commonly demanded from his serfs as much

labour as possible.  Under such a master the serfs were probably

free from money dues, and fulfilled their obligations to him by

labouring in his fields in summer and transporting his grain to

market in winter.  When, on the contrary, a land-owner had more

serf labour at his disposal than he required for the cultivation of

his fields, he put the superfluous serfs "on obrok,"--that is to

say, he allowed them to go and work where they pleased on condition

of paying him a fixed yearly sum.  Sometimes the proprietor did not

farm at all on his own account, in which case he put all the serfs

"on obrok," and generally gave to the Commune in usufruct the whole

of the arable land and pasturage.  In this way the Mir played the

part of a tenant.



We have here the basis for a simple and important classification of

estates in the time of serfage: (1) Estates on which the dues were

exclusively in labour; (2) estates on which the dues were partly in

labour and partly in money; and (3) estates on which the dues were

exclusively in money.



In the manner of exacting the labour dues there was considerable

variety.  According to the famous manifesto of Paul I., the peasant

could not be compelled to work more than three days in the week;

but this law was by no means universally observed, and those who

did observe it had various methods of applying it.  A few took it

literally and laid down a rule that the serfs should work for them

three definite days in the week--for example, every Monday,

Tuesday, and Wednesday--but this was an extremely inconvenient

method, for it prevented the field labour from being carried on

regularly.  A much more rational system was that according to which

one-half of the serfs worked the first three days of the week, and

the other half the remaining three.  In this way there was, without

any contravention of the law, a regular and constant supply of

labour.  It seems, however, that the great majority of the

proprietors followed no strict method, and paid no attention

whatever to Paul's manifesto, which gave to the peasants no legal

means of making formal complaints.  They simply summoned daily as

many labourers as they required.  The evil consequences of this for

the peasants' crops were in part counteracted by making the

peasants sow their own grain a little later than that of the

proprietor, so that the master's harvest work was finished, or

nearly finished, before their grain was ripe.  This combination did

not, however, always succeed, and in cases where there was a

conflict of interests, the serf was, of course, the losing party.

All that remained for him to do in such cases was to work a little

in his own fields before six o'clock in the morning and after nine

o'clock at night, and in order to render this possible he

economised his strength, and worked as little as possible in his

master's fields during the day.



It has frequently been remarked, and with much truth--though the

indiscriminate application of the principle has often led to

unjustifiable legislative inactivity--that the practical result of

institutions depends less on the intrinsic abstract nature of the

institutions themselves than on the character of those who work

them.  So it was with serfage.  When a proprietor habitually acted

towards his serfs in an enlightened, rational, humane way, they had

little reason to complain of their position, and their life was

much easier than that of many men who live in a state of complete

individual freedom and unlimited, unrestricted competition.

However paradoxical the statement may seem to those who are in the

habit of regarding all forms of slavery from the sentimental point

of view, it is unquestionable that the condition of serfs under

such a proprietor as I have supposed was more enviable than that of

the majority of English agricultural labourers.  Each family had a

house of its own, with a cabbage-garden, one or more horses, one or

two cows, several sheep, poultry, agricultural implements, a share

of the Communal land, and everything else necessary for carrying on

its small farming operations; and in return for this it had to

supply the proprietor with an amount of labour which was by no

means oppressive.  If, for instance, a serf had three adult sons--

and the households, as I have said, were at that time generally

numerous--two of them might work for the proprietor whilst he

himself and the remaining son could attend exclusively to the

family affairs.  By the events which used to be called "the

visitations of God" he had no fear of being permanently ruined.  If

his house was burnt, or his cattle died from the plague, or a

series of "bad years" left him without seed for his fields, he

could always count upon temporary assistance from his master.  He

was protected, too, against all oppression and exactions on the

part of the officials; for the police, when there was any call for

its interference, applied to the proprietor, who was to a certain

extent responsible for his serfs.  Thus the serf might live a

tranquil, contented life, and die at a ripe old age, without ever

having been conscious that serfage was a grievous burden.



If all the serfs had lived in this way we might, perhaps, regret

that the Emancipation was ever undertaken.  In reality there was,

as the French say, le revers de la medaille, and serfage generally

appeared under a form very different from that which I have just

depicted.  The proprietors were, unfortunately, not all of the

enlightened, humane type.  Amongst them were many who demanded from

their serfs an inordinate amount of labour, and treated them in a

very inhuman fashion.



These oppressors of their serfs may be divided into four

categories.  First, there were the proprietors who managed their

own estates, and oppressed simply for the purpose of increasing

their revenues.  Secondly, there were a number of retired officers

who wished to establish a certain order and discipline on their

estates, and who employed for this purpose the barbarous measures

which were at that time used in the army, believing that merciless

corporal punishment was the only means of curing laziness,

disorderliness and other vices.  Thirdly, there were the absentees

who lived beyond their means, and demanded from their steward,

under pain of giving him or his son as a recruit, a much greater

yearly sum than the estate could be reasonably expected to yield.

Lastly, in the latter years of serfage, there were a number of men

who bought estates as a mercantile speculation, and made as much

money out of them as they could in the shortest possible space of

time.



Of all hard masters, the last-named were the most terrible.

Utterly indifferent to the welfare of the serfs and the ultimate

fate of the property, they cut down the timber, sold the cattle,

exacted heavy money dues under threats of giving the serfs or their

children as recruits, presented to the military authorities a

number of conscripts greater than was required by law--selling the

conscription receipts (zatchetniya kvitantsii) to the merchants and

burghers who were liable to the conscription but did not wish to

serve--compelled some of the richer serfs to buy their liberty at

an enormous price, and, in a word, used every means, legal and

illegal, for extracting money.  By this system of management they

ruined the estate completely in the course of a few years; but by

that time they had realised probably the whole sum paid, with a

very fair profit from the operation; and this profit could be

considerably augmented by selling a number of the peasant families

for transportation to another estate (na svoz), or by mortgaging

the property in the Opekunski Sovet--a Government institution which

lent money on landed property without examining carefully the

nature of the security.



As to the means which the proprietors possessed of oppressing their

peasants, we must distinguish between the legal and the actual.

The legal were almost as complete as any one could desire.  "The

proprietor," it is said in the Laws (Vol. IX, p. 1045, ed. an.

1857), "may impose on his serfs every kind of labour, may take from

them money dues (obrok) and demand from them personal service, with

this one restriction, that they should not be thereby ruined, and

that the number of days fixed by law should be left to them for

their own work."*  Besides this, he had the right to transform

peasants into domestic servants, and might, instead of employing

them in his own service, hire them out to others who had the rights

and privileges of Noblesse (pp. 1047-48).  For all offences

committed against himself or against any one under his jurisdiction

he could subject the guilty ones to corporal punishment not

exceeding forty lashes with the birch or fifteen blows with the

stick (p. 1052); and if he considered any of his serfs as

incorrigible, he could present them to the authorities to be

drafted into the army or transported to Siberia as he might desire

(pp. 1053-55).  In cases of insubordination, where the ordinary

domestic means of discipline did not suffice, he could call in the

police and the military to support his authority.





* I give here the references to the Code, because Russians commonly

believe and assert that the hiring out of serfs, the infliction of

corporal punishment, and similar practices were merely abuses

unauthorised by law.





Such were the legal means by which the proprietor might oppress his

peasants, and it will be readily understood that they were very

considerable and very elastic.  By law he had the power to impose

any dues in labour or money which he might think fit, and in all

cases the serfs were ordered to be docile and obedient (p. 1027).

Corporal punishment, though restricted by law, he could in reality

apply to any extent.  Certainly none of the serfs, and very few of

the proprietors, were aware that the law placed any restriction on

this right.  All the proprietors were in the habit of using

corporal punishment as they thought proper, and unless a proprietor

became notorious for inhuman cruelty the authorities never thought

of interfering.  But in the eyes of the peasants corporal

punishment was not the worst.  What they feared infinitely more

than the birch or the stick was the proprietor's power of giving

them or their sons as recruits.  The law assumed that this extreme

means would be employed only against those serfs who showed

themselves incorrigibly vicious or insubordinate; but the

authorities accepted those presented without making any

investigations, and consequently the proprietor might use this

power as an effective means of extortion.



Against these means of extortion and oppression the serfs had no

legal protection.  The law provided them with no means of resisting

any injustice to which they might be subjected, or of bringing to

punishment the master who oppressed and ruined them.  The

Government, notwithstanding its sincere desire to protect them from

inordinate burdens and cruel treatment, rarely interfered between

the master and his serfs, being afraid of thereby undermining the

authority of the proprietors, and awakening among the peasantry a

spirit of insubordination.  The serfs were left, therefore, to

their own resources, and had to defend themselves as best they

could.  The simplest way was open mutiny; but this was rarely

employed, for they knew by experience that any attempt of the kind

would be at once put down by the military and mercilessly punished.

Much more favourite and efficient methods were passive resistance,

flight, and fire-raising or murder.



We might naturally suppose that an unscrupulous proprietor, armed

with the enormous legal and actual power which I have just

described, could very easily extort from his peasants anything he

desired.  In reality, however, the process of extortion, when it

exceeded a certain measure, was a very difficult operation.  The

Russian peasant has a capacity of patient endurance that would do

honour to a martyr, and a power of continued, dogged, passive

resistance such as is possessed, I believe, by no other class of

men in Europe; and these qualities formed a very powerful barrier

against the rapacity of unconscientious proprietors.  As soon as

the serfs remarked in their master a tendency to rapacity and

extortion, they at once took measures to defend themselves.  Their

first step was to sell secretly the live stock they did not

actually require, and all their movable property except the few

articles necessary for everyday use; then the little capital

realised was carefully hidden.



When this had been effected, the proprietor might threaten and

punish as he liked, but he rarely succeeded in unearthing the

treasure.  Many a peasant, under such circumstances, bore patiently

the most cruel punishment, and saw his sons taken away as recruits,

and yet he persisted in declaring that he had no money to ransom

himself and his children.  A spectator in such a case would

probably have advised him to give up his little store of money, and

thereby liberate himself from persecution; but the peasants

reasoned otherwise.  They were convinced, and not without reason,

that the sacrifice of their little capital would merely put off the

evil day, and that the persecution would very soon recommence.  In

this way they would have to suffer as before, and have the

additional mortification of feeling that they had spent to no

purpose the little that they possessed.  Their fatalistic belief in

the "perhaps" (avos') came here to their aid.  Perhaps the

proprietor might become weary of his efforts when he saw that they

led to no result, or perhaps something might occur which would

remove the persecutor.



It always happened, however, that when a proprietor treated his

serfs with extreme injustice and cruelty, some of them lost

patience, and sought refuge in flight.  As the estates lay

perfectly open on all sides, and it was utterly impossible to

exercise a strict supervision, nothing was easier than to run away,

and the fugitive might be a hundred miles off before his absence

was noticed.  But the oppressed serf was reluctant to adopt such an

extreme measure.  He had almost always a wife and family, and he

could not possibly take them with him; flight, therefore, was

expatriation for life in its most terrible form.  Besides this, the

life of a fugitive was by no means enviable.  He was liable at any

moment to fall into the hands of the police, and to be put into

prison or sent back to his master.  So little charm, indeed, did

this life present that not infrequently after a few months or a few

years the fugitive returned of his own accord to his former

domicile.



Regarding fugitives or passportless wanderers in general, I may

here remark parenthetically that there were two kinds.  In the

first place, there was the young, able-bodied peasant, who fled

from the oppression of his master or from the conscription.  Such a

fugitive almost always sought out for himself a new domicile--

generally in the southern provinces, where there was a great

scarcity of labourers, and where many proprietors habitually

welcomed all peasants who presented themselves, without making any

inquiries as to passports.  In the second place, there were those

who chose fugitivism as a permanent mode of life.  These were, for

the most part, men or women of a certain age--widowers or widows--

who had no close family ties, and who were too infirm or too lazy

to work.  The majority of these assumed the character of pilgrims.

As such they could always find enough to eat, and could generally

even collect a few roubles with which to grease the palm of any

zealous police-officer who should arrest them.  For a life of this

kind Russia presented peculiar facilities.  There was abundance of

monasteries, where all comers could live for three days without

questions being asked, and where those who were willing to do a

little work for the patron saint might live for a much longer

period.  Then there were the towns, where the rich merchants

considered almsgiving as very profitable for salvation.  And,

lastly, there were the villages, where a professing pilgrim was

sure to be hospitably received and entertained so long as he

refrained from stealing and other acts too grossly inconsistent

with his assumed character.  For those who contented themselves

with simple fare, and did not seek to avoid the usual privations of

a wanderer's life, these ordinary means of subsistence were amply

sufficient.  Those who were more ambitious and more cunning often

employed their talents with great success in the world of the Old

Ritualists and Sectarians.



The last and most desperate means of defense which the serfs

possessed were fire-raising and murder.  With regard to the amount

of fire-raising there are no trustworthy statistics.  With regard

to the number of agrarian murders I once obtained some interesting

statistical data, but unfortunately lost them.  I may say, however,

that these cases were not very numerous.  This is to be explained

in part by the patient, long-suffering character of the peasantry,

and in part by the fact that the great majority of the proprietors

were by no means such inhuman taskmasters as is sometimes supposed.

When a case did occur, the Administration always made a strict

investigation--punishing the guilty with exemplary severity, and

taking no account of the provocation to which they had been

subjected.  The peasantry, on the contrary--at least, when the act

was not the result of mere personal vengeance--secretly sympathised

with "the unfortunates," and long cherished their memory as that of

men who had suffered for the Mir.



In speaking of the serfs I have hitherto confined my attention to

the members of the Mir, or rural Commune--that is to say, the

peasants in the narrower sense of the term; but besides these there

were the Dvorovuye, or domestic servants, and of these I must add a

word or two.



The Dvorovuye were domestic slaves rather than serfs in the proper

sense of the term.  Let us, however, avoid wounding unnecessarily

Russian sensibilities by the use of the ill-sounding word.  We may

call the class in question "domestics"--remembering, of course,

that they were not quite domestic servants in the ordinary sense.

They received no wages, were not at liberty to change masters,

possessed almost no legal rights, and might be punished, hired out,

or sold by their owners without any infraction of the written law.



These "domestics" were very numerous--out of all proportion to the

work to be performed--and could consequently lead a very lazy

life;* but the peasant considered it a great misfortune to be

transferred to their ranks, for he thereby lost his share of the

Communal land and the little independence which he enjoyed.  It

very rarely happened, however, that the proprietor took an able-

bodied peasant as domestic.  The class generally kept up its

numbers by the legitimate and illegitimate method of natural

increase; and involuntary additions were occasionally made when

orphans were left without near relatives, and no other family

wished to adopt them.  To this class belonged the lackeys, servant-

girls, cooks, coachmen, stable-boys, gardeners, and a large number

of nondescript old men and women who had no very clearly defined

functions.  If the proprietor had a private theatre or orchestra,

it was from this class that the actors and musicians were drawn.

Those of them who were married and had children occupied a position

intermediate between the ordinary domestic servant and the peasant.

On the one hand, they received from the master a monthly allowance

of food and a yearly allowance of clothes, and they were obliged to

live in the immediate vicinity of the mansion-house; but, on the

other hand, they had each a separate house or apartment, with a

little cabbage-garden, and commonly a small plot of flax.  The

unmarried ones lived in all respects like ordinary domestic

servants.





* Those proprietors who kept orchestras, large packs of hounds,

&c., had sometimes several hundred domestic serfs.





The number of these domestic serfs being generally out of all

proportion to the amount of work they had to perform, they were

imbued with a hereditary spirit of indolence, and they performed

lazily and carelessly what they had to do.  On the other hand, they

were often sincerely attached to the family they served, and

occasionally proved by acts their fidelity and attachment.  Here is

an instance out of many for which I can vouch.  An old nurse, whose

mistress was dangerously ill, vowed that, in the event of the

patient's recovery, she would make a pilgrimage, first to Kief, the

Holy City on the Dnieper, and afterwards to Solovetsk, a much

revered monastery on an island in the White Sea.  The patient

recovered, and the old woman, in fulfilment of her vow, walked more

than two thousand miles!



This class of serfs might well be called domestic slaves, but I

must warn the reader that he ought not to use the expression when

speaking with Russians, because they are extremely sensitive on the

point.  Serfage, they say, was something quite different from

slavery, and slavery never existed in Russia.



The first part of this assertion is perfectly true, and the second

part perfectly false.  In old times, as I have said above, slavery

was a recognised institution in Russia as in other countries.  One

can hardly read a few pages of the old chronicles without stumbling

on references to slaves; and I distinctly remember--though I cannot

at this moment give chapter and verse--that one of the old Russian

Princes was so valiant and so successful in his wars that during

his reign a slave might be bought for a few coppers.  As late as

the beginning of last century the domestic serfs were sold very

much as domestic slaves used to be sold in countries where slavery

was recognised as a legal institution.  Here is an example of the

customary advertisement; I take it almost at random from the Moscow

Gazette of 1801:--



"TO BE SOLD: three coachmen, well trained and handsome; and two

girls, the one eighteen, and the other fifteen years of age, both

of them good-looking, and well acquainted with various kinds of

handiwork.  In the same house there are for sale two hairdressers;

the one, twenty-one years of age, can read, write, play on a

musical instrument, and act as huntsman; the other can dress

ladies' and gentlemen's hair.  In the same house are sold pianos

and organs."



A little farther on in the same number of the paper, a first-rate

clerk, a carver, and a lackey are offered for sale, and the reason

assigned is a superabundance of the articles in question (za

izlishestvom).  In some instances it seems as if the serfs and the

cattle were intentionally put in the same category, as in the

following announcement: "In this house one can buy a coachman and a

Dutch cow about to calve."  The style of these advertisements, and

the frequent recurrence of the same addresses, show that there was

at this time in Moscow a regular class of slave-dealers.  The

humane Alexander I. prohibited advertisements of this kind, but he

did not put down the custom which they represented, and his

successor, Nicholas I., took no effective measures for its

repression.



Of the whole number of serfs belonging to the proprietors, the

domestics formed, according to the census of 1857, no less than 6

3/4 per cent. (6.79), and their numbers were evidently rapidly

increasing, for in the preceding census they represented only 4.79

per cent. of the whole.  This fact seems all the more significant

when we observe that during this period the number of peasant serfs

had diminished.



I must now bring this long chapter to an end.  My aim has been to

represent serfage in its normal, ordinary forms rather than in its

occasional monstrous manifestations.  Of these latter I have a

collection containing ample materials for a whole series of

sensation novels, but I refrain from quoting them, because I do not

believe that the criminal annals of a country give a fair

representation of its real condition.  On the other hand, I do not

wish to whitewash serfage or attenuate its evil consequences.  No

great body of men could long wield such enormous uncontrolled power

without abusing it,* and no large body of men could long live under

such power without suffering morally and materially from its

pernicious influence.  If serfage did not create that moral apathy

and intellectual lethargy which formed, as it were, the atmosphere

of Russian provincial life, it did much at least to preserve it.

In short, serfage was the chief barrier to all material and moral

progress, and in a time of moral awakening such as that which I

have described in the preceding chapter, the question of

Emancipation naturally came at once to the front.





* The number of deposed proprietors--or rather the number of

estates placed under curators in consequence of the abuse of

authority on the part of their owners--amounted in 1859 to 215.  So

at least I found in an official MS. document shown to me by the

late Nicholas Milutin.

