




CHAPTER XI



LORD NOVGOROD THE GREAT





Departure from Ivanofka and Arrival at Novgorod--The Eastern Half

of the Town--The Kremlin--An Old Legend--The Armed Men of Rus--The

Northmen--Popular Liberty in Novgorod--The Prince and the Popular

Assembly--Civil Dissensions and Faction-fights-- The Commercial

Republic Conquered by the Muscovite Tsars--Ivan the Terrible--

Present Condition of the Town--Provincial Society--Card-playing--

Periodicals--"Eternal Stillness."





Country life in Russia is pleasant enough in summer or in winter,

but between summer and winter there is an intermediate period of

several weeks when the rain and mud transform a country-house into

something very like a prison.  To escape this durance vile I

determined in the month of October to leave Ivanofka, and chose as

my headquarters for the next few months the town of Novgorod--the

old town of that name, not to be confounded with Nizhni Novgorod--

i.e., Lower Novgorod, on the Volga--where the great annual fair is

held.



For this choice there were several reasons.  I did not wish to go

to St. Petersburg or Moscow, because I foresaw that in either of

those cities my studies would certainly be interrupted.  In a

quiet, sleepy provincial town I should have much more chance of

coming in contact with people who could not speak fluently any

West-European languages, and much better opportunities for studying

native life and local administration.  Of the provincial capitals,

Novgorod was the nearest, and more interesting than most of its

rivals; for it has had a curious history, much older than that of

St. Petersburg or even of Moscow, and some traces of its former

greatness are still visible.  Though now a town of third-rate

importance--a mere shadow of its former self--it still contains

about 21,000 inhabitants, and is the administrative centre of the

large province in which it is situated.



About eighty miles before reaching St. Petersburg the Moscow

railway crosses the Volkhof, a rapid, muddy river which connects

Lake Ilmen with Lake Ladoga.  At the point of intersection I got on

board a small steamer and sailed up stream towards Lake Ilmen for

about fifty miles.*  The journey was tedious, for the country was

flat and monotonous, and the steamer, though it puffed and snorted

inordinately, did not make more than nine knots.  Towards sunset

Novgorod appeared on the horizon.  Seen thus at a distance in the

soft twilight, it seemed decidedly picturesque.  On the east bank

lay the greater part of the town, the sky line of which was

agreeably broken by the green roofs and pear-shaped cupolas of many

churches.  On the opposite bank rose the Kremlin.  Spanning the

river was a long, venerable stone bridge, half hidden by a

temporary wooden one, which was doing duty for the older structure

while the latter was being repaired.  A cynical fellow-passenger

assured me that the temporary structure was destined to become

permanent, because it yielded a comfortable revenue to certain

officials, but this sinister prediction has not been verified.





* The journey would now be made by rail, but the branch line which

runs near the bank of the river had not been constructed at that

time.





That part of Novgorod which lies on the eastern bank of the river,

and in which I took up my abode for several months, contains

nothing that is worthy of special mention.  As is the case in most

Russian towns, the streets are straight, wide, and ill-paved, and

all run parallel or at right angles to each other.  At the end of

the bridge is a spacious market-place, flanked on one side by the

Town-house.  Near the other side stand the houses of the Governor

and of the chief military authority of the district.  The only

other buildings of note are the numerous churches, which are mostly

small, and offer nothing that is likely to interest the student of

architecture.  Altogether this part of the town is unquestionably

commonplace.  The learned archaeologist may detect in it some

traces of the distant past, but the ordinary traveller will find

little to arrest his attention.



If now we cross over to the other side of the river, we are at once

confronted by something which very few Russian towns possess--a

kremlin, or citadel.  This is a large and slightly-elevated

enclosure, surrounded by high brick walls, and in part by the

remains of a moat.  Before the days of heavy artillery these walls

must have presented a formidable barrier to any besieging force,

but they have long ceased to have any military significance, and

are now nothing more than an historical monument.  Passing through

the gateway which faces the bridge, we find ourselves in a large

open space.  To the right stands the cathedral--a small, much-

venerated church, which can make no pretensions to architectural

beauty--and an irregular group of buildings containing the

consistory and the residence of the Archbishop.  To the left is a

long symmetrical range of buildings containing the Government

offices and the law courts.  Midway between this and the cathedral,

in the centre of the great open space, stands a colossal monument,

composed of a massive circular stone pedestal and an enormous

globe, on and around which cluster a number of emblematic and

historical figures.  This curious monument, which has at least the

merit of being original in design, was erected in 1862, in

commemoration of Russia's thousandth birthday, and is supposed to

represent the history of Russia in general and of Novgorod in

particular during the last thousand years.  It was placed here

because Novgorod is the oldest of Russian towns, and because

somewhere in the surrounding country occurred the incident which is

commonly recognised as the foundation of the Russian Empire.  The

incident in question is thus described in the oldest chronicle:



"At that time, as the southern Slavonians paid tribute to the

Kozars, so the Novgorodian Slavonians suffered from the attacks of

the Variags.  For some time the Variags exacted tribute from the

Novgorodian Slavonians and the neighbouring Finns; then the

conquered tribes, by uniting their forces, drove out the

foreigners.  But among the Slavonians arose strong internal

dissensions; the clans rose against each other.  Then, for the

creation of order and safety, they resolved to call in princes from

a foreign land.  In the year 862 Slavonic legates went away beyond

the sea to the Variag tribe called Rus, and said, 'Our land is

great and fruitful, but there is no order in it; come and reign and

rule over us.'  Three brothers accepted the invitation, and

appeared with their armed followers.  The eldest of these, Rurik,

settled in Novgorod; the second, Sineus, at Byelo-ozero; and the

third, Truvor, in Isborsk.  From them our land is called Rus.

After two years the brothers of Rurik died.  He alone began to rule

over the Novgorod district, and confided to his men the

administration of the principal towns."



This simple legend has given rise to a vast amount of learned

controversy, and historical investigators have fought valiantly

with each other over the important question, Who were those armed

men of Rus?  For a long time the commonly received opinion was that

they were Normans from Scandinavia.  The Slavophils accepted the

legend literally in this sense, and constructed upon it an

ingenious theory of Russian history.  The nations of the West, they

said, were conquered by invaders, who seized the country and

created the feudal system for their own benefit; hence the history

of Western Europe is a long tale of bloody struggles between

conquerors and conquered, and at the present day the old enmity

still lives in the political rivalry of the different social

classes.  The Russo-Slavonians, on the contrary, were not

conquered, but voluntarily invited a foreign prince to come and

rule over them!  Hence the whole social and political development

of Russia has been essentially peaceful, and the Russian people

know nothing of social castes or feudalism.  Though this theory

afforded some nourishment for patriotic self-satisfaction, it

displeased extreme patriots, who did not like the idea that order

was first established in their country by men of Teutonic race.

These preferred to adopt the theory that Rurik and his companions

were Slavonians from the shores of the Baltic.



Though I devoted to the study of this question more time and labour

than perhaps the subject deserved, I have no intention of inviting

the reader to follow me through the tedious controversy.  Suffice

it to say that, after careful consideration, and with all due

deference to recent historians, I am inclined to adopt the old

theory, and to regard the Normans of Scandinavia as in a certain

sense the founders of the Russian Empire.  We know from other

sources that during the ninth century there was a great exodus from

Scandinavia.  Greedy of booty, and fired with the spirit of

adventure, the Northmen, in their light, open boats, swept along

the coasts of Germany, France, Spain, Greece, and Asia Minor,

pillaging the towns and villages near the sea, and entering into

the heart of the country by means of the rivers.  At first they

were mere marauders, and showed everywhere such ferocity and

cruelty that they came to be regarded as something akin to plagues

and famines, and the faithful added a new petition to the Litany,

"From the wrath and malice of the Normans, O Lord, deliver us!"

But towards the middle of the century the movement changed its

character.  The raids became military invasions, and the invaders

sought to conquer the lands which they had formerly plundered, "ut

acquirant sibi spoliando regna quibus possent vivere pace

perpetua."  The chiefs embraced Christianity, married the daughters

or sisters of the reigning princes, and obtained the conquered

territories as feudal grants.  Thus arose Norman principalities in

the Low Countries, in France, in Italy, and in Sicily; and the

Northmen, rapidly blending with the native population, soon showed

as much political talent as they had formerly shown reckless and

destructive valour.



It would have been strange indeed if these adventurers, who

succeeded in reaching Asia Minor and the coasts of North America,

should have overlooked Russia, which lay, as it were, at their very

doors.  The Volkhof, flowing through Novgorod, formed part of a

great waterway which afforded almost uninterrupted water-

communication between the Baltic and the Black Sea; and we know

that some time afterwards the Scandinavians used this route in

their journeys to Constantinople.  The change which the

Scandinavian movement underwent elsewhere is clearly indicated by

the Russian chronicles: first, the Variags came as collectors of

tribute, and raised so much popular opposition that they were

expelled, and then they came as rulers, and settled in the country.

Whether they really came on invitation may be doubted, but that

they adopted the language, religion, and customs of the native

population does not militate against the assertion that they were

Normans.  On the contrary, we have here rather an additional

confirmation, for elsewhere the Normans did likewise.  In the North

of France they adopted almost at once the French language and

religion, and the son and successor of the famous Rollo was

sometimes reproached with being more French than Norman.*





*Strinnholm, "Die Vikingerzuge" (Hamburg, 1839), I., p. 135.





Though it is difficult to decide how far the legend is literally

true, there can be no possible doubt that the event which it more

or less accurately describes had an important influence on Russian

history.  From that time dates the rapid expansion of the Russo-

Slavonians--a movement that is still going on at the present day.

To the north, the east, and the south new principalities were

formed and governed by men who all claimed to be descendants of

Rurik, and down to the end of the sixteenth century no Russian

outside of this great family ever attempted to establish

independent sovereignty.



For six centuries after the so-called invitation of Rurik the city

on the Volkhof had a strange, checkered history.  Rapidly it

conquered the neighbouring Finnish tribes, and grew into a powerful

independent state, with a territory extending to the Gulf of

Finland, and northwards to the White Sea.  At the same time its

commercial importance increased, and it became an outpost of the

Hanseatic League.  In this work the descendants of Rurik played an

important part, but they were always kept in strict subordination

to the popular will.  Political freedom kept pace with commercial

prosperity.  What means Rurik employed for establishing and

preserving order we know not, but the chronicles show that his

successors in Novgorod possessed merely such authority as was

freely granted them by the people.  The supreme power resided, not

in the prince, but in the assembly of the citizens called together

in the market-place by the sound of the great bell.  This assembly

made laws for the prince as well as for the people, entered into

alliances with foreign powers, declared war, and concluded peace,

imposed taxes, raised troops, and not only elected the magistrates,

but also judged and deposed them when it thought fit.  The prince

was little more than the hired commander of the troops and the

president of the judicial administration.  When entering on his

functions he had to take a solemn oath that he would faithfully

observe the ancient laws and usages, and if he failed to fulfil his

promise he was sure to be summarily deposed and expelled.  The

people had an old rhymed proverb, "Koli khud knyaz, tak v gryaz!"

"If the prince is bad, into the mud with him!"), and they

habitually acted according to it.  So unpleasant, indeed, was the

task of ruling those sturdy, stiff-necked burghers, that some

princes refused to undertake it, and others, having tried it for a

time, voluntarily laid down their authority and departed.  But

these frequent depositions and abdications--as many as thirty took

place in the course of a single century--did not permanently

disturb the existing order of things.  The descendants of Rurik

were numerous, and there were always plenty of candidates for the

vacant post.  The municipal republic continued to grow in strength

and in riches, and during the thirteenth and fourteenth centuries

it proudly styled itself "Lord Novgorod the Great" (Gospodin

Velilki Novgorod).



"Then came a change, as all things human change."  To the east

arose the principality of Moscow--not an old, rich municipal

republic, but a young, vigorous State, ruled by a line of crafty,

energetic, ambitious, and unscrupulous princes of the Rurik stock,

who were freeing the country from the Tartar yoke and gradually

annexing by fair means and foul the neighbouring principalities to

their own dominions.  At the same time, and in a similar manner,

the Lithuanian Princes to the westward united various small

principalities and formed a large independent State.  Thus Novgorod

found itself in a critical position.  Under a strong Government it

might have held its own against these rivals and successfully

maintained its independence, but its strength was already

undermined by internal dissensions.  Political liberty had led to

anarchy.  Again and again on that great open space where the

national monument now stands, and in the market-place on the other

side of the river, scenes of disorder and bloodshed took place, and

more than once on the bridge battles were fought by contending

factions.  Sometimes it was a contest between rival families, and

sometimes a struggle between the municipal aristocracy, who sought

to monopolise the political power, and the common people, who

wished to have a large share in the administration.  A State thus

divided against itself could not long resist the aggressive

tendencies of powerful neighbours.  Artful diplomacy could but

postpone the evil day, and it required no great political foresight

to predict that sooner or later Novgorod must become Lithuanian or

Muscovite.  The great families inclined to Lithuania, but the

popular party and the clergy, disliking Roman Catholicism, looked

to Moscow for assistance, and the Grand Princes of Muscovy

ultimately won the prize.



The barbarous way in which the Grand Princes effected the

annexation shows how thoroughly they had imbibed the spirit of

Tartar statesmanship.  Thousands of families were transported to

Moscow, and Muscovite families put in their places; and when, in

spite of this, the old spirit revived, Ivan the Terrible determined

to apply the method of physical extermination which he had found so

effectual in breaking the power of his own nobles.  Advancing with

a large army, which met with no resistance, he devastated the

country with fire and sword, and during a residence of five weeks

in the town he put the inhabitants to death with a ruthless

ferocity which has perhaps never been surpassed even by Oriental

despots.  If those old walls could speak they would have many a

horrible tale to tell.  Enough has been preserved in the chronicles

to give us some idea of this awful time.  Monks and priests were

subjected to the Tartar punishment called pravezh, which consisted

in tying the victim to a stake, and flogging him daily until a

certain sum of money was paid for his release.  The merchants and

officials were tortured with fire, and then thrown from the bridge

with their wives and children into the river.  Lest any of them

should escape by swimming, boatfuls of soldiers despatched those

who were not killed by the fall.  At the present day there is a

curious bubbling immediately below the bridge, which prevents the

water from freezing in winter, and according to popular belief this

is caused by the spirits of the terrible Tsar's victims.  Of those

who were murdered in the villages there is no record, but in the

town alone no less than 60,000 human beings are said to have been

butchered--an awful hecatomb on the altar of national unity and

autocratic power!



This tragic scene, which occurred in 1570, closes the history of

Novgorod as an independent State.  Its real independence had long

since ceased to exist, and now the last spark of the old spirit was

extinguished.  The Tsars could not suffer even a shadow of

political independence to exist within their dominions.



In the old days, when many Hanseatic merchants annually visited the

city, and when the market-place, the bridge, and the Kremlin were

often the scene of violent political struggles, Novgorod must have

been an interesting place to live in; but now its glory has

departed, and in respect of social resources it is not even a

first-rate provincial town.  Kief, Kharkof, and other towns which

are situated at a greater distance from the capital, in districts

fertile enough to induce the nobles to farm their own land, are in

their way little semi-independent centres of civilisation.  They

contain a theatre, a library, two or three clubs, and large houses

belonging to rich landed proprietors, who spend the summer on their

estates and come into town for the winter months.  These

proprietors, together with the resident officials, form a numerous

society, and during the winter, dinner-parties, balls, and other

social gatherings are by no means infrequent.  In Novgorod the

society is much more limited.  It does not, like Kief, Kharkof, and

Kazan, possess a university, and it contains no houses belonging to

wealthy nobles.  The few proprietors of the province who live on

their estates, and are rich enough to spend part of the year in

town, prefer St. Petersburg for their winter residence.  The

society, therefore, is composed exclusively of the officials and of

the officers who happen to be quartered in the town or the

immediate vicinity.



Of all the people whose acquaintance I made at Novgorod, I can

recall only two men who did not occupy some official position,

civil or military.  One of these was a retired doctor, who was

attempting to farm on scientific principles, and who, I believe,

soon afterwards gave up the attempt and migrated elsewhere.  The

other was a Polish bishop who had been compromised in the

insurrection of 1863, and was condemned to live here under police

supervision.  This latter could scarcely be said to belong to the

society of the place; though he sometimes appeared at the

unceremonious weekly receptions given by the Governor, and was

invariably treated by all present with marked respect, he could not

but feel that he was in a false position, and he was rarely or

never seen in other houses.



The official circle of a town like Novgorod is sure to contain a

good many people of average education and agreeable manners, but it

is sure to be neither brilliant nor interesting.  Though it is

constantly undergoing a gradual renovation by the received system

of frequently transferring officials from one town to another, it

preserves faithfully, in spite of the new blood which it thus

receives, its essentially languid character.  When a new official

arrives he exchanges visits with all the notables, and for a few

days he produces quite a sensation in the little community.  If he

appears at social gatherings he is much talked to, and if he does

not appear he is much talked about.  His former history is

repeatedly narrated, and his various merits and defects assiduously

discussed.



If he is married, and has brought his wife with him, the field of

comment and discussion is very much enlarged.  The first time that

Madame appears in society she is the "cynosure of neighbouring

eyes."  Her features, her complexion, her hair, her dress, and her

jewellery are carefully noted and criticised.  Perhaps she has

brought with her, from the capital or from abroad, some dresses of

the newest fashion.  As soon as this is discovered she at once

becomes an object of special curiosity to the ladies, and of

envious jealousy to those who regard as a personal grievance the

presence of a toilette finer or more fashionable than their own.

Her demeanour, too, is very carefully observed.  If she is friendly

and affable in manner, she is patronised; if she is distant and

reserved, she is condemned as proud and pretentious.  In either

case she is pretty sure to form a close intimacy with some one of

the older female residents, and for a few weeks the two ladies are

inseparable, till some incautious word or act disturbs the new-born

friendship, and the devoted friends become bitter enemies.

Voluntarily or involuntarily the husbands get mixed up in the

quarrel.  Highly undesirable qualities are discovered in the

characters of all parties concerned, and are made the subject of

unfriendly comment.  Then the feud subsides, and some new feud of a

similar kind comes to occupy the public attention.  Mrs. A. wonders

how her friends Mr. and Mrs. B. can afford to lose considerable

sums every evening at cards, and suspects that they are getting

into debt or starving themselves and their children; in her humble

opinion they would do well to give fewer supper-parties, and to

refrain from poisoning their guests.  The bosom friend to whom this

is related retails it directly or indirectly to Mrs. B., and Mrs.

B. naturally retaliates.  Here is a new quarrel, which for some

time affords material for conversation.



When there is no quarrel, there is sure to be a bit of scandal

afloat.  Though Russian provincial society is not at all prudish,

and leans rather to the side of extreme leniency, it cannot

entirely overlook les convenances.  Madame C. has always a large

number of male admirers, and to this there can be no reasonable

objection so long as her husband does not complain, but she really

parades her preference for Mr. X. at balls and parties a little too

conspicuously.  Then there is Madame D., with the big dreamy eyes.

How can she remain in the place after her husband was killed in a

duel by a brother officer?  Ostensibly the cause of the quarrel was

a trifling incident at the card-table, but every one knows that in

reality she was the cause of the deadly encounter.  And so on, and

so on.  In the absence of graver interests society naturally

bestows inordinate attention on the private affairs of its members;

and quarrelling, backbiting, and scandal-mongery help indolent

people to kill the time that hangs heavily on their hands.



Potent as these instruments are, they are not sufficient to kill

all the leisure hours.  In the forenoons the gentlemen are occupied

with their official duties, whilst the ladies go out shopping or

pay visits, and devote any time that remains to their household

duties and their children; but the day's work is over about four

o'clock, and the long evening remains to be filled up.  The siesta

may dispose of an hour or an hour and a half, but about seven

o'clock some definite occupation has to be found.  As it is

impossible to devote the whole evening to discussing the ordinary

news of the day, recourse is almost invariably had to card-playing,

which is indulged in to an extent that we had no conception of in

England until Bridge was imported.  Hour after hour the Russians of

both sexes will sit in a hot room, filled with a constantly-renewed

cloud of tobacco-smoke--in the production of which most of the

ladies take part--and silently play "Preference," "Yarolash," or

Bridge.  Those who for some reason are obliged to be alone can

amuse themselves with "Patience," in which no partner is required.

In the other games the stakes are commonly very small, but the

sittings are often continued so long that a player may win or lose

two or three pounds sterling.  It is no unusual thing for gentlemen

to play for eight or nine hours at a time.  At the weekly club

dinners, before coffee had been served, nearly all present used to

rush off impatiently to the card-room, and sit there placidly from

five o'clock in the afternoon till one or two o'clock in the

morning!  When I asked my friends why they devoted so much time to

this unprofitable occupation, they always gave me pretty much the

same answer: "What are we to do?  We have been reading or writing

official papers all day, and in the evening we like to have a

little relaxation.  When we come together we have very little to

talk about, for we have all read the daily papers and nothing more.

The best thing we can do is to sit down at the card-table, where we

can spend our time pleasantly, without the necessity of talking."



In addition to the daily papers, some people read the monthly

periodicals--big, thick volumes, containing several serious

articles on historical and social subjects, sections of one or two

novels, satirical sketches, and a long review of home and foreign

politics on the model of those in the Revue des Deux Mondes.

Several of these periodicals are very ably conducted, and offer to

their readers a large amount of valuable information; but I have

noticed that the leaves of the more serious part often remain

uncut.  The translation of a sensation novel by the latest French

or English favourite finds many more readers than an article by an

historian or a political economist.  As to books, they seem to be

very little read, for during all the time I lived in Novgorod I

never discovered a bookseller's shop, and when I required books I

had to get them sent from St. Petersburg.  The local

administration, it is true, conceived the idea of forming a museum

and circulating library, but in my time the project was never

realised.  Of all the magnificent projects that are formed in

Russia, only a very small percentage come into existence, and these

are too often very short-lived.  The Russians have learned

theoretically what are the wants of the most advanced civilisation,

and are ever ready to rush into the grand schemes which their

theoretical knowledge suggests; but very few of them really and

permanently feel these wants, and consequently the institutions

artificially formed to satisfy them very soon languish and die.  In

the provincial towns the shops for the sale of gastronomic

delicacies spring up and flourish, whilst shops for the sale of

intellectual food are rarely to be met with.



About the beginning of December the ordinary monotony of Novgorod

life is a little relieved by the annual Provincial Assembly, which

sits daily for two or three weeks and discusses the economic wants

of the province.*  During this time a good many lauded proprietors,

who habitually live on their estates or in St. Petersburg, collect

in the town, and enliven a little the ordinary society.  But as

Christmas approaches the deputies disperse, and again the town

becomes enshrouded in that "eternal stillness" (vetchnaya tishina)

which a native poet has declared to be the essential characteristic

of Russian provincial life.





* Of these Assemblies I shall have more to say when I come to

describe the local self-government.


