





CHAPTER VIII



THE MIR, OR VILLAGE COMMUNITY





Social and Political Importance of the Mir--The Mir and the Family

Compared--Theory of the Communal System--Practical Deviations from

the Theory--The Mir a Good Specimen of Constitutional Government of

the Extreme Democratic Type--The Village Assembly--Female Members--

The Elections--Distribution of the Communal Land.





When I had gained a clear notion of the family-life and occupations

of the peasantry, I turned my attention to the constitution of the

village.  This was a subject which specially interested me, because

I was aware that the Mir is the most peculiar of Russian

institutions.  Long before visiting Russia I had looked into

Haxthausen's celebrated work, by which the peculiarities of the

Russian village system were first made known to Western Europe, and

during my stay in St. Petersburg I had often been informed by

intelligent, educated Russians that the rural Commune presented a

practical solution of many difficult social problems with which the

philosophers and statesmen of the West had long been vainly

struggling.  "The nations of the West"--such was the substance of

innumerable discourses which I had heard--"are at present on the

high-road to political and social anarchy, and England has the

unenviable distinction of being foremost in the race.  The natural

increase of population, together with the expropriation of the

small landholders by the great landed proprietors, has created a

dangerous and ever-increasing Proletariat--a great disorganised

mass of human beings, without homes, without permanent domicile,

without property of any kind, without any stake in the existing

institutions.  Part of these gain a miserable pittance as

agricultural labourers, and live in a condition infinitely worse

than serfage.  The others have been forever uprooted from the soil,

and have collected in the large towns, where they earn a precarious

living in the factories and workshops, or swell the ranks of the

criminal classes.  In England you have no longer a peasantry in the

proper sense of the term, and unless some radical measures be very

soon adopted, you will never be able to create such a class, for

men who have been long exposed to the unwholesome influences of

town life are physically and morally incapable of becoming

agriculturists.



"Hitherto," the disquisition proceeded, "England has enjoyed, in

consequence of her geographical position, her political freedom,

and her vast natural deposits of coal and iron, a wholly

exceptional position in the industrial world.  Fearing no

competition, she has proclaimed the principles of Free Trade, and

has inundated the world with her manufactures--using unscrupulously

her powerful navy and all the other forces at her command for

breaking down every barrier tending to check the flood sent forth

from Manchester and Birmingham.  In that way her hungry Proletariat

has been fed.  But the industrial supremacy of England is drawing

to a close.  The nations have discovered the perfidious fallacy of

Free-Trade principles, and are now learning to manufacture for

their own wants, instead of paying England enormous sums to

manufacture for them.  Very soon English goods will no longer find

foreign markets, and how will the hungry Proletariat then be fed?

Already the grain production of England is far from sufficient for

the wants of the population, so that, even when the harvest is

exceptionally abundant, enormous quantities of wheat are imported

from all quarters of the globe.  Hitherto this grain has been paid

for by the manufactured goods annually exported, but how will it be

procured when these goods are no longer wanted by foreign

consumers?  And what then will the hungry Proletariat do?"*





* This passage was written, precisely as it stands, long before the

fiscal question was raised by Mr. Chamberlain.  It will be found in

the first edition of this work, published in 1877.  (Vol. I., pp.

179-81.)





This sombre picture of England's future had often been presented to

me, and on nearly every occasion I had been assured that Russia had

been saved from these terrible evils by the rural Commune--an

institution which, in spite of its simplicity and incalculable

utility, West Europeans seemed utterly incapable of understanding

and appreciating.



The reader will now easily conceive with what interest I took to

studying this wonderful institution, and with what energy I

prosecuted my researches.  An institution which professes to solve

satisfactorily the most difficult social problems of the future is

not to be met with every day, even in Russia, which is specially

rich in material for the student of social science.



On my arrival at Ivanofka my knowledge of the institution was of

that vague, superficial kind which is commonly derived from men who

are fonder of sweeping generalisations and rhetorical declamation

than of serious, patient study of phenomena.  I knew that the chief

personage in a Russian village is the Selski Starosta, or Village

Elder, and that all important Communal affairs are regulated by the

Selski Skhod, or Village Assembly.  Further, I was aware that the

land in the vicinity of the village belongs to the Commune, and is

distributed periodically among the members in such a way that every

able-bodied peasant possesses a share sufficient, or nearly

sufficient, for his maintenance.  Beyond this elementary

information I knew little or nothing.



My first attempt at extending my knowledge was not very successful.

Hoping that my friend Ivan might be able to assist me, and knowing

that the popular name for the Commune is Mir, which means also "the

world," I put to him the direct, simple question, "What is the

Mir?"



Ivan was not easily disconcerted, but for once he looked puzzled,

and stared at me vacantly.  When I endeavoured to explain to him my

question, he simply knitted his brows and scratched the back of his

head.  This latter movement is the Russian peasant's method of

accelerating cerebral action; but in the present instance it had no

practical result.  In spite of his efforts, Ivan could not get much

further than the "Kak vam skazat'?" that is to say, "How am I to

tell you?"



It was not difficult to perceive that I had adopted an utterly

false method of investigation, and a moment's reflection sufficed

to show me the absurdity of my question.  I had asked from an

uneducated man a philosophical definition, instead of extracting

from him material in the form of concrete facts, and constructing

therefrom a definition for myself.  These concrete facts Ivan was

both able and willing to supply; and as soon as I adopted a

rational mode of questioning, I obtained from him all I wanted.

The information he gave me, together with the results of much

subsequent conversation and reading, I now propose to present to

the reader in my own words.



The peasant family of the old type is, as we have just seen, a kind

of primitive association in which the members have nearly all

things in common.  The village may be roughly described as a

primitive association on a larger scale.



Between these two social units there are many points of analogy.

In both there are common interests and common responsibilities.  In

both there is a principal personage, who is in a certain sense

ruler within and representative as regards the outside world: in

the one case called Khozain, or Head of the Household, and in the

other Starosta, or Village Elder.  In both the authority of the

ruler is limited: in the one case by the adult members of the

family, and in the other by the Heads of Households.  In both there

is a certain amount of common property: in the one case the house

and nearly all that it contains, and in the other the arable land

and possibly a little pasturage.  In both cases there is a certain

amount of common responsibility: in the one case for all the debts,

and in the other for all the taxes and Communal obligations.  And

both are protected to a certain extent against the ordinary legal

consequences of insolvency, for the family cannot be deprived of

its house or necessary agricultural implements, and the Commune

cannot be deprived of its land, by importunate creditors.



On the other hand, there are many important points of contrast. The

Commune is, of course, much larger than the family, and the mutual

relations of its members are by no means so closely interwoven.

The members of a family all farm together, and those of them who

earn money from other sources are expected to put their savings

into the common purse; whilst the households composing a Commune

farm independently, and pay into the common treasury only a certain

fixed sum.



From these brief remarks the reader will at once perceive that a

Russian village is something very different from a village in our

sense of the term, and that the villagers are bound together by

ties quite unknown to the English rural population.  A family

living in an English village has little reason to take an interest

in the affairs of its neighbours.  The isolation of the individual

families is never quite perfect, for man, being a social animal,

takes necessarily a certain interest in the affairs of those around

him, and this social duty is sometimes fulfilled by the weaker sex

with more zeal than is absolutely indispensable for the public

welfare; but families may live for many years in the same village

without ever becoming conscious of common interests.  So long as

the Jones family do not commit any culpable breach of public order,

such as putting obstructions on the highway or habitually setting

their house on fire, their neighbour Brown takes probably no

interest in their affairs, and has no ground for interfering with

their perfect liberty of action.  Amongst the families composing a

Russian village, such a state of isolation is impossible.  The

Heads of Households must often meet together and consult in the

Village Assembly, and their daily occupation must be influenced by

the Communal decrees.  They cannot begin to mow the hay or plough

the fallow field until the Village Assembly has passed a resolution

on the subject.  If a peasant becomes a drunkard, or takes some

equally efficient means to become insolvent, every family in the

village has a right to complain, not merely in the interests of

public morality, but from selfish motives, because all the families

are collectively responsible for his taxes.*  For the same reason

no peasant can permanently leave the village without the consent of

the Commune, and this consent will not be granted until the

applicant gives satisfactory security for the fulfilment of his

actual and future liabilities.  If a peasant wishes to go away for

a short time, in order to work elsewhere, he must obtain a written

permission, which serves him as a passport during his absence; and

he may be recalled at any moment by a Communal decree.  In reality

he is rarely recalled so long as he sends home regularly the full

amount of his taxes--including the dues which he has to pay for the

temporary passport--but sometimes the Commune uses the power of

recall for purposes of extortion.  If it becomes known, for

instance, that an absent member is receiving a good salary or

otherwise making money, he may one day receive a formal order to

return at once to his native village, but he is probably informed

at the same time, unofficially, that his presence will be dispensed

with if he will send to the Commune a certain specified sum.  The

money thus sent is generally used by the Commune for convivial

purposes. **





* This common responsibility for the taxes was abolished in 1903 by

the Emperor, on the advice of M. Witte, and the other Communal

fetters are being gradually relaxed.  A peasant may now, if he

wishes, cease to be a member of the Commune altogether, as soon as

he has defrayed all his outstanding obligations.



** With the recent relaxing of the Communal fetters, referred to in

the foregoing note, this abuse should disappear.





In all countries the theory of government and administration

differs considerably from the actual practice.  Nowhere is this

difference greater than in Russia, and in no Russian institution is

it greater than in the Village Commune.  It is necessary,

therefore, to know both theory and practice; and it is well to

begin with the former, because it is the simpler of the two.  When

we have once thoroughly mastered the theory, it is easy to

understand the deviations that are made to suit peculiar local

conditions.



According, then, to theory, all male peasants in every part of the

Empire are inscribed in census-lists, which form the basis of the

direct taxation.  These lists are revised at irregular intervals,

and all males alive at the time of the "revision," from the newborn

babe to the centenarian, are duly inscribed.  Each Commune has a

list of this kind, and pays to the Government an annual sum

proportionate to the number of names which the list contains, or,

in popular language, according to the number of "revision souls."

During the intervals between the revisions the financial

authorities take no notice of the births and deaths.  A Commune

which has a hundred male members at the time of the revision may

have in a few years considerably more or considerably less than

that number, but it has to pay taxes for a hundred members all the

same until a new revision is made for the whole Empire.



Now in Russia, so far at least as the rural population is

concerned, the payment of taxes is inseparably connected with the

possession of land.  Every peasant who pays taxes is supposed to

have a share of the land belonging to the Commune.  If the Communal

revision lists contain a hundred names, the Communal land ought to

be divided into a hundred shares, and each "revision soul" should

enjoy his share in return for the taxes which he pays.



The reader who has followed my explanations up to this point may

naturally conclude that the taxes paid by the peasants are in

reality a species of rent for the land which they enjoy.  Such a

conclusion would not be altogether justified.  When a man rents a

bit of land he acts according to his own judgment, and makes a

voluntary contract with the proprietor; but the Russian peasant is

obliged to pay his taxes whether he desires to enjoy land or not.

The theory, therefore, that the taxes are simply the rent of the

land will not bear even superficial examination.  Equally untenable

is the theory that they are a species of land-tax.  In any

reasonable system of land-dues the yearly sum imposed bears some

kind of proportion to the quantity and quality of the land enjoyed;

but in Russia it may be that the members of one Commune possess six

acres of bad land, and the members of the neighbouring Commune

seven acres of good land, and yet the taxes in both cases are the

same.  The truth is that the taxes are personal, and are calculated

according to the number of male "souls," and the Government does

not take the trouble to inquire how the Communal land is

distributed.  The Commune has to pay into the Imperial Treasury a

fixed yearly sum, according to the number of its "revision souls,"

and distributes the land among its members as it thinks fit.



How, then, does the Commune distribute the land?  To this question

it is impossible to reply in brief, general terms, because each

Commune acts as it pleases!*  Some act strictly according to the

theory.  These divide their land at the time of the revision into a

number of portions or shares corresponding to the number of

revision souls, and give to each family a number of shares

corresponding to the number of revision souls which it contains.

This is from the administrative point of view by far the simplest

system.  The census-list determines how much land each family will

enjoy, and the existing tenures are disturbed only by the revisions

which take place at irregular intervals.**  But, on the other hand,

this system has serious defects.  The revision-list represents

merely the numerical strength of the families, and the numerical

strength is often not at all in proportion to the working power.

Let us suppose, for example, two families, each containing at the

time of the revision five male members.  According to the census-

list these two families are equal, and ought to receive equal

shares of the land; but in reality it may happen that the one

contains a father in the prime of life and four able-bodies sons,

whilst the other contains a widow and five little boys.  The wants

and working power of these two families are of course very

different; and if the above system of distribution be applied, the

man with four sons and a goodly supply of grandchildren will

probably find that he has too little land, whilst the widow with

her five little boys will find it difficult to cultivate the five

shares alloted to her, and utterly impossible to pay the

corresponding amount of taxation--for in all cases, it must be

remembered, the Communal burdens are distributed in the same

proportion as the land.





* A long list of the various systems of allotment to be found in

individual Communes in different parts of the country is given in

the opening chapter of a valuable work by Karelin, entitled

"Obshtchinnoye Vladyenie v Rossii" (St. Petersburg, 1893).  As my

object is to convey to the reader merely a general idea of the

institution, I refrain from confusing him by an enumeration of the

endless divergencies from the original type.



** Since 1719 eleven revisions have been made, the last in 1897.

The intervals varied from six to forty-one years.





But why, it may be said, should the widow not accept provisionally

the five shares, and let to others the part which she does not

require?  The balance of rent after payment of the taxes might help

her to bring up her young family.



So it seems to one acquainted only with the rural economy of

England, where land is scarce, and always gives a revenue more than

sufficient to defray the taxes.  But in Russia the possession of a

share of Communal land is often not a privilege, but a burden.  In

some Communes the land is so poor and abundant that it cannot be

let at any price.  In others the soil will repay cultivation, but a

fair rent will not suffice to pay the taxes and dues.



To obviate these inconvenient results of the simpler system, many

Communes have adopted the expedient of allotting the land, not

according to the number of revision souls, but according to the

working power of the families.  Thus, in the instance above

supposed, the widow would receive perhaps two shares, and the large

household, containing five workers, would receive perhaps seven or

eight.  Since the breaking-up of the large families, such

inequality as I have supposed is, of course, rare; but inequality

of a less extreme kind does still occur, and justifies a departure

from the system of allotment according to the revision-lists.



Even if the allotment be fair and equitable at the time of the

revision, it may soon become unfair and burdensome by the natural

fluctuations of the population.  Births and deaths may in the

course of a very few years entirely alter the relative working

power of the various families.  The sons of the widow may grow up

to manhood, whilst two or three able-bodied members of the other

family may be cut off by an epidemic.  Thus, long before a new

revision takes place, the distribution of the land may be no longer

in accordance with the wants and capacities of the various families

composing the Commune.  To correct this, various expedients are

employed.  Some Communes transfer particular lots from one family

to another, as circumstances demand; whilst others make from time

to time, during the intervals between the revisions, a complete

redistribution and reallotment of the land.  Of these two systems

the former is now more frequently employed.



The system of allotment adopted depends entirely on the will of the

particular Commune.  In this respect the Communes enjoy the most

complete autonomy, and no peasant ever dreams of appealing against

a Communal decree.*  The higher authorities not only abstain from

all interference in the allotment of the Communal lands, but remain

in profound ignorance as to which system the Communes habitually

adopt.  Though the Imperial Administration has a most voracious

appetite for symmetrically constructed statistical tables--many of

them formed chiefly out of materials supplied by the mysterious

inner consciousness of the subordinate officials--no attempt has

yet been made, so far as I know, to collect statistical data which

might throw light on this important subject.  In spite of the

systematic and persistent efforts of the centralised bureaucracy to

regulate minutely all departments of the national life, the rural

Communes, which contain about five-sixths of the population, remain

in many respects entirely beyond its influence, and even beyond its

sphere of vision!  But let not the reader be astonished overmuch.

He will learn in time that Russia is the land of paradoxes; and

meanwhile he is about to receive a still more startling bit of

information.  In "the great stronghold of Caesarian despotism and

centralised bureaucracy," these Village Communes, containing about

five-sixths of the population, are capital specimens of

representative Constitutional government of the extreme democratic

type!





* This has been somewhat modified by recent legislation.  According

to the Emancipation Law of 1861, redistribution of the land could

take place at any time provided it was voted by a majority of two-

thirds at the Village Assembly.  By a law of 1893 redistribution

cannot take place oftener than once in twelve years, and must

receive the sanction of certain local authorities.





When I say that the rural Commune is a good specimen of

Constitutional government, I use the phrase in the English, and not

in the Continental sense.  In the Continental languages a

Constitutional regime implies the existence of a long, formal

document, in which the functions of the various institutions, the

powers of the various authorities, and the methods of procedure are

carefully defined.  Such a document was never heard of in Russian

Village Communes, except those belonging to the Imperial Domains,

and the special legislation which formerly regulated their affairs

was repealed at the time of the Emancipation.  At the present day

the Constitution of all the Village Communes is of the English

type--a body of unwritten, traditional conceptions, which have

grown up and modified themselves under the influence of ever-

changing practical necessity.  No doubt certain definitions of the

functions and mutual relations of the Communal authorities might be

extracted from the Emancipation Law and subsequent official

documents, but as a rule neither the Village Elder nor the members

of the Village Assembly ever heard of such definitions; and yet

every peasant knows, as if by instinct, what each of these

authorities can do and cannot do.  The Commune is, in fact, a

living institution, whose spontaneous vitality enables it to

dispense with the assistance and guidance of the written law, and

its constitution is thoroughly democratic.  The Elder represents

merely the executive power.  The real authority resides in the

Assembly, of which all Heads of Households are members.*





* An attempt was made by Alexander III. in 1884 to bring the rural

Communes under supervision and control by the appointment of rural

officials called Zemskiye Natchalniki.  Of this so-called reform I

shall have occasion to speak later.





The simple procedure, or rather the absence of all formal

procedure, at the Assemblies, illustrates admirably the essentially

practical character of the institution.  The meetings are held in

the open air, because in the village there is no building--except

the church, which can be used only for religious purposes--large

enough to contain all the members; and they almost always take

place on Sundays or holidays, when the peasants have plenty of

leisure.  Any open space may serve as a Forum.  The discussions are

occasionally very animated, but there is rarely any attempt at

speech-making.  If any young member should show an inclination to

indulge in oratory, he is sure to be unceremoniously interrupted by

some of the older members, who have never any sympathy with fine

talking.  The assemblage has the appearance of a crowd of people

who have accidentally come together and are discussing in little

groups subjects of local interest.  Gradually some one group,

containing two or three peasants who have more moral influence than

their fellows, attracts the others, and the discussion becomes

general.  Two or more peasants may speak at a time, and interrupt

each other freely--using plain, unvarnished language, not at all

parliamentary--and the discussion may become a confused,

unintelligible din; but at the moment when the spectator imagines

that the consultation is about to be transformed into a free fight,

the tumult spontaneously subsides, or perhaps a general roar of

laughter announces that some one has been successfully hit by a

strong argumentum ad hominem, or biting personal remark.  In any

case there is no danger of the disputants coming to blows.  No

class of men in the world are more good-natured and pacific than

the Russian peasantry.  When sober they never fight, and even when

under the influence of alcohol they are more likely to be violently

affectionate than disagreeably quarrelsome.  If two of them take to

drinking together, the probability is that in a few minutes, though

they may never have seen each other before, they will be expressing

in very strong terms their mutual regard and affection, confirming

their words with an occasional friendly embrace.



Theoretically speaking, the Village Parliament has a Speaker, in

the person of the Village Elder.  The word Speaker is

etymologically less objectionable than the term President, for the

personage in question never sits down, but mingles in the crowd

like the ordinary members.  Objection may be taken to the word on

the ground that the Elder speaks much less than many other members,

but this may likewise be said of the Speaker of the House of

Commons.  Whatever we may call him, the Elder is officially the

principal personage in the crowd, and wears the insignia of office

in the form of a small medal suspended from his neck by a thin

brass chain.  His duties, however, are extremely light.  To call to

order those who interrupt the discussion is no part of his

functions.  If he calls an honourable member "Durak" (blockhead),

or interrupts an orator with a laconic "Moltchi!" (hold your

tongue!), he does so in virtue of no special prerogative, but

simply in accordance with a time-honoured privilege, which is

equally enjoyed by all present, and may be employed with impunity

against himself.  Indeed, it may be said in general that the

phraseology and the procedure are not subjected to any strict

rules.  The Elder comes prominently forward only when it is

necessary to take the sense of the meeting.  On such occasions he

may stand back a little from the crowd and say, "Well, orthodox,

have you decided so?" and the crowd will probably shout, "Ladno!

ladno!" that is to say, "Agreed! agreed!"



Communal measures are generally carried in this way by acclamation;

but it sometimes happens that there is such a diversity of opinion

that it is difficult to tell which of the two parties has a

majority.  In this case the Elder requests the one party to stand

to the right and the other to the left.  The two groups are then

counted, and the minority submits, for no one ever dreams of

opposing openly the will of the Mir.



During the reign of Nicholas I. an attempt was made to regulate by

the written law the procedure of Village Assemblies amongst the

peasantry of the State Domains, and among other reforms voting by

ballot was introduced; but the new custom never struck root.  The

peasants did not regard with favour the new method, and persisted

in calling it, contemptuously, "playing at marbles."  Here, again,

we have one of those wonderful and apparently anomalous facts which

frequently meet the student of Russian affairs: the Emperor

Nicholas I., the incarnation of autocracy and the champion of the

Reactionary Party throughout Europe, forces the ballot-box, the

ingenious invention of extreme radicals, on several millions of his

subjects!



In the northern provinces, where a considerable portion of the male

population is always absent, the Village Assembly generally

includes a good many female members.  These are women who, on

account of the absence or death of their husbands, happen to be for

the moment Heads of Households.  As such they are entitled to be

present, and their right to take part in the deliberations is never

called in question.  In matters affecting the general welfare of

the Commune they rarely speak, and if they do venture to enounce an

opinion on such occasions they have little chance of commanding

attention, for the Russian peasantry are as yet little imbued with

the modern doctrines of female equality, and express their opinion

of female intelligence by the homely adage: "The hair is long, but

the mind is short."  According to one proverb, seven women have

collectively but one soul, and, according to a still more ungallant

popular saying, women have no souls at all, but only a vapour.

Woman, therefore, as woman, is not deserving of much consideration,

but a particular woman, as Head of a Household, is entitled to

speak on all questions directly affecting the household under her

care.  If, for instance, it be proposed to increase or diminish her

household's share of the land and the burdens, she will be allowed

to speak freely on the subject, and even to indulge in personal

invective against her male opponents.  She thereby exposes herself,

it is true, to uncomplimentary remarks; but any which she happens

to receive she is pretty sure to repay with interest--referring,

perhaps, with pertinent virulence to the domestic affairs of those

who attack her.  And when argument and invective fail, she can try

the effect of pathetic appeal, supported by copious tears.



As the Village Assembly is really a representative institution in

the full sense of the term, it reflects faithfully the good and the

bad qualities of the rural population.  Its decisions are therefore

usually characterised by plain, practical common sense, but it is

subject to occasional unfortunate aberrations in consequence of

pernicious influences, chiefly of an alcoholic kind.  An instance

of this fact occurred during my sojourn at Ivanofka.  The question

under discussion was whether a kabak, or gin-shop, should be

established in the village.  A trader from the district town

desired to establish one, and offered to pay to the Commune a

yearly sum for the necessary permission.  The more industrious,

respectable members of the Commune, backed by the whole female

population, were strongly opposed to the project, knowing full well

that a kabak would certainly lead to the ruin of more than one

household; but the enterprising trader had strong arguments

wherewith to seduce a large number of the members, and succeeded in

obtaining a decision in his favour.



The Assembly discusses all matters affecting the Communal welfare,

and, as these matters have never been legally defined, its

recognised competence is very wide.  It fixes the time for making

the hay, and the day for commencing the ploughing of the fallow

field; it decrees what measures shall be employed against those who

do not punctually pay their taxes; it decides whether a new member

shall be admitted into the Commune, and whether an old member shall

be allowed to change his domicile; it gives or withholds permission

to erect new buildings on the Communal land; it prepares and signs

all contracts which the Commune makes with one of its own members

or with a stranger; it interferes whenever it thinks necessary in

the domestic affairs of its members; it elects the Elder--as well

as the Communal tax-collector and watchman, where such offices

exist--and the Communal herd-boy; above all, it divides and allots

the Communal land among the members as it thinks fit.



Of all these various proceedings the English reader may naturally

assume that the elections are the most noisy and exciting.  In

reality this is a mistake.  The elections produce little

excitement, for the simple reason that, as a rule, no one desires

to be elected.  Once, it is said, a peasant who had been guilty of

some misdemeanor was informed by an Arbiter of the Peace--a species

of official of which I shall have occasion to speak in the sequel--

that he would be no longer capable of filling any Communal office;

and instead of regretting this diminution of his civil rights, he

bowed very low, and respectfully expressed his thanks for the new

privilege which he had acquired.  This anecdote may not be true,

but it illustrates the undoubted fact that the Russian peasant

regards office as a burden rather than as an honour.  There is no

civic ambition in those little rural commonwealths, whilst the

privilege of wearing a bronze medal, which commands no respect, and

the reception of a few roubles as salary afford no adequate

compensation for the trouble, annoyance, and responsibility which a

Village Elder has to bear.  The elections are therefore generally

very tame and uninteresting.  The following description may serve

as an illustration:



It is a Sunday afternoon.  The peasants, male and female, have

turned out in Sunday attire, and the bright costumes of the women

help the sunshine to put a little rich colour into the scene, which

is at ordinary times monotonously grey.  Slowly the crowd collects

on the open space at the side of the church.  All classes of the

population are represented.  On the extreme outskirts are a band of

fair-haired, merry children--some of them standing or lying on the

grass and gazing attentively at the proceedings, and others running

about and amusing themselves.  Close to these stand a group of

young girls, convulsed with half-suppressed laughter.  The cause of

their merriment is a youth of some seventeen summers, evidently the

wag of the village, who stands beside them with an accordion in his

hand, and relates to them in a half-whisper how he is about to be

elected Elder, and what mad pranks he will play in that capacity.

When one of the girls happens to laugh outright, the matrons who

are standing near turn round and scowl; and one of them, stepping

forward, orders the offender, in a tone of authority, to go home at

once if she cannot behave herself.  Crestfallen, the culprit

retires, and the youth who is the cause of the merriment makes the

incident the subject of a new joke.  Meanwhile the deliberations

have begun.  The majority of the members are chatting together, or

looking at a little group composed of three peasants and a woman,

who are standing a little apart from the others.  Here alone the

matter in hand is being really discussed.  The woman is explaining,

with tears in her eyes, and with a vast amount of useless

repetition, that her "old man," who is Elder for the time being, is

very ill, and cannot fulfil his duties.



"But he has not yet served a year, and he'll get better," remarks

one peasant, evidently the youngest of the little group.



"Who knows?" replies the woman, sobbing.  "It is the will of God,

but I don't believe that he'll ever put his foot to the ground

again.  The Feldsher has been four times to see him, and the doctor

himself came once, and said that he must be brought to the

hospital."



"And why has he not been taken there?"



"How could he be taken?  Who is to carry him?  Do you think he's a

baby?  The hospital is forty versts off.  If you put him in a cart

he would die before he had gone a verst.  And then, who knows what

they do with people in the hospital?"  This last question contained

probably the true reason why the doctor's orders had been

disobeyed.



"Very well, that's enough; hold your tongue," says the grey-beard

of the little group to the woman; and then, turning to the other

peasants, remarks, "There is nothing to be done.  The Stanovoi

[officer of rural police] will be here one of these days, and will

make a row again if we don't elect a new Elder.  Whom shall we

choose?"



As soon as this question is asked several peasants look down to the

ground, or try in some other way to avoid attracting attention,

lest their names should be suggested.  When the silence has

continued a minute or two, the greybeard says, "There is Alexei

Ivanof; he has not served yet!"



"Yes, yes, Alexei Ivanof!" shout half-a-dozen voices, belonging

probably to peasants who fear they may be elected.



Alexei protests in the strongest terms.  He cannot say that he is

ill, because his big ruddy face would give him the lie direct, but

he finds half-a-dozen other reasons why he should not be chosen,

and accordingly requests to be excused.  But his protestations are

not listened to, and the proceedings terminate.  A new Village

Elder has been duly elected.



Far more important than the elections is the redistribution of the

Communal land.  It can matter but little to the Head of a Household

how the elections go, provided he himself is not chosen.  He can

accept with perfect equanimity Alexei, or Ivan, or Nikolai, because

the office-bearers have very little influence in Communal affairs.

But he cannot remain a passive, indifferent spectator when the

division and allotment of the land come to be discussed, for the

material welfare of every household depends to a great extent on

the amount of land and of burdens which it receives.



In the southern provinces, where the soil is fertile, and the taxes

do not exceed the normal rent, the process of division and

allotment is comparatively simple.  Here each peasant desires to

get as much land as possible, and consequently each household

demands all the land to which it is entitled--that is to say, a

number of shares equal to the number of its members inscribed in

the last revision list.  The Assembly has therefore no difficult

questions to decide.  The Communal revision list determines the

number of shares into which the land must be divided, and the

number of shares to be allotted to each family.  The only

difficulty likely to arise is as to which particular shares a

particular family shall receive, and this difficulty is commonly

obviated by the custom of drawing lots.  There may be, it is true,

some difference of opinion as to when a redistribution should be

made, but this question is easily decided by a vote of the

Assembly.



Very different is the process of division and allotment in many

Communes of the northern provinces.  Here the soil is often very

unfertile and the taxes exceed the normal rent, and consequently it

may happen that the peasants strive to have as little land as

possible.  In these cases such scenes as the following may occur:



Ivan is being asked how many shares of the Communal land he will

take, and replies in a slow, contemplative way, "I have two sons,

and there is myself, so I'll take three shares, or somewhat less,

if it is your pleasure."



"Less!" exclaims a middle-aged peasant, who is not the Village

Elder, but merely an influential member, and takes the leading part

in the proceedings.  "You talk nonsense.  Your two sons are already

old enough to help you, and soon they may get married, and so bring

you two new female labourers."



"My eldest son," explains Ivan, "always works in Moscow, and the

other often leaves me in summer."



"But they both send or bring home money, and when they get married,

the wives will remain with you."



"God knows what will be," replies Ivan, passing over in silence the

first part of his opponent's remark.  "Who knows if they will

marry?"



"You can easily arrange that!"



"That I cannot do.  The times are changed now.  The young people do

as they wish, and when they do get married they all wish to have

houses of their own.  Three shares will be heavy enough for me!"



"No, no.  If they wish to separate from you, they will take some

land from you.  You must take at least four.  The old wives there

who have little children cannot take shares according to the number

of souls."



"He is a rich muzhik!" says a voice in the crowd.  "Lay on him five

souls!" (that is to say, give him five shares of the land and of

the burdens).



"Five souls I cannot!  By God, I cannot!"



"Very well, you shall have four," says the leading spirit to Ivan;

and then, turning to the crowd, inquires, "Shall it be so?"



"Four! four!" murmurs the crowd; and the question is settled.



Next comes one of the old wives just referred to.  Her husband is a

permanent invalid, and she has three little boys, only one of whom

is old enough for field labour.  If the number of souls were taken

as the basis of distribution, she would receive four shares; but

she would never be able to pay four shares of the Communal burdens.

She must therefore receive less than that amount.  When asked how

many she will take, she replies with downcast eyes, "As the Mir

decides, so be it!"



"Then you must take three."



"What do you say, little father?" cries the woman, throwing off

suddenly her air of submissive obedience.  "Do you hear that, ye

orthodox?  They want to lay upon me three souls!  Was such a thing

ever heard of?  Since St. Peter's Day my husband has been

bedridden--bewitched, it seems, for nothing does him good.  He

cannot put a foot to the ground--all the same as if he were dead;

only he eats bread!"



"You talk nonsense," says a neighbour; "he was in the kabak [gin-

shop] last week."



"And you!" retorts the woman, wandering from the subject in hand;

"what did YOU do last parish fete?  Was it not you who got drunk

and beat your wife till she roused the whole village with her

shrieking?  And no further gone than last Sunday--pfu!"



"Listen!" says the old man, sternly cutting short the torrent of

invective.  "You must take at least two shares and a half.  If you

cannot manage it yourself, you can get some one to help you."



"How can that be?  Where am I to get the money to pay a labourer?"

asks the woman, with much wailing and a flood of tears.  "Have

pity, ye orthodox, on the poor orphans!  God will reward you!" and

so on, and so on.



I need not worry the reader with a further description of these

scenes, which are always very long and sometimes violent.  All

present are deeply interested, for the allotment of the land is by

far the most important event in Russian peasant life, and the

arrangement cannot be made without endless talking and discussion.

After the number of shares for each family has been decided, the

distribution of the lots gives rise to new difficulties.  The

families who have plentifully manured their land strive to get back

their old lots, and the Commune respects their claims so far as

these are consistent with the new arrangement; but often it happens

that it is impossible to conciliate private rights and Communal

interests, and in such cases the former are sacrificed in a way

that would not be tolerated by men of Anglo-Saxon race.  This

leads, however, to no serious consequences.  The peasants are

accustomed to work together in this way, to make concessions for

the Communal welfare, and to bow unreservedly to the will of the

Mir.  I know of many instances where the peasants have set at

defiance the authority of the police, of the provincial governor,

and of the central Government itself, but I have never heard of any

instance where the will of the Mir was openly opposed by one of its

members.



In the preceding pages I have repeatedly spoken about "shares of

the Communal land."  To prevent misconception I must explain

carefully what this expression means.  A share does not mean simply

a plot or parcel of land; on the contrary, it always contains at

least four, and may contain a large number of distinct plots.  We

have here a new point of difference between the Russian village and

the villages of Western Europe.



Communal land in Russia is of three kinds: the land on which the

village is built, the arable land, and the meadow or hay-field, if

the village is fortunate enough to possess one.  On the first of

these each family possesses a house and garden, which are the

hereditary property of the family, and are never affected by the

periodical redistributions.  The other two kinds are both subject

to redistribution, but on somewhat different principles.



The whole of the Communal arable land is first of all divided into

three fields, to suit the triennial rotation of crops already

described, and each field is divided into a number of long narrow

strips--corresponding to the number of male members in the Commune--

as nearly as possible equal to each other in area and quality.

Sometimes it is necessary to divide the field into several

portions, according to the quality of the soil, and then to

subdivide each of these portions into the requisite number of

strips.  Thus in all cases every household possesses at least one

strip in each field; and in those cases where subdivision is

necessary, every household possesses a strip in each of the

portions into which the field is subdivided.  It often happens,

therefore, that the strips are very narrow, and the portions

belonging to each family very numerous.  Strips six feet wide are

by no means rare.  In 124 villages of the province of Moscow,

regarding which I have special information, they varied in width

from 3 to 45 yards, with an average of 11 yards.  Of these narrow

strips a household may possess as many as thirty in a single field!

The complicated process of division and subdivision is accomplished

by the peasants themselves, with the aid of simple measuring-rods,

and the accuracy of the result is truly marvellous.



The meadow, which is reserved for the production of hay, is divided

into the same number of shares as the arable land.  There, however,

the division and distribution take place, not at irregular

intervals, but annually.  Every year, on a day fixed by the

Assembly, the villagers proceed in a body to this part of their

property, and divide it into the requisite number of portions.

Lots are then cast, and each family at once mows the portion

allotted to it.  In some Communes the meadow is mown by all the

peasants in common, and the hay afterwards distributed by lot among

the families; but this system is by no means so frequently used.



As the whole of the Communal land thus resembles to some extent a

big farm, it is necessary to make certain rules concerning

cultivation.  A family may sow what it likes in the land allotted

to it, but all families must at least conform to the accepted

system of rotation.  In like manner, a family cannot begin the

autumn ploughing before the appointed time, because it would

thereby interfere with the rights of the other families, who use

the fallow field as pasturage.



It is not a little strange that this primitive system of land

tenure should have succeeded in living into the twentieth century,

and still more remarkable that the institution of which it forms an

essential part should be regarded by many intelligent people as one

of the great institutions of the future, and almost as a panacea

for social and political evils.  The explanation of these facts

will form the subject of the next chapter.

