




CHAPTER XV



THE COSSACKS





Lawlessness on the Steppe--Slave-markets of the Crimea--The

Military Cordon and the Free Cossacks--The Zaporovian Commonwealth

Compared with Sparta and with the Mediaeval Military Orders--The

Cossacks of the Don, of the Volga, and of the Ural--Border Warfare--

The Modern Cossacks--Land Tenure among the Cossacks of the Don--

The Transition from Pastoral to Agriculture Life--"Universal Law"

of Social Development--Communal versus Private Property--Flogging

as a Means of Land-registration.





No sooner had the Grand Princes of Moscow thrown off the Mongol

yoke and become independent Tsars of Muscovy than they began that

eastward territorial expansion which has been going on steadily

ever since, and which culminated in the occupation of Talienwan and

Port Arthur.  Ivan the Terrible conquered the Khanates of Kazan and

Astrakhan (1552-54) and reduced to nominal subjection the Bashkir

and Kirghiz tribes in the vicinity of the Volga, but he did not

thereby establish law and order on the Steppe.  The lawless tribes

retained their old pastoral mode of life and predatory habits, and

harassed the Russian agricultural population of the outlying

provinces in the same way as the Red Indians in America used to

harass the white colonists of the Far West.  A large section of the

Horde, inhabiting the Crimea and the Steppe to the north of the

Black Sea, escaped annexation by submitting to the Ottoman Turks

and becoming tributaries of the Sultan.



The Turks were at that time a formidable power, with which the

Tsars of Muscovy were too weak to cope successfully, and the Khan

of the Crimea could always, when hard pressed by his northern

neighbours, obtain assistance from Constantinople.  This potentate

exercised a nominal authority over the pastoral tribes which roamed

on the Steppe between the Crimea and the Russian frontier, but he

had neither the power nor the desire to control their aggressive

tendencies.  Their raids in Russian and Polish territory ensured,

among other advantages, a regular and plentiful supply of slaves,

which formed the chief article of export from Kaffa--the modern

Theodosia--and from the other seaports of the coast.



Of this slave trade, which flourished down to 1783, when the Crimea

was finally conquered and annexed by Russia, we have a graphic

account by an eye-witness, a Lithuanian traveller of the sixteenth

century.  "Ships from Asia," he says, "bring arms, clothes, and

horses to the Crimean Tartars, and start on the homeward voyage

laden with slaves.  It is for this kind of merchandise alone that

the Crimean markets are remarkable.  Slaves may be always had for

sale as a pledge or as a present, and every one rich enough to have

a horse deals in them.  If a man wishes to buy clothes, arms, or

horses, and does not happen to have at the moment any slaves, he

takes on credit the articles required, and makes a formal promise

to deliver at a certain time a certain number of people of our

blood--being convinced that he can get by that time the requisite

number.  And these promises are always accurately fulfilled, as if

those who made them had always a supply of our people in their

courtyards.  A Jewish money-changer, sitting at the gate of Tauris

and seeing constantly the countless multitude of our countrymen led

in as captives, asked us whether there still remained any people in

our land, and whence came such a multitude of them.  The stronger

of these captives, branded on the forehead and cheeks and manacled

or fettered, are tortured by severe labour all day, and are shut up

in dark cells at night.  They are kept alive by small quantities of

food, composed chiefly of the flesh of animals that have died--

putrid, covered with maggots, disgusting even to dogs.  Women, who

are more tender, are treated in a different fashion; some of them

who can sing and play are employed to amuse the guests at

festivals.



"When the slaves are led out for sale they walk to the marketplace

in single file, like storks on the wing, in whole dozens, chained

together by the neck, and are there sold by auction.  The

auctioneer shouts loudly that they are 'the newest arrivals,

simple, and not cunning, lately captured from the people of the

kingdom (Poland), and not from Muscovy'; for the Muscovite race,

being crafty and deceitful, does not bring a good price.  This kind

of merchandise is appraised with great accuracy in the Crimea, and

is bought by foreign merchants at a high price, in order to be sold

at a still higher rate to blacker nations, such as Saracens,

Persians, Indians, Arabs, Syrians, and Assyrians.  When a purchase

is made the teeth are examined, to see that they are neither few

nor discoloured.  At the same time the more hidden parts of the

body are carefully inspected, and if a mole, excrescence, wound, or

other latent defect is discovered, the bargain is rescinded.  But

notwithstanding these investigations the cunning slave-dealers and

brokers succeed in cheating the buyers; for when they have valuable

boys and girls, they do not at once produce them, but first fatten

them, clothe them in silk, and put powder and rouge on their

cheeks, so as to sell them at a better price.  Sometimes beautiful

and perfect maidens of our nation bring their weight in gold.  This

takes place in all the towns of the peninsula, but especially in

Kaffa."*





* Michalonis Litvani, "De moribus Tartarorum Fragmina," X.,

Basilliae, 1615.





To protect the agricultural population of the Steppe against the

raids of these thieving, cattle-lifting, kidnapping neighbours, the

Tsars of Muscovy and the Kings of Poland built forts, constructed

palisades, dug trenches, and kept up a regular military cordon.

The troops composing this cordon were called Cossacks; but these

were not the "Free Cossacks" best known to history and romance.

These latter lived beyond the frontier on the debatable land which

lay between the two hostile races, and there they formed self-

governing military communities.  Each one of the rivers flowing

southwards--the Dnieper, the Don, the Volga, and the Yaik or Ural--

was held by a community of these Free Cossacks, and no one, whether

Christian or Tartar, was allowed to pass through their territory

without their permission.



Officially the Free Cossacks were Russians, for they professed to

be champions of Orthodox Christianity, and--with the exception of

those of the Dnieper--loyal subjects of the Tsar; but in reality

they were something different.  Though they were Russian by origin,

language, and sympathy, the habit of kidnapping Tartar women

introduced among them a certain admixture of Tartar blood.  Though

self-constituted champions of Christianity and haters of Islam,

they troubled themselves very little with religion, and did not

submit to the ecclesiastical authorities.  As to their religious

status, it cannot be easily defined.  Whilst professing allegiance

and devotion to the Tsar, they did not think it necessary to obey

him, except in so far as his orders suited their own convenience.

And the Tsar, it must be confessed, acted towards them in a similar

fashion.  When he found it convenient he called them his faithful

subjects; and when complaints were made to him about their raids in

Turkish territory, he declared that they were not his subjects, but

runaways and brigands, and that the Sultan might punish them as he

saw fit.  At the same time, the so-called runaways and brigands

regularly received supplies and ammunition from Moscow, as is amply

proved by recently-published documents.  Down to the middle of the

seventeenth century the Cossacks of the Dnieper stood in a similar

relation to the Polish kings; but at that time they threw off their

allegiance to Poland, and became subjects of the Tsars of Muscovy.



Of these semi-independent military communities, which formed a

continuous barrier along the southern and southeastern frontier,

the most celebrated were the Zaporovians* of the Dnieper, and the

Cossacks of the Don.





* The name "Zaporovians," by which they are known in the West, is a

corruption of the Russian word Zaporozhtsi, which means "Those who

live beyond the rapids."





The Zaporovian Commonwealth has been compared sometimes to ancient

Sparta, and sometimes to the mediaeval Military Orders, but it had

in reality quite a different character.  In Sparta the nobles kept

in subjection a large population of slaves, and were themselves

constantly under the severe discipline of the magistrates.  These

Cossacks of the Dnieper, on the contrary, lived by fishing,

hunting, and marauding, and knew nothing of discipline, except in

time of war.  Amongst all the inhabitants of the Setch--so the

fortified camp was called--there reigned the most perfect equality.

The common saying, "Bear patiently, Cossack; you will one day be

Ataman!" was often realised; for every year the office-bearers laid

down the insignia of office in presence of the general assembly,

and after thanking the brotherhood for the honour they had enjoyed,

retired to their former position of common Cossack.  At the

election which followed this ceremony any member could be chosen

chief of his kuren, or company, and any chief of a kuren could be

chosen Ataman.



The comparison of these bold Borderers with the mediaeval Military

Orders is scarcely less forced.  They call themselves, indeed,

Lytsars--a corruption of the Russian word Ritsar, which is in its

turn a corruption of the German Ritter--talked of knightly honour

(lytsarskaya tchest'), and sometimes proclaimed themselves the

champions of Greek Orthodoxy against the Roman Catholicism of the

Poles and the Mahometanism of the Tartars; but religion occupied in

their minds a very secondary place.  Their great object in life was

the acquisition of booty.  To attain this object they lived in

intermittent warfare with the Tartars, lifted their cattle,

pillaged their aouls, swept the Black Sea in flotillas of small

boats, and occasionally sacked important coast towns, such as Varna

and Sinope.  When Tartar booty could not be easily obtained, they

turned their attention to the Slavonic populations; and when hard

pressed by Christian potentates, they did not hesitate to put

themselves under the protection of the Sultan.



The Cossacks of the Don, of the Volga, and of the Ural had a

somewhat different organisation.  They had no fortified camp like

the Setch, but lived in villages, and assembled as necessity

demanded.  As they were completely beyond the sphere of Polish

influence, they knew nothing about "knightly honour" and similar

conceptions of Western chivalry; they even adopted many Tartar

customs, and loved in time of peace to strut about in gorgeous

Tartar costumes.  Besides this, they were nearly all emigrants from

Great Russia, and mostly Old Ritualists or Sectarians, whilst the

Zaporovians were Little Russians and Orthodox.



These military communities rendered valuable service to Russia.

The best means of protecting the southern frontier was to have as

allies a large body of men leading the same kind of life and

capable of carrying on the same kind of warfare as the nomadic

marauders; and such a body of men were the Free Cossacks.  The

sentiment of self-preservation and the desire of booty kept them

constantly on the alert.  By sending out small parties in all

directions, by "procuring tongues"--that is to say, by kidnapping

and torturing straggling Tartars with a view to extracting

information from them--and by keeping spies in the enemy's

territory, they were generally apprised beforehand of any intended

incursion.  When danger threatened, the ordinary precautions were

redoubled.  Day and night patrols kept watch at the points where

the enemy was expected, and as soon as sure signs of his approach

were discovered a pile of tarred barrels prepared for the purpose

was fired to give the alarm.  Rapidly the signal was repeated at

one point of observation after another, and by this primitive

system of telegraphy in the course of a few hours the whole

district was up in arms.  If the invaders were not too numerous,

they were at once attacked and driven back.  If they could not be

successfully resisted, they were allowed to pass; but a troop of

Cossacks was sent to pillage their aouls in their absence, whilst

another and larger force was collected, in order to intercept them

when they were returning home laden with booty.  Thus many a

nameless battle was fought on the trackless Steppe, and many brave

men fell unhonoured and unsung:



                   "Illacrymabiles

     Urgentur ignotique longa

     Nocte, carent quia vate sacro."



Notwithstanding these valuable services, the Cossack communities

were a constant source of diplomatic difficulties and political

dangers.  As they paid very little attention to the orders of the

Government, they supplied the Sultan with any number of casi belli,

and were often ready to turn their arms against the power to which

they professed allegiance.  During "the troublous times," for

example, when the national existence was endangered by civil strife

and foreign invasion, they overran the country, robbing, pillaging,

and burning as they were wont to do in the Tartar aouls.  At a

later period the Don Cossacks twice raised formidable

insurrections--first under Stenka Razin (1670), and secondly under

Pugatchef (1773)--and during the war between Peter the Great and

Charles XII. of Sweden the Zaporovians took the side of the Swedish

king.



The Government naturally strove to put an end to this danger, and

ultimately succeeded.  All the Cossacks were deprived of their

independence, but the fate of the various communities was

different.  Those of the Volga were transfered to the Terek, where

they had abundant occupation in guarding the frontier against the

incursions of the Eastern Caucasian tribes.  The Zaporovians held

tenaciously to their "Dnieper liberties," and resisted all

interference, till they were forcibly disbanded in the time of

Catherine II.  The majority of them fled to Turkey, where some of

their descendants are still to be found, and the remainder were

settled on the Kuban, where they could lead their old life by

carrying on an irregular warfare with the tribes of the Western

Caucasus.  Since the capture of Shamyl and the pacification of the

Caucasus, this Cossack population of the Kuban and the Terek,

extending in an unbroken line from the Sea of Azof to the Caspian,

have been able to turn their attention to peaceful pursuits, and

now raise large quantities of wheat for exportation; but they still

retain their martial bearing, and some of them regret the good old

times when a brush with the Circassians was an ordinary occurrence

and the work of tilling the soil was often diversified with a more

exciting kind of occupation.



The Cossacks of the Ural and the Don have been allowed to remain in

their old homes, but they have been deprived of their independence

and self-government, and their social organisation has been

completely changed.  The boisterous popular assemblies which

formerly decided all public affairs have been abolished, and the

custom of choosing the Ataman and other office-bearers by popular

election has been replaced by a system of regular promotion,

according to rules elaborated in St. Petersburg.  The officers and

their families now compose a kind of hereditary aristocracy which

has succeeded in appropriating, by means of Imperial grants, a

large portion of the land which was formerly common property.  As

the Empire expanded in Asia the system of protecting the parties by

Cossack colonists was extended eastwards, so now there is a belt of

Cossack territory stretching almost without interruption from the

banks of the Don to the coast of the Pacific.  It is divided into

eleven sections, in each of which is settled a Cossack corps with a

separate administration.



When universal military service was introduced, in 1873, the

Cossacks were brought under the new law, but in order to preserve

their military traditions and habits they were allowed to retain,

with certain modifications, their old organisation, rights, and

privileges.  In return for a large amount of fertile land and

exemption from direct taxation, they have to equip themselves at

their own expense, and serve for twenty years, of which three are

spent in preparatory training, twelve in the active army, and five

in the reserve.  This system gives to the army a contingent of

about 330,000 men--divided into 890 squadrons and 108 infantry

companies--with 236 guns.



The Cossacks in active service are to be met with in all parts of

the Empire, from the Prussian to the Chinese frontier.  In the

Asiatic Provinces their services are invaluable.  Capable of

enduring an incredible amount of fatigue and all manner of

privations, they can live and thrive in conditions which would soon

disable regular troops.  The capacity of self-adaptation, which is

characteristic of the Russian people generally, is possessed by

them in the highest degree.  When placed on some distant Asiatic

frontier they can at once transform themselves into squatters--

building their own houses, raising crops of grain, and living as

colonists without neglecting their military duties.



I have sometimes heard it asserted by military men that the Cossack

organisation is an antiquated institution, and that the soldiers

which it produces, however useful they may be in Central Asia,

would be of little service in regular European warfare.  Whether

this view, which received some confirmation in the Russo-Turkish

War of 1877-78, is true or false I cannot pretend to say, for it is

a subject on which a civilian has no right to speak; but I may

remark that the Cossacks themselves are not by any means of that

opinion.  They regard themselves as the most valuable troops which

the Tsar possesses, believing themselves capable of performing

anything within the bounds of human possibility, and a good deal

that lies beyond that limit.  More than once Don Cossacks have

assured me that if the Tsar had allowed them to fit out a flotilla

of small boats during the Crimean War they would have captured the

British fleet, as their ancestors used to capture Turkish galleys

on the Black Sea!



In old times, throughout the whole territory of the Don Cossacks,

agriculture was prohibited on pain of death.  It is generally

supposed that this measure was adopted with a view to preserve the

martial spirit of the inhabitants, but it may be explained

otherwise.  The great majority of the Cossacks, averse to all

regular, laborious occupations, wished to live by fishing, hunting,

cattle-breeding, and marauding, but there was always amongst them a

considerable number of immigrants--runaway serfs from the interior--

who had been accustomed to live by agriculture.  These latter

wished to raise crops on the fertile virgin soil, and if they had

been allowed to do so they would to some extent have spoiled the

pastures.  We have here, I believe, the true reason for the above-

mentioned prohibition, and this view is strongly confirmed by

analogous facts which I have observed in another locality.  In the

Kirghiz territory the poorer inhabitants of the aouls near the

frontier, having few or no cattle, wish to let part of the common

land to the neighbouring Russian peasantry for agricultural

purposes; but the richer inhabitants, who possess flocks and herds,

strenuously oppose this movement, and would doubtless prohibit it

under pain of death if they had the power, because all agricultural

encroachments diminish the pasture-land.



Whatever was the real reason of the prohibition, practical

necessity proved in the long run too strong for the anti-

agriculturists.  As the population augmented and the opportunities

for marauding decreased, the majority had to overcome their

repugnance to husbandry; and soon large patches of ploughed land or

waving grain were to be seen in the vicinity of the stanitsas, as

the Cossack villages are termed.  At first there was no attempt to

regulate this new use of the ager publicus.  Each Cossack who

wished to raise a crop ploughed and sowed wherever he thought fit,

and retained as long as he chose the land thus appropriated; and

when the soil began to show signs of exhaustion he abandoned his

plot and ploughed elsewhere.  But this unregulated use of the

Communal property could not long continue.  As the number of

agriculturists increased, quarrels frequently arose, and sometimes

terminated in bloodshed.  Still worse evils appeared when markets

were created in the vicinity, and it became possible to sell the

grain for exportation.  In some stanitsas the richer families

appropriated enormous quantities of the common land by using

several teams of oxen, or by hiring peasants in the nearest

villages to come and plough for them; and instead of abandoning the

land after raising two or three crops they retained possession of

it, and came to regard it as their private property.  Thus the

whole of the arable land, or at least the best part of it, became

actually, if not legally, the private property of a few families,

whilst the less energetic or less fortunate inhabitants of the

stanitsa had only parcels of comparatively barren soil, or had no

land whatever, and became mere agricultural labourers.



After a time this injustice was remedied.  The landless members

justly complained that they had to bear the same burdens as those

who possessed the land, and that therefore they ought to enjoy the

same privileges.  The old spirit of equality was still strong

amongst them, and they ultimately succeeded in asserting their

rights.  In accordance with their demands the appropriated land was

confiscated by the Commune, and the system of periodical

redistributions was introduced.  By this system each adult male

possesses a share of the land.



These facts tend to throw light on some of the dark questions of

social development in its early stages.



So long as a village community leads a purely pastoral life, and

possesses an abundance of land, there is no reason why the

individuals or the families of which it is composed should divide

the land into private lots, and there are very potent reasons why

they should not adopt such a course.  To give the division of the

land any practical significance, it would be necessary to raise

fences of some kind, and these fences, requiring for their

construction a certain amount of labour, would prove merely a

useless encumbrance, for it is much more convenient that all the

sheep and cattle should graze together.  If there is a scarcity of

pasture, and consequently a conflict of interest among the

families, the enjoyment of the common land will be regulated not by

raising fences, but by simply limiting the number of sheep and

cattle which each family is entitled to put upon the pasturage, as

is done in many Russian villages at the present day.  When any one

desires to keep more sheep and cattle than the maximum to which he

is entitled, he pays to the others a certain compensation.  Thus,

we see, in pastoral life the dividing of the common land is

unnecessary and inexpedient, and consequently private property in

land is not likely to come into existence.



With the introduction of agriculture appears a tendency to divide

the land among the families composing the community, for each

family living by husbandry requires a definite portion of the soil.

If the land suitable for agricultural purposes be plentiful, each

head of a family may be allowed to take possession of as much of it

as he requires, as was formerly done in the Cossack stanitsas; if,

on the contrary, the area of arable land is small, as is the case

in some Bashkir aouls, there will probably be a regular allotment

of it among the families.



With the tendency to divide the land into definite portions arises

a conflict between the principle of communal and the principle of

private property.  Those who obtain definite portions of the soil

are in general likely to keep them and transmit them to their

descendants.  In a country, however, like the Steppe--and it is

only of such countries that I am at present speaking--the nature of

the soil and the system of agriculture militate against this

conversion of simple possession into a right of property.  A plot

of land is commonly cultivated for only three or four years in

succession.  It is then abandoned for at least double that period,

and the cultivators remove to some other portion of the communal

territory.  After a time, it is true, they return to the old

portion, which has been in the meantime lying fallow; but as the

soil is tolerably equal in quality, the families or individuals

have no reason to desire the precise plots which they formerly

possessed.  Under such circumstances the principle of private

property in the land is not likely to strike root; each family

insists on possessing a certain QUANTITY rather than a certain PLOT

of land, and contents itself with a right of usufruct, whilst the

right of property remains in the hands of the Commune; and it must

not be forgotten that the difference between usufruct and property

here is of great practical importance, for so long as the Commune

retains the right of property it may re-allot the land in any way

it thinks fit.



As the population increases and land becomes less plentiful, the

primitive method of agriculture above alluded to gives place to a

less primitive method, commonly known as "the three-field system,"

according to which the cultivators do not migrate periodically from

one part of the communal territory to another, but till always the

same fields, and are obliged to manure the plots which they occupy.

The principle of communal property rarely survives this change, for

by long possession the families acquire a prescriptive right to the

portions which they cultivate, and those who manure their land well

naturally object to exchange it for land which has been held by

indolent, improvident neighbours.  In Russia, however, this change

has not destroyed the principle of communal property.  Though the

three-field system has been in use for many generations in the

central provinces, the communal principle, with its periodical re-

allotment of the land, still remains intact.



For the student of sociology the past history and actual condition

of the Don Cossacks present many other features equally interesting

and instructive.  He may there see, for instance, how an

aristocracy can be created by military promotion, and how serfage

may originate and become a recognised institution without any

legislative enactment.  If he takes an interest in peculiar

manifestations of religious thought and feeling, he will find a

rich field of investigation in the countless religious sects; and

if he is a collector of quaint old customs, he will not lack

occupation.



One curious custom, which has very recently died out, I may here

mention by way of illustration.  As the Cossacks knew very little

about land-surveying, and still less about land-registration, the

precise boundary between two contiguous yurts--as the communal land

of a stanitsa was called--was often a matter of uncertainty and a

fruitful source of disputes.  When the boundary was once

determined, the following method of registering it was employed.

All the boys of the two stanitsas were collected and driven in a

body like sheep to the intervening frontier.  The whole population

then walked along the frontier that had been agreed upon, and at

each landmark a number of boys were soundly whipped and allowed to

run home!  This was done in the hope that the victims would

remember, as long as they lived, the spot where they had received

their unmerited castigation.*  The device, I have been assured, was

generally very effective, but it was not always quite successful.

Whether from the castigation not being sufficiently severe, or from

some other defect in the method, it sometimes happened that

disputes afterwards arose, and the whipped boys, now grown up to

manhood, gave conflicting testimony.  When such a case occurred the

following expedient was adopted.  One of the oldest inhabitants was

chosen as arbiter, and made to swear on the Scriptures that he

would act honestly to the best of his knowledge; then taking an

Icon in his hand, he walked along what he believed to be the old

frontier.  Whether he made mistakes or not, his decision was

accepted by both parties and regarded as final.  This custom

existed in some stanitsas down to the year 1850, when the

boundaries were clearly determined by Government officials.



* A custom of this kind, I am told, existed not very long ago in

England and is still spoken of as "the beating of the bounds."


