





CHAPTER XXIV



THE IMPERIAL ADMINISTRATION AND THE OFFICIALS





The Officials in Norgorod Assist Me in My Studies--The Modern

Imperial Administration Created by Peter the Great, and Developed

by his Successors--A Slavophil's View of the Administration--The

Administration Briefly Described--The Tchinovniks, or Officials--

Official Titles, and Their Real Significance--What the

Administration Has Done for Russia in the Past--Its Character

Determined by the Peculiar Relation between the Government and the

People--Its Radical Vices--Bureaucratic Remedies--Complicated

Formal Procedure--The Gendarmerie: My Personal Relations with this

Branch of the Administration; Arrest and Release--A Strong, Healthy

Public Opinion the Only Effectual Remedy for Bad Administration.





My administrative studies were begun in Novgorod.  One of my

reasons for spending a winter in that provincial capital was that I

might study the provincial administration, and as soon as I had

made the acquaintance of the leading officials I explained to them

the object I had in view.  With the kindly bonhomie which

distinguishes the Russian educated classes, they all volunteered to

give me every assistance in their power, but some of them, on

mature reflection, evidently saw reason to check their first

generous impulse.  Among these was the Vice-Governor, a gentleman

of German origin, and therefore more inclined to be pedantic than a

genuine Russian.  When I called on him one evening and reminded him

of his friendly offer, I found to my surprise that he had in the

meantime changed his mind.  Instead of answering my first simple

inquiry, he stared at me fixedly, as if for the purpose of

detecting some covert, malicious design, and then, putting on an

air of official dignity, informed me that as I had not been

authorised by the Minister to make these investigations, he could

not assist me, and would certainly not allow me to examine the

archives.



This was not encouraging, but it did not prevent me from applying

to the Governor, and I found him a man of a very different stamp.

Delighted to meet a foreigner who seemed anxious to study seriously

in an unbiassed frame of mind the institutions of his much-maligned

native country, he willingly explained to me the mechanism of the

administration which he directed and controlled, and kindly placed

at my disposal the books and documents in which I could find the

historical and practical information which I required.



This friendly attitude of his Excellency towards me soon became

generally known in the town, and from that moment my difficulties

were at an end.  The minor officials no longer hesitated to

initiate me into the mysteries of their respective departments, and

at last even the Vice-Governor threw off his reserve and followed

the example of his colleagues.  The elementary information thus

acquired I had afterwards abundant opportunities of completing by

observation and study in other parts of the Empire, and I now

propose to communicate to the reader a few of the more general

results.



The gigantic administrative machine which holds together all the

various parts of the vast Empire has been gradually created by

successive generations, but we may say roughly that it was first

designed and constructed by Peter the Great.  Before his time the

country was governed in a rude, primitive fashion.  The Grand

Princes of Moscow, in subduing their rivals and annexing the

surrounding principalities, merely cleared the ground for a great

homogeneous State.  Wily, practical politicians, rather than

statesmen of the doctrinaire type, they never dreamed of

introducing uniformity and symmetry into the administration as a

whole.  They developed the ancient institutions so far as these

were useful and consistent with the exercise of autocratic power,

and made only such alterations as practical necessity demanded.

And these necessary alterations were more frequently local than

general.  Special decisions, instruction to particular officials,

and charters for particular communes of proprietors were much more

common than general legislative measures.



In short, the old Muscovite Tsars practised a hand-to-mouth policy,

destroying whatever caused temporary inconvenience, and giving

little heed to what did not force itself upon their attention.

Hence, under their rule the administration presented not only

territorial peculiarities, but also an ill-assorted combination of

different systems in the same district--a conglomeration of

institutions belonging to different epochs, like a fleet composed

of triremes, three-deckers, and iron-clads.



This irregular system, or rather want of system, seemed highly

unsatisfactory to the logical mind of Peter the Great, and he

conceived the grand design of sweeping it away, and putting in its

place a symmetrical bureaucratic machine.  It is scarcely necessary

to say that this magnificent project, so foreign to the traditional

ideas and customs of the people, was not easily realised.  Imagine

a man, without technical knowledge, without skilled workmen,

without good tools, and with no better material than soft,

crumbling sandstone, endeavouring to build a palace on a marsh!

The undertaking would seem to reasonable minds utterly absurd, and

yet it must be admitted that Peter's project was scarcely more

feasible.  He had neither technical knowledge, nor the requisite

materials, nor a firm foundation to build on.  With his usual

Titanic energy he demolished the old structure, but his attempts to

construct were little more than a series of failures.  In his

numerous ukazes he has left us a graphic description of his

efforts, and it is at once instructive and pathetic to watch the

great worker toiling indefatigably at his self-imposed task.  His

instruments are constantly breaking in his hands.  The foundations

of the building are continually giving way, and the lower tiers

crumbling under the superincumbent weight.  Now and then a whole

section is found to be unsuitable, and is ruthlessly pulled down,

or falls of its own accord.  And yet the builder toils on, with a

perseverance and an energy of purpose that compel admiration,

frankly confessing his mistakes and failures, and patiently seeking

the means of remedying them, never allowing a word of despondency

to escape him, and never despairing of ultimate success.  And at

length death comes, and the mighty builder is snatched away

suddenly in the midst of his unfinished labours, bequeathing to his

successors the task of carrying on the great work.



None of these successors possessed Peter's genius and energy--with

the exception perhaps of Catherine II.--but they were all compelled

by the force of circumstances to adopt his plans.  A return to the

old rough-and-ready rule of time local Voyevods was impossible.  As

the Autocratic Power became more and more imbued with Western

ideas, it felt more and more the need of new means for carrying

them out, and accordingly it strove to systematise and centralise

the administration.



In this change we may perceive a certain analogy with the history

of the French administration from the reign of Philippe le Bel to

that of Louis XIV.  In both countries we see the central power

bringing the local administrative organs more and more under its

control, till at last it succeeds in creating a thoroughly

centralised bureaucratic organisation.  But under this superficial

resemblance lie profound differences.  The French kings had to

struggle with provincial sovereignties and feudal rights, and when

they had annihilated this opposition they easily found materials

with which to build up the bureaucratic structure.  The Russian

sovereigns, on the contrary, met with no such opposition, but they

had great difficulty in finding bureaucratic material amongst their

uneducated, undisciplined subjects, notwithstanding the numerous

schools and colleges which were founded and maintained simply for

the purpose of preparing men for the public service.



The administration was thus brought much nearer to the West-

European ideal, but some people have grave doubts as to whether it

became thereby better adapted to the practical wants of the people

for whom it was created.  On this point a well-known Slavophil once

made to me some remarks which are worthy of being recorded.  "You

have observed," he said, "that till very recently there was in

Russia an enormous amount of official peculation, extortion, and

misgovernment of every kind, that the courts of law were dens of

iniquity, that the people often committed perjury, and much more of

the same sort, and it must be admitted that all this has not yet

entirely disappeared.  But what does it prove?  That the Russian

people are morally inferior to the German?  Not at all.  It simply

proves that the German system of administration, which was forced

upon them without their consent, was utterly unsuited to their

nature.  If a young growing boy be compelled to wear very tight

boots, he will probably burst them, and the ugly rents will

doubtless produce an unfavourable impression on the passers-by; but

surely it is better that the boots should burst than that the feet

should be deformed.  Now, the Russian people was compelled to put

on not only tight boots, but also a tight jacket, and, being young

and vigorous, it burst them.  Narrow-minded, pedantic Germans can

neither understand nor provide for the wants of the broad Slavonic

nature."



In its present form the Russian administration seems at first sight

a very imposing edifice.  At the top of the pyramid stands the

Emperor, "the autocratic monarch," as Peter the Great described

him, "who has to give an account of his acts to no one on earth,

but has power and authority to rule his States and lands as a

Christian sovereign according to his own will and judgment."

Immediately below the Emperor we see the Council of State, the

Committee of Ministers, and the Senate, which represent

respectively the legislative, the administrative, and the judicial

power.  An Englishman glancing over the first volume of the great

Code of Laws might imagine that the Council of State is a kind of

Parliament, and the Committee of Ministers a cabinet in our sense

of the term, but in reality both institutions are simply

incarnations of the Autocratic Power.  Though the Council is

entrusted by law with many important functions--such as discussing

Bills, criticising the annual budget, declaring war and concluding

peace--it has merely a consultative character, and the Emperor is

not in any way bound by its decisions.  The Committee is not at all

a cabinet as we understand the word.  The Ministers are directly

and individually responsible to the Emperor, and therefore the

Committee has no common responsibility or other cohesive force.  As

to the Senate, it has descended from its high estate.  It was

originally entrusted with the supreme power during the absence or

minority of the monarch, and was intended to exercise a controlling

influence in all sections of the administration, but now its

activity is restricted to judicial matters, and it is little more

than a supreme court of appeal.



Immediately below these three institutions stand the Ministries,

ten in number.  They are the central points in which converge the

various kinds of territorial administration, and from which

radiates the Imperial will all over the Empire.



For the purpose of territorial administration Russia proper--that

is to say, European Russia, exclusive of Poland, the Baltic

Provinces, Finland and the Caucasus--is divided into forty-nine

provinces or "Governments" (gubernii), and each Government is

subdivided into Districts (uyezdi).  The average area of a province

is about the size of Portugal, but some are as small as Belgium,

whilst one at least is twenty-five times as big.  The population,

however, does not correspond to the amount of territory.  In the

largest province, that of Archangel, there are only about 350,000

inhabitants, whilst in two of the smaller ones there are over three

millions.  The districts likewise vary greatly in size.  Some are

smaller than Oxfordshire or Buckingham, and others are bigger than

the whole of the United Kingdom.



Over each province is placed a Governor, who is assisted in his

duties by a Vice-Governor and a small council.  According to the

legislation of Catherine II., which still appears in the Code and

has only been partially repealed, the Governor is termed "the

steward of the province," and is entrusted with so many and such

delicate duties, that in order to obtain qualified men for the post

it would be necessary to realise the great Empress's design of

creating, by education, "a new race of people."  Down to the time

of the Crimean War the Governors understood the term "stewards" in

a very literal sense, and ruled in a most arbitrary, high-handed

style, often exercising an important influence on the civil and

criminal tribunals.  These extensive and vaguely defined powers

have now been very much curtailed, partly by positive legislation,

and partly by increased publicity and improved means of

communication.  All judicial matters have been placed theoretically

beyond the Governor's control, and many of his former functions are

now fulfilled by the Zemstvo--the new organ of local self-

government.  Besides this, all ordinary current affairs are

regulated by an already big and ever-growing body of instructions,

in the form of Imperial orders and ministerial circulars, and as

soon as anything not provided for by the instructions happens to

occur, the minister is consulted through the post-office or by

telegraph.



Even within the sphere of their lawful authority the Governors have

now a certain respect for public opinion and occasionally a very

wholesome dread of casual newspaper correspondents.  Thus the men

who were formerly described by the satirists as "little satraps"

have sunk to the level of subordinate officials.  I can confidently

say that many (I believe the majority) of them are honest, upright

men, who are perhaps not endowed with any unusual administrative

capacities, but who perform their duties faithfully according to

their lights.  If any representatives of the old "satraps" still

exist, they must be sought for in the outlying Asiatic provinces.



Independent of the Governor, who is the local representative of the

Ministry of the Interior, are a number of resident officials, who

represent the other ministries, and each of them has a bureau, with

the requisite number of assistants, secretaries, and scribes.



To keep this vast and complex bureaucratic machine in motion it is

necessary to have a large and well-drilled army of officials.

These are drawn chiefly from the ranks of the Noblesse and the

clergy, and form a peculiar social class called Tchinovniks, or men

with Tchins.  As the Tchin plays an important part in Russia, not

only in the official world, but also to some extent in social life,

it may be well to explain its significance.



All offices, civil and military, are, according to a scheme

invented by Peter the Great, arranged in fourteen classes or ranks,

and to each class or rank a particular name is attached.  As

promotion is supposed to be given according to personal merit, a

man who enters the public service for the first time must, whatever

be his social position, begin in the lower ranks, and work his way

upwards.  Educational certificates may exempt him from the

necessity of passing through the lowest classes, and the Imperial

will may disregard the restrictions laid down by law; but as

general rule a man must begin at or near the bottom of the official

ladder, and he must remain on each step a certain specified time.

The step on which he is for the moment standing, or, in other

words, the official rank or tchin which he possesses determines

what offices he is competent to hold.  Thus rank or tchin is a

necessary condition for receiving an appointment, but it does not

designate any actual office, and the names of the different ranks

are extremely apt to mislead a foreigner.



We must always bear this in mind when we meet with those imposing

titles which Russian tourists sometimes put on their visiting

cards, such as "Conseiller de Cour," "Conseiller d'Etat,"

"Conseiller prive de S. M. l'Empereur de toutes les Russies."  It

would be uncharitable to suppose that these titles are used with

the intention of misleading, but that they do sometimes mislead

there cannot be the least doubt.  I shall never forget the look of

intense disgust which I once saw on the face of an American who had

invited to dinner a "Conseiller de Cour," on the assumption that he

would have a Court dignitary as his guest, and who casually

discovered that the personage in question was simply an

insignificant official in one of the public offices.  No doubt

other people have bad similar experiences.  The unwary foreigner

who has heard that there is in Russia a very important institution

called the Conseil d'Etat," naturally supposes that a " Conseiller

d'Etat" is a member of that venerable body; and if he meets "Son

Excellence le Conseiller prive," he is pretty sure to assume--

especially if the word "actuel" has been affixed--that he sees

before him a real living member of the Russian Privy Council.  When

to the title is added, "de S. M. l'Empereur de toutes les Russies,"

a boundless field is opened up to the non-Russian imagination.  In

reality these titles are not nearly so important as they seem.  The

soi-disant "Conseiller de Cour" has probably nothing to do with the

Court.  The Conseiller d'Etat is so far from being a member of the

Conseil d'Etat that he cannot possibly become a member till he

receives a higher tchin.*  As to the Privy Councillor, it is

sufficient to say that the Privy Council, which had a very odious

reputation in its lifetime, died more than a century ago, and has

not since been resuscitated.  The explanation of these anomalies is

to be found in the fact that the Russian tchins, like the German

honorary titles--Hofrath, Staatsrath, Geheimrath--of which they are

a literal translation, indicate not actual office, but simply

official rank.  Formerly the appointment to an office generally

depended on the tchin; now there is a tendency to reverse the old

order of things and make the tchin depend upon the office actually

held.





* In Russian the two words are quite different; the Council is

called Gosudarstvenny sovet, and the title Statski sovetnik.





The reader of practical mind who is in the habit of considering

results rather than forms and formalities desires probably no

further description of the Russian bureaucracy, but wishes to know

simply how it works in practice.  What has it done for Russia in

the past, and what is it doing in the present?



At the present day, when faith in despotic civilisers and paternal

government has been rudely shaken, and the advantages of a free,

spontaneous national development are fully recognised, centralised

bureaucracies have everywhere fallen into bad odour.  In Russia the

dislike to them is particularly strong, because it has there

something more than a purely theoretical basis.  The recollection

of the reign of Nicholas I., with its stern military regime, and

minute, pedantic formalism, makes many Russians condemn in no

measured terms the administration under which they live, and most

Englishmen will feel inclined to endorse this condemnation.  Before

passing sentence, however, we ought to know that the system has at

least an historical justification, and we must not allow our love

of constitutional liberty and local self-government to blind us to

the distinction between theoretical and historical possibility.

What seems to political philosophers abstractly the best possible

government may be utterly inapplicable in certain concrete cases.

We need not attempt to decide whether it is better for humanity

that Russia should exist as a nation, but we may boldly assert that

without a strongly centralised administration Russia would never

have become one of the great European Powers.  Until comparatively

recent times the part of the world which is known as the Russian

Empire was a conglomeration of independent or semi-independent

political units, animated with centrifugal as well as centripetal

forces; and even at the present day it is far from being a compact

homogeneous State.  It was the autocratic power, with the

centralised administration as its necessary complement, that first

created Russia, then saved her from dismemberment and political

annihilation, and ultimately secured for her a place among European

nations by introducing Western civilisation.



Whilst thus recognising clearly that autocracy and a strongly

centralised administration were necessary first for the creation

and afterwards for the preservation of national independence, we

must not shut our eyes to the evil consequences which resulted from

this unfortunate necessity.  It was in the nature of things that

the Government, aiming at the realisation of designs which its

subjects neither sympathised with nor clearly understood, should

have become separated from the nation; and the reckless haste and

violence with which it attempted to carry out its schemes aroused a

spirit of positive opposition among the masses.  A considerable

section of the people long looked on the reforming Tsars as

incarnations of the spirit of evil, and the Tsars in their turn

looked upon the people as raw material for the realisation of their

political designs.  This peculiar relation between the nation and

the Government has given the key-note to the whole system of

administration.  The Government has always treated the people as

minors, incapable of understanding its political aims, and only

very partially competent to look after their own local affairs.

The officials have naturally acted in the same spirit.  Looking for

direction and approbation merely to their superiors, they have

systematically treated those over whom they were placed as a

conquered or inferior race.  The State has thus come to be regarded

as an abstract entity, with interests entirely different from those

of the human beings composing it; and in all matters in which State

interests are supposed to be involved, the rights of individuals

are ruthlessly sacrificed.



If we remember that the difficulties of centralised administration

must be in direct proportion to the extent and territorial variety

of the country to be governed, we may readily understand how slowly

and imperfectly the administrative machine necessarily works in

Russia.  The whole of the vast region stretching from the Polar

Ocean to the Caspian, and from the shores of the Baltic to the

confines of the Celestial Empire, is administered from St.

Petersburg.  The genuine bureaucrat has a wholesome dread of formal

responsibility, and generally tries to avoid it by taking all

matters out of the hands of his subordinates, and passing them on

to the higher authorities.  As soon, therefore, as affairs are

caught up by the administrative machine they begin to ascend, and

probably arrive some day at the cabinet of the minister.  Thus the

ministries are flooded with papers--many of the most trivial

import--from all parts of the Empire; and the higher officials,

even if they had the eyes of an Argus and the hands of a Briareus,

could not possibly fulfil conscientiously the duties imposed on

them.  In reality the Russian administrators of the higher ranks

recall neither Argus nor Briareus.  They commonly show neither an

extensive nor a profound knowledge of the country which they are

supposed to govern, and seem always to have a fair amount of

leisure time at their disposal.



Besides the unavoidable evils of excessive centralisation, Russia

has had to suffer much from the jobbery, venality, and extortion of

the officials.  When Peter the Great one day proposed to hang every

man who should steal as much as would buy a rope, his Procurator-

General frankly replied that if his Majesty put his project into

execution there would be no officials left.  "We all steal," added

the worthy official; "the only difference is that some of us steal

larger amounts and more openly than others."  Since these words

were spoken nearly two centuries have passed, and during all that

time Russia has been steadily making progress, but until the

accession of Alexander II. in 1855 little change took place in the

moral character of the administration.  Some people still living

can remember the time when they could have repeated, without much

exaggeration, the confession of Peter's Procurator-General.



To appreciate aright this ugly phenomenon we must distinguish two

kinds of venality.  On the one hand there was the habit of exacting

what are vulgarly termed "tips" for services performed, and on the

other there were the various kinds of positive dishonesty.  Though

it might not be always easy to draw a clear line between the two

categories, the distinction was fully recognised in the moral

consciousness of the time, and many an official who regularly

received "sinless revenues" (bezgreshniye dokhodi), as the tips

were sometimes called, would have been very indignant had he been

stigmatised as a dishonest man.  The practice was, in fact,

universal, and could be, to a certain extent, justified by the

smallness of the official salaries.  In some departments there was

a recognised tariff.  The "brandy farmers," for example, who worked

the State Monopoly for the manufacture and sale of alcoholic

liquors, paid regularly a fixed sum to every official, from the

Governor to the policeman, according to his rank.  I knew of one

case where an official, on receiving a larger sum than was

customary, conscientiously handed back the change!  The other and

more heinous offences were by no means so common, but were still

fearfully frequent.  Many high officials and important dignitaries

were known to receive large revenues, to which the term "sinless"

could not by any means be applied, and yet they retained their

position, and were received in society with respectful deference.



The Sovereigns were well aware of the abuses, and strove more or

less to root them out, but the success which attended their efforts

does not give us a very exalted idea of the practical omnipotence

of autocracy.  In a centralised bureaucratic administration, in

which each official is to a certain extent responsible for the sins

of his subordinates, it is always extremely difficult to bring an

official culprit to justice, for he is sure to be protected by his

superiors; and when the superiors are themselves habitually guilty

of malpractices, the culprit is quite safe from exposure and

punishment.  The Tsar, indeed, might do much towards exposing and

punishing offenders if he could venture to call in public opinion

to his assistance, but in reality he is very apt to become a party

to the system of hushing up official delinquencies.  He is himself

the first official in the realm, and he knows that the abuse of

power by a subordinate has a tendency to produce hostility towards

the fountain of all official power.  Frequent punishment of

officials might, it is thought, diminish public respect for the

Government, and undermine that social discipline which is necessary

for the public tranquillity.  It is therefore considered expedient

to give to official delinquencies as little publicity as possible.



Besides this, strange as it may seem, a Government which rests on

the arbitrary will of a single individual is, notwithstanding

occasional outbursts of severity, much less systematically severe

than authority founded on free public opinion.  When delinquencies

occur in very high places the Tsar is almost sure to display a

leniency approaching to tenderness.  If it be necessary to make a

sacrifice to justice, the sacrificial operation is made as painless

as may be, and illustrious scapegoats are not allowed to die of

starvation in the wilderness--the wilderness being generally Paris

or the Riviera.  This fact may seem strange to those who are in the

habit of associating autocracy with Neapolitan dungeons and the

mines of Siberia, but it is not difficult to explain.  No

individual, even though he be the Autocrat of all the Russias, can

so case himself in the armour of official dignity as to be

completely proof against personal influences.  The severity of

autocrats is reserved for political offenders, against whom they

naturally harbour a feeling of personal resentment.  It is so much

easier for us to be lenient and charitable towards a man who sins

against public morality than towards one who sins against

ourselves!



In justice to the bureaucratic reformers in Russia, it must be said

that they have preferred prevention to cure.  Refraining from all

Draconian legislation, they have put their faith in a system of

ingenious checks and a complicated formal procedure.  When we

examine the complicated formalities and labyrinthine procedure by

which the administration is controlled, our first impression is

that administrative abuses must be almost impossible.  Every

possible act of every official seems to have been foreseen, and

every possible outlet from the narrow path of honesty seems to have

been carefully walled up.  As the English reader has probably no

conception of formal procedure in a highly centralised bureaucracy,

let me give, by way of illustration, an instance which accidentally

came to my knowledge.



In the residence of a Governor-General one of the stoves is in need

of repairs.  An ordinary mortal may assume that a man with the rank

of Governor-General may be trusted to expend a few shillings

conscientiously, and that consequently his Excellency will at once

order the repairs to be made and the payment to be put down among

the petty expenses.  To the bureaucratic mind the case appears in a

very different light.  All possible contingencies must be carefully

provided for.  As a Governor-General may possibly be possessed with

a mania for making useless alterations, the necessity for the

repairs ought to be verified; and as wisdom and honesty are more

likely to reside in an assembly than in an individual, it is well

to entrust the verification to a council.  A council of three or

four members accordingly certifies that the repairs are necessary.

This is pretty strong authority, but it is not enough.  Councils

are composed of mere human beings, liable to error and subject to

be intimidated by a Governor-General.  It is prudent, therefore, to

demand that the decision of the council be confirmed by the

Procureur, who is directly subordinated to the Minister of Justice.

When this double confirmation has been obtained, an architect

examines the stove, and makes an estimate.  But it would be

dangerous to give carte blanche to an architect, and therefore the

estimate has to be confirmed, first by the aforesaid council and

afterwards by the Procureur.  When all these formalities--which

require sixteen days and ten sheets of paper--have been duly

observed, his Excellency is informed that the contemplated repairs

will cost two roubles and forty kopecks, or about five shillings of

our money.  Even here the formalities do not stop, for the

Government must have the assurance that the architect who made the

estimate and superintended the repairs has not been guilty of

negligence.  A second architect is therefore sent to examine the

work, and his report, like the estimate, requires to be confirmed

by the council and the Procureur.  The whole correspondence lasts

thirty days, and requires no less than thirty sheets of paper!  Had

the person who desired the repairs been not a Governor-General, but

an ordinary mortal, it is impossible to say how long the procedure

might have lasted.*





* In fairness I feel constrained to add that incidents of this kind

occasionally occur--or at least occurred as late as 1886--in our

Indian Administration.  I remember an instance of a pane of glass

being broken in the Viceroy's bedroom in the Viceregal Lodge at

Simla, and it would have required nearly a week, if the official

procedure had been scrupulously observed, to have it replaced by

the Public Works Department.





It might naturally be supposed that this circuitous and complicated

method, with its registers, ledgers, and minutes of proceedings,

must at least prevent pilfering; but this a priori conclusion has

been emphatically belied by experience.  Every new ingenious device

had merely the effect of producing a still more ingenious means of

avoiding it.  The system did not restrain those who wished to

pilfer, and it had a deleterious effect on honest officials by

making them feel that the Government reposed no confidence in them.

Besides this, it produced among all officials, honest and dishonest

alike, the habit of systematic falsification.  As it was impossible

for even the most pedantic of men--and pedantry, be it remarked, is

a rare quality among Russians--to fulfil conscientiously all the

prescribed formalities, it became customary to observe the forms

merely on paper.  Officials certified facts which they never

dreamed of examining, and secretaries gravely wrote the minutes of

meetings that had never been held!  Thus, in the case above cited,

the repairs were in reality begun and ended long before the

architect was officially authorised to begin the work.  The comedy

was nevertheless gravely played out to the end, so that any one

afterwards revising the documents would have found that everything

had been done in perfect order.



Perhaps the most ingenious means for preventing administrative

abuses was devised by the Emperor Nicholas I.  Fully aware that he

was regularly and systematically deceived by the ordinary

officials, he formed a body of well-paid officers, called the

gendarmerie, who were scattered over the country, and ordered to

report directly to his Majesty whatever seemed to them worthy of

attention.  Bureaucratic minds considered this an admirable

expedient; and the Tsar confidently expected that he would, by

means of these official observers who had no interest in concealing

the truth, be able to know everything, and to correct all official

abuses.  In reality the institution produced few good results, and

in some respects had a very pernicious influence.  Though picked

men and provided with good salaries, these officers were all more

or less permeated with the prevailing spirit.  They could not but

feel that they were regarded as spies and informers--a humiliating

conviction, little calculated to develop that feeling of self-

respect which is the main foundation of uprightness--and that all

their efforts could do but little good.  They were, in fact, in

pretty much the same position as Peter's Procurator-General, and,

with true Russian bonhomie, they disliked ruining individuals who

were no worse than the majority of their fellows.  Besides this,

according to the received code of official morality insubordination

was a more heinous sin than dishonesty, and political offences were

regarded as the blackest of all.  The gendarmerie officers shut

their eyes, therefore, to the prevailing abuses, which were

believed to be incurable, and directed their attention to real or

imaginary political delinquencies.  Oppression and extortion

remained unnoticed, whilst an incautious word or a foolish joke at

the expense of the Government was too often magnified into an act

of high treason.



This force still exists under a slightly modified form.  Towards

the close of the reign of Alexander II. (1880), when Count Loris

Melikof, with the sanction and approval of his august master, was

preparing to introduce a system of liberal political reforms, it

was intended to abolish the gendarmerie as an organ of political

espionage, and accordingly the direction of it was transferred from

the so-called Third Section of his Imperial Majesty's Chancery to

the Ministry of the Interior; but when the benevolent monarch was a

few months afterwards assassinated by revolutionists, the project

was naturally abandoned, and the Corps of Gendarmes, while

remaining nominally under the Minister of the Interior, was

practically reinstated in its former position.  Now, as then, it

serves as a kind of supplement to the ordinary police, and is

generally employed for matters in which secrecy is required.

Unfortunately it is not bound by those legal restrictions which

protect the public against the arbitrary will of the ordinary

authorities.  In addition to its regular duties it has a vaguely

defined roving commission to watch and arrest all persons who seem

to it in any way dangerous or suspectes, and it may keep such in

confinement for an indefinite time, or remove them to some distant

and inhospitable part of the Empire, without making them undergo a

regular trial.  It is, in short, the ordinary instrument for

punishing political dreamers, suppressing secret societies,

counteracting political agitations, and in general executing the

extra-legal orders of the Government.



My relations with this anomalous branch of the administration were

somewhat peculiar.  After my experience with the Vice-Governor of

Novgorod I determined to place myself above suspicion, and

accordingly applied to the "Chef des Gendarmes" for some kind of

official document which would prove to all officials with whom I

might come in contact that I had no illicit designs.  My request

was granted, and I was furnished with the necessary documents; but

I soon found that in seeking to avoid Scylla I had fallen into

Charybdis.  In calming official suspicions, I inadvertently aroused

suspicions of another kind.  The documents proving that I enjoyed

the protection of the Government made many people suspect that I

was an emissary of the gendarmerie, and greatly impeded me in my

efforts to collect information from private sources.  As the

private were for me more important than the official sources of

information, I refrained from asking for a renewal of the

protection, and wandered about the country as an ordinary

unprotected traveller.  For some time I had no cause to regret this

decision.  I knew that I was pretty closely watched, and that my

letters were occasionally opened in the post-office, but I was

subjected to no further inconvenience.  At last, when I had nearly

forgotten all about Scylla and Charybdis, I one night unexpectedly

ran upon the former, and, to my astonishment, found myself formally

arrested!  The incident happened in this wise.



I had been visiting Austria and Servia, and after a short absence

returned to Russia through Moldavia.  On arriving at the Pruth,

which there forms the frontier, I found an officer of gendarmerie,

whose duty it was to examine the passports of all passers-by.

Though my passport was completely en regle, having been duly vise

by the British and Russian Consuls at Galatz, this gentleman

subjected me to a searching examination regarding my past life,

actual occupation, and intentions for the future.  On learning that

I had been for more than two years travelling in Russia at my own

expense, for the simple purpose of collecting miscellaneous

information, he looked incredulous, and seemed to have some doubts

as to my being a genuine British subject; but when my statements

were confirmed by my travelling companion, a Russian friend who

carried awe-inspiring credentials, he countersigned my passport,

and allowed us to depart.  The inspection of our luggage by the

custom-house officers was soon got over; and as we drove off to the

neighbouring village where we were to spend the night we

congratulated ourselves on having escaped for some time from all

contact with the official world.  In this we were "reckoning

without the host."  As the clock struck twelve that night I was

roused by a loud knocking at my door, and after a good deal of

parley, during which some one proposed to effect an entrance by

force, I drew the bolt.  The officer who had signed my passport

entered, and said, in a stiff, official tone, "I must request you

to remain here for twenty-four hours."



Not a little astonished by this announcement, I ventured to inquire

the reason for this strange request.



"That is my business," was the laconic reply.



"Perhaps it is; still you must, on mature consideration, admit that

I too have some interest in the matter.  To my extreme regret I

cannot comply with your request, and must leave at sunrise."



"You shall not leave.  Give me your passport."



"Unless detained by force, I shall start at four o'clock; and as I

wish to get some sleep before that time, I must request you

instantly to retire.  You had the right to stop me at the frontier,

but you have no right to come and disturb me in this fashion, and I

shall certainly report you.  My passport I shall give to none but a

regular officer of police."



Here followed a long discussion on the rights, privileges, and

general character of the gendarmerie, during which my opponent

gradually laid aside his dictatorial tone, and endeavoured to

convince me that the honourable body to which he belonged was

merely an ordinary branch of the administration.  Though evidently

irritated, he never, I must say, overstepped the bounds of

politeness, and seemed only half convinced that he was justified in

interfering with my movements.  When he found that he could not

induce me to give up my passport, he withdrew, and I again lay down

to rest; but in about half an hour I was again disturbed.  This

time an officer of regular police entered, and demanded my

"papers."  To my inquiries as to the reason of all this

disturbance, he replied, in a very polite, apologetic way, that he

knew nothing about the reason, but he had received orders to arrest

me, and must obey.  To him I delivered my passport, on condition

that I should receive a written receipt, and should be allowed to

telegraph to the British ambassador in St. Petersburg.



Early next morning I telegraphed to the ambassador, and waited

impatiently all day for a reply.  I was allowed to walk about the

village and the immediate vicinity, but of this permission I did

not make much use.  The village population was entirely Jewish, and

Jews in that part of the world have a wonderful capacity for

spreading intelligence.  By the early morning there was probably

not a man, woman, or child in the place who had not heard of my

arrest, and many of them felt a not unnatural curiosity to see the

malefactor who had been caught by the police.  To be stared at as a

malefactor is not very agreeable, so I preferred to remain in my

room, where, in the company of my friend, who kindly remained with

me and made small jokes about the boasted liberty of British

subjects, I spent the time pleasantly enough.  The most

disagreeable part of the affair was the uncertainty as to how many

days, weeks, or months I might be detained, and on this point the

police-officer would not even hazard a conjecture.



The detention came to an end sooner than I expected.  On the

following day--that is to say, about thirty-six hours after the

nocturnal visit--the police-officer brought me my passport, and at

the same time a telegram from the British Embassy informed me that

the central authorities had ordered my release.  On my afterwards

pertinaciously requesting an explanation of the unceremonious

treatment to which I had been subjected, the Minister for Foreign

Affairs declared that the authorities expected a person of my name

to cross the frontier about that time with a quantity of false

bank-notes, and that I had been arrested by mistake.  I must

confess that this explanation, though official, seemed to me more

ingenious than satisfactory, but I was obliged to accept it for

what it was worth.  At a later period I had again the misfortune to

attract the attention of the secret police, but I reserve the

incident till I come to speak of my relations with the

revolutionists.



From all I have seen and heard of the gendarmerie I am disposed to

believe that the officers are for the most part polite, well-

educated men, who seek to fulfil their disagreeable duties in as

inoffensive a way as possible.  It must, however, be admitted that

they are generally regarded with suspicion and dislike, even by

those people who fear the attempts at revolutionary propaganda

which it is the special duty of the gendarmerie to discover and

suppress.  Nor need this surprise us.  Though very many people

believe in the necessity of capital punishment, there are few who

do not feel a decided aversion to the public executioner.



The only effectual remedy for administrative abuses lies in placing

the administration under public control.  This has been abundantly

proved in Russia.  All the efforts of the Tsars during many

generations to check the evil by means of ingenious bureaucratic

devices proved utterly fruitless.  Even the iron will and gigantic

energy of Nicholas I. were insufficient for the task.  But when,

after the Crimean War, there was a great moral awakening, and the

Tsar called the people to his assistance, the stubborn, deep-rooted

evils immediately disappeared.  For a time venality and extortion

were unknown, and since that period they have never been able to

regain their old force.



At the present moment it cannot be said that the administration is

immaculate, but it is incomparably purer than it was in old times.

Though public opinion is no longer so powerful as it was in the

early sixties, it is still strong enough to repress many

malpractices which in the time of Nicholas I. and his predecessors

were too frequent to attract attention.  On this subject I shall

have more to say hereafter.



If administrative abuses are rife in the Empire of the Tsars, it is

not from any want of carefully prepared laws.  In no country in the

world, perhaps, is the legislation more voluminous, and in theory,

not only the officials, but even the Tsar himself, must obey the

laws he has sanctioned, like the meanest of his subjects.  This is

one of those cases, not infrequent in Russia, in which theory

differs somewhat from practice.  In real life the Emperor may at

any moment override the law by means of what is called a Supreme

Command (vysotchaishiye povelenie), and a minister may "interpret"

a law in any way he pleases by means of a circular.  This is a

frequent cause of complaint even among those who wish to uphold the

Autocratic Power.  In their opinion law-respecting autocracy

wielded by a strong Tsar is an excellent institution for Russia; it

is arbitrary autocracy wielded by irresponsible ministers that they

object to.



As Englishmen may have some difficulty in imagining how laws can

come into being without a Parliament or Legislative Chamber of some

sort, I shall explain briefly how they are manufactured by the

Russian bureaucratic machine without the assistance of

representative institutions.



When a minister considers that some institution in his branch of

the service requires to be reformed, he begins by submitting to the

Emperor a formal report on the matter.  If the Emperor agrees with

his minister as to the necessity for reform, he orders a Commission

to be appointed for the purpose of considering the subject and

preparing a definite legislative project.  The Commission meets and

sets to work in what seems a very thorough way.  It first studies

the history of the institution in Russia from the earliest times

downwards--or rather, it listens to an essay on the subject,

especially prepared for the occasion by some official who has a

taste for historical studies, and can write in a pleasant style.

The next step--to use a phrase which often occurs in the minutes of

such commissions--consists in "shedding the light of science on the

question" (prolit' na dyelo svet nauki).  This important operation

is performed by preparing a memorial containing the history of

similar institutions in foreign countries, and an elaborate

exposition of numerous theories held by French and German

philosophical jurists.  In these memorials it is often considered

necessary to include every European country except Turkey, and

sometimes the small German States and principal Swiss cantons are

treated separately.



To illustrate the character of these wonderful productions, let me

give an example.  From a pile of such papers lying before me I take

one almost at random.  It is a memorial relating to a proposed

reform of benevolent institutions.  First I find a philosophical

disquisition on benevolence in general; next, some remarks on the

Talmud and the Koran; then a reference to the treatment of paupers

in Athens after the Peloponnesian War, and in Rome under the

emperors: then some vague observations on the Middle Ages, with a

quotation that was evidently intended to be Latin; lastly, comes an

account of the poor-laws of modern times, in which I meet with "the

Anglo-Saxon domination," King Egbert, King Ethelred, "a remarkable

book of Icelandic laws, called Hragas"; Sweden and Norway, France,

Holland, Belgium, Prussia, and nearly all the minor German States.

The most wonderful thing is that all this mass of historical

information, extending from the Talmud to the most recent

legislation of Hesse-Darmstadt, is compressed into twenty-one

octavo pages!  The doctrinal part of the memorandum is not less

rich.  Many respected names from the literature of Germany, France,

and England are forcibly dragged in; and the general conclusion

drawn from this mass of raw, undigested materials is believed to be

"the latest results of science."



Does the reader suspect that I have here chosen an extremely

exceptional case?  If so, let us take the next paper in the file.

It refers to a project of law regarding imprisonment for debt.  On

the first page I find references to "the Salic laws of the fifth

century," and the "Assises de Jerusalem, A.D 1099."  That, I think,

will suffice.  Let us pass, then, to the next step.



When the quintessence of human wisdom and experience has thus been

extracted, the commission considers how the valuable product may be

applied to Russia, so as to harmonise with the existing general

conditions and local peculiarities.  For a man of practical mind

this is, of course, the most interesting and most important part of

the operation, but from Russian legislators it receives

comparatively little attention.  Very often have I turned to this

section of official papers in order to obtain information regarding

the actual state of the country, and in every case I have been

grievously disappointed.  Vague general phrases, founded on a

priori reasoning rather than on observation, together with a few

statistical tables--which the cautious investigator should avoid as

he would an ambuscade--are too often all that is to be found.

Through the thin veil of pseudo-erudition the real facts are clear

enough.  These philosophical legislators, who have spent their

lives in the official atmosphere of St. Petersburg, know as much

about Russia as the genuine cockney knows about Great Britain, and

in this part of their work they derive no assistance from the

learned German treatises which supply an unlimited amount of

historical facts and philosophical speculation.



From the commission the project passes to the Council of State,

where it is certainly examined and criticised, and perhaps

modified, but it is not likely to be improved from the practical

point of view, because the members of the Council are merely ci-

devant members of similar commissions, hardened by a few additional

years of official routine.  The Council is, in fact, an assembly of

tchinovniks who know little of the practical, everyday wants of the

unofficial classes.  No merchant, manufacturer, or farmer ever

enters its sacred precincts, so that its bureaucratic serenity is

rarely disturbed by practical objections.  It is not surprising,

therefore, that it has been known to pass laws which were found at

once to be absolutely unworkable.



From the Council of State the Bill is taken to the Emperor, and he

generally begins by examining the signatures.  The "Ayes" are in

one column and the "Noes" in another.  If his Majesty is not

specially acquainted with the matter--and he cannot possibly be

acquainted with all the matters submitted to him--he usually signs

with the majority, or on the side where he sees the names of

officials in whose judgment he has special confidence; but if he

has strong views of his own, he places his signature in whichever

column he thinks fit, and it outweighs the signatures of any number

of Councillors.  Whatever side he supports, that side "has it," and

in this way a small minority may be transformed into a majority.

When the important question, for example, as to how far classics

should be taught in the ordinary schools was considered by the

Council, it is said that only two members signed in favour of

classical education, which was excessively unpopular at the moment,

but the Emperor Alexander III., disregarding public opinion and the

advice of his Councillors, threw his signature into the lighter

scale, and the classicists were victorious.

