




CHAPTER II



IN THE NORTHERN FORESTS





Bird's-eye View of Russia--The Northern Forests--Purpose of my

Journey--Negotiations--The Road--A Village--A Peasant's House--

Vapour-Baths--Curious Custom--Arrival.





There are many ways of describing a country that one has visited.

The simplest and most common method is to give a chronological

account of the journey; and this is perhaps the best way when the

journey does not extend over more than a few weeks.  But it cannot

be conveniently employed in the case of a residence of many years.

Did I adopt it, I should very soon exhaust the reader's patience.

I should have to take him with me to a secluded village, and make

him wait for me till I had learned to speak the language.  Thence

he would have to accompany me to a provincial town, and spend

months in a public office, whilst I endeavoured to master the

mysteries of local self-government.  After this he would have to

spend two years with me in a big library, where I studied the

history and literature of the country.  And so on, and so on.  Even

my journeys would prove tedious to him, as they often were to

myself, for he would have to drive with me many a score of weary

miles, where even the most zealous diary-writer would find nothing

to record beyond the names of the post-stations.



It will be well for me, then, to avoid the strictly chronological

method, and confine myself to a description of the more striking

objects and incidents that came under my notice.  The knowledge

which I derived from books will help me to supply a running

commentary on what I happened to see and hear.



Instead of beginning in the usual way with St. Petersburg, I prefer

for many reasons to leave the description of the capital till some

future time, and plunge at once into the great northern forest

region.



If it were possible to get a bird's-eye view of European Russia,

the spectator would perceive that the country is composed of two

halves widely differing from each other in character.  The northern

half is a land of forest and morass, plentifully supplied with

water in the form of rivers, lakes, and marshes, and broken up by

numerous patches of cultivation.  The southern half is, as it were,

the other side of the pattern--an immense expanse of rich, arable

land, broken up by occasional patches of sand or forest.  The

imaginary undulating line separating those two regions starts from

the western frontier about the 50th parallel of latitude, and runs

in a northeasterly direction till it enters the Ural range at about

56 degrees N.L.



Well do I remember my first experience of travel in the northern

region, and the weeks of voluntary exile which formed the goal of

the journey.  It was in the summer of 1870.  My reason for

undertaking the journey was this: a few months of life in St.

Petersburg had fully convinced me that the Russian language is one

of those things which can only be acquired by practice, and that

even a person of antediluvian longevity might spend all his life in

that city without learning to express himself fluently in the

vernacular--especially if he has the misfortune of being able to

speak English, French, and German.  With his friends and associates

he speaks French or English.  German serves as a medium of

communication with waiters, shop keepers, and other people of that

class.  It is only with isvoshtchiki--the drivers of the little

open droshkis which fulfil the function of cabs--that he is obliged

to use the native tongue, and with them a very limited vocabulary

suffices.  The ordinal numerals and four short, easily-acquired

expressions--poshol (go on), na pravo (to the right), na lyevo (to

the left), and stoi (stop)--are all that is required.



Whilst I was considering how I could get beyond the sphere of West-

European languages, a friend came to my assistance, and suggested

that I should go to his estate in the province of Novgorod, where I

should find an intelligent, amiable parish priest, quite innocent

of any linguistic acquirements.  This proposal I at once adopted,

and accordingly found myself one morning at a small station of the

Moscow Railway, endeavouring to explain to a peasant in sheep's

clothing that I wished to be conveyed to Ivanofka, the village

where my future teacher lived.  At that time I still spoke Russian

in a very fragmentary and confused way--pretty much as Spanish cows

are popularly supposed to speak French.  My first remark therefore

being literally interpreted, was--"Ivanofka.  Horses.  You can?"

The point of interrogation was expressed by a simultaneous raising

of the voice and the eyebrows.



"Ivanofka?" cried the peasant, in an interrogatory tone of voice.

In Russia, as in other countries, the peasantry when speaking with

strangers like to repeat questions, apparently for the purpose of

gaining time.



"Ivanofka," I replied.



"Now?"



"Now!"



After some reflection the peasant nodded and said something which I

did not understand, but which I assumed to mean that he was open to

consider proposals for transporting me to my destination.



"Roubles.  How many?"



To judge by the knitting of the brows and the scratching of the

head, I should say that that question gave occasion to a very

abstruse mathematical calculation.  Gradually the look of

concentrated attention gave place to an expression such as children

assume when they endeavour to get a parental decision reversed by

means of coaxing.  Then came a stream of soft words which were to

me utterly unintelligible.



I must not weary the reader with a detailed account of the

succeeding negotiations, which were conducted with extreme

diplomatic caution on both sides, as if a cession of territory or

the payment of a war indemnity had been the subject of discussion.

Three times he drove away and three times returned.  Each time he

abated his pretensions, and each time I slightly increased my

offer.  At last, when I began to fear that he had finally taken his

departure and had left me to my own devices, he re-entered the room

and took up my baggage, indicating thereby that he agreed to my

last offer.



The sum agreed upon would have been, under ordinary circumstances,

more than sufficient, but before proceeding far I discovered that

the circumstances were by no means ordinary, and I began to

understand the pantomimic gesticulation which had puzzled me during

the negotiations.  Heavy rain had fallen without interruption for

several days, and now the track on which we were travelling could

not, without poetical license, be described as a road.  In some

parts it resembled a water-course, in others a quagmire, and at

least during the first half of the journey I was constantly

reminded of that stage in the work of creation when the water was

not yet separated from the dry land.  During the few moments when

the work of keeping my balance and preventing my baggage from being

lost did not engross all my attention, I speculated on the

possibility of inventing a boat-carriage, to be drawn by some

amphibious quadruped.  Fortunately our two lean, wiry little horses

did not object to being used as aquatic animals.  They took the

water bravely, and plunged through the mud in gallant style.  The

telega in which we were seated--a four-wheeled skeleton cart--did

not submit to the ill-treatment so silently.  It creaked out its

remonstrances and entreaties, and at the more difficult spots

threatened to go to pieces; but its owner understood its character

and capabilities, and paid no attention to its ominous threats.

Once, indeed, a wheel came off, but it was soon fished out of the

mud and replaced, and no further casualty occurred.



The horses did their work so well that when about midday we arrived

at a village, I could not refuse to let them have some rest and

refreshment--all the more as my own thoughts had begun to turn in

that direction.



The village, like villages in that part of the country generally,

consisted of two long parallel rows of wooden houses.  The road--if

a stratum of deep mud can be called by that name--formed the

intervening space.  All the houses turned their gables to the

passerby, and some of them had pretensions to architectural

decoration in the form of rude perforated woodwork.  Between the

houses, and in a line with them, were great wooden gates and high

wooden fences, separating the courtyards from the road.  Into one

of these yards, near the farther end of the village, our horses

turned of their own accord.



"An inn?" I said, in an interrogative tone.



The driver shook his head and said something, in which I detected

the word "friend."  Evidently there was no hostelry for man and

beast in the village, and the driver was using a friend's house for

the purpose.



The yard was flanked on the one side by an open shed, containing

rude agricultural implements which might throw some light on the

agriculture of the primitive Aryans, and on the other side by the

dwelling-house and stable.  Both the house and stable were built of

logs, nearly cylindrical in form, and placed in horizontal tiers.



Two of the strongest of human motives, hunger and curiosity,

impelled me to enter the house at once.  Without waiting for an

invitation, I went up to the door--half protected against the

winter snows by a small open portico--and unceremoniously walked

in.  The first apartment was empty, but I noticed a low door in the

wall to the left, and passing through this, entered the principal

room.  As the scene was new to me, I noted the principal objects.

In the wall before me were two small square windows looking out

upon the road, and in the corner to the right, nearer to the

ceiling than to the floor, was a little triangular shelf, on which

stood a religious picture.  Before the picture hung a curious oil

lamp.  In the corner to the left of the door was a gigantic stove,

built of brick, and whitewashed.  From the top of the stove to the

wall on the right stretched what might be called an enormous shelf,

six or eight feet in breadth.  This is the so-called palati, as I

afterwards discovered, and serves as a bed for part of the family.

The furniture consisted of a long wooden bench attached to the wall

on the right, a big, heavy, deal table, and a few wooden stools.



Whilst I was leisurely surveying these objects, I heard a noise on

the top of the stove, and, looking up, perceived a human face, with

long hair parted in the middle, and a full yellow beard.  I was

considerably astonished by this apparition, for the air in the room

was stifling, and I had some difficulty in believing that any

created being--except perhaps a salamander or a negro--could exist

in such a position.  I looked hard to convince myself that I was

not the victim of a delusion.  As I stared, the head nodded slowly

and pronounced the customary form of greeting.



I returned the greeting slowly, wondering what was to come next.



"Ill, very ill!" sighed the head.



"I'm not astonished at that," I remarked, in an "aside."  "If I

were lying on the stove as you are I should be very ill too."



"Hot, very hot?" I remarked, interrogatively.



"Nitchevo"--that is to say, "not particularly."  This remark

astonished me all the more as I noticed that the body to which the

head belonged was enveloped in a sheep-skin!



After living some time in Russia I was no longer surprised by such

incidents, for I soon discovered that the Russian peasant has a

marvellous power of bearing extreme heat as well as extreme cold.

When a coachman takes his master or mistress to the theatre or to a

party, he never thinks of going home and returning at an appointed

time.  Hour after hour he sits placidly on the box, and though the

cold be of an intensity such as is never experienced in our

temperate climate, he can sleep as tranquilly as the lazzaroni at

midday in Naples.  In that respect the Russian peasant seems to be

first-cousin to the polar bear, but, unlike the animals of the

Arctic regions, he is not at all incommoded by excessive heat.  On

the contrary, he likes it when he can get it, and never omits an

opportunity of laying in a reserve supply of caloric.  He even

delights in rapid transitions from one extreme to the other, as is

amply proved by a curious custom which deserves to be recorded.



The reader must know that in the life of the Russian peasantry the

weekly vapour-bath plays a most important part.  It has even a

certain religious signification, for no good orthodox peasant would

dare to enter a church after being soiled by certain kinds of

pollution without cleansing himself physically and morally by means

of the bath.  In the weekly arrangements it forms the occupation

for Saturday afternoon, and care is taken to avoid thereafter all

pollution until after the morning service on Sunday.  Many villages

possess a public or communal bath of the most primitive

construction, but in some parts of the country--I am not sure how

far the practice extends--the peasants take their vapour-bath in

the household oven in which the bread is baked!  In all cases the

operation is pushed to the extreme limit of human endurance--far

beyond the utmost limit that can be endured by those who have not

been accustomed to it from childhood.  For my own part, I only made

the experiment once; and when I informed my attendant that my life

was in danger from congestion of the brain, he laughed outright,

and told me that the operation had only begun.  Most astounding of

all--and this brings me to the fact which led me into this

digression--the peasants in winter often rush out of the bath and

roll themselves in the snow!  This aptly illustrates a common

Russian proverb, which says that what is health to the Russian is

death to the German.



Cold water, as well as hot vapour, is sometimes used as a means of

purification.  In the villages the old pagan habit of masquerading

in absurd costumes at certain seasons--as is done during the

carnival in Roman Catholic countries with the approval, or at least

connivance, of the Church--still survives; but it is regarded as

not altogether sinless.  He who uses such disguises places himself

to a certain extent under the influence of the Evil One, thereby

putting his soul in jeopardy; and to free himself from this danger

he has to purify himself in the following way: When the annual mid-

winter ceremony of blessing the waters is performed, by breaking a

hole in the ice and immersing a cross with certain religious rites,

he should plunge into the hole as soon as possible after the

ceremony.  I remember once at Yaroslavl, on the Volga, two young

peasants successfully accomplished this feat--though the police

have orders to prevent it--and escaped, apparently without evil

consequences, though the Fahrenheit thermometer was below zero.

How far the custom has really a purifying influence, is a question

which must be left to theologians; but even an ordinary mortal can

understand that, if it be regarded as a penance, it must have a

certain deterrent effect.  The man who foresees the necessity of

undergoing this severe penance will think twice before putting on a

disguise.  So at least it must have been in the good old times; but

in these degenerate days--among the Russian peasantry as elsewhere--

the fear of the Devil, which was formerly, if not the beginning,

at least one of the essential elements, of wisdom, has greatly

decreased.  Many a young peasant will now thoughtlessly disguise

himself, and when the consecration of the water is performed, will

stand and look on passively like an ordinary spectator!  It would

seem that the Devil, like his enemy the Pope, is destined to lose

gradually his temporal power.



But all this time I am neglecting my new acquaintance on the top of

the stove.  In reality I did not neglect him, but listened most

attentively to every word of the long tale that he recited.  What

it was all about I could only vaguely guess, for I did not

understand more than ten per cent of the words used, but I assumed

from the tone and gestures that he was relating to me all the

incidents and symptoms of his illness.  And a very severe illness

it must have been, for it requires a very considerable amount of

physical suffering to make the patient Russian peasant groan.

Before he had finished his tale a woman entered, apparently his

wife.



To her I explained that I had a strong desire to eat and drink, and

that I wished to know what she would give me.  By a good deal of

laborious explanation I was made to understand that I could have

eggs, black bread, and milk, and we agreed that there should be a

division of labour: my hostess should prepare the samovar for

boiling water, whilst I should fry the eggs to my own satisfaction.



In a few minutes the repast was ready, and, though not very

delicate, was highly acceptable.  The tea and sugar I had of course

brought with me; the eggs were not very highly flavoured; and the

black rye-bread, strongly intermixed with sand, could be eaten by a

peculiar and easily-acquired method of mastication, in which the

upper molars are never allowed to touch those of the lower jaw.  In

this way the grating of the sand between the teeth is avoided.



Eggs, black bread, milk, and tea--these formed my ordinary articles

of food during all my wanderings in Northern Russia.  Occasionally

potatoes could be got, and afforded the possibility of varying the

bill of fare.  The favourite materials employed in the native

cookery are sour cabbage, cucumbers, and kvass--a kind of very

small beer made from black bread.  None of these can be recommended

to the traveller who is not already accustomed to them.



The remainder of the journey was accomplished at a rather more

rapid pace than the preceding part, for the road was decidedly

better, though it was traversed by numerous half-buried roots,

which produced violent jolts.  From the conversation of the driver

I gathered that wolves, bears, and elks were found in the forest

through which we were passing.



The sun had long since set when we reached our destination, and I

found to my dismay that the priest's house was closed for the

night.  To rouse the reverend personage from his slumbers, and

endeavour to explain to him with my limited vocabulary the object

of my visit, was not to be thought of.  On the other hand, there

was no inn of any kind in the vicinity.  When I consulted the

driver as to what was to be done, he meditated for a little, and

then pointed to a large house at some distance where there were

still lights.  It turned out to be the country-house of the

gentleman who had advised me to undertake the journey, and here,

after a short explanation, though the owner was not at home, I was

hospitably received.



It had been my intention to live in the priest's house, but a short

interview with him on the following day convinced me that that part

of my plan could not be carried out.  The preliminary objections

that I should find but poor fare in his humble household, and much

more of the same kind, were at once put aside by my assurance, made

partly by pantomime, that, as an old traveller, I was well

accustomed to simple fare, and could always accommodate myself to

the habits of people among whom my lot happened to be cast.  But

there was a more serious difficulty.  The priest's family had, as

is generally the case with priests' families, been rapidly

increasing during the last few years, and his house had not been

growing with equal rapidity.  The natural consequence of this was

that he had not a room or a bed to spare.  The little room which he

had formerly kept for occasional visitors was now occupied by his

eldest daughter, who had returned from a "school for the daughters

of the clergy," where she had been for the last two years.  Under

these circumstances, I was constrained to accept the kind proposal

made to me by the representative of my absent friend, that I should

take up my quarters in one of the numerous unoccupied rooms in the

manor-house.  This arrangement, I was reminded, would not at all

interfere with my proposed studies, for the priest lived close at

hand, and I might spend with him as much time as I liked.



And now let me introduce the reader to my reverend teacher and one

or two other personages whose acquaintance I made during my

voluntary exile.
