





CHAPTER XXIX



THE EMANCIPATION OF THE SERFS





The Question Raised--Chief Committee--The Nobles of the Lithuanian

Provinces--The Tsar's Broad Hint to the Noblesse--Enthusiasm in the

Press--The Proprietors--Political Aspirations--No Opposition--The

Government--Public Opinion--Fear of the Proletariat--The Provincial

Committees--The Elaboration Commission--The Question Ripens--

Provincial Deputies--Discontent and Demonstrations--The Manifesto--

Fundamental Principles of the Law--Illusions and Disappointment of

the Serfs--Arbiters of the Peace--A Characteristic Incident--

Redemption--Who Effected the Emancipation?





It is a fundamental principle of Russian political organisation

that all initiative in public affairs proceeds from the Autocratic

Power.  The widespread desire, therefore, for the Emancipation of

the serfs did not find free expression so long as the Emperor kept

silence regarding his intentions.  The educated classes watched

anxiously for some sign, and soon a sign was given to them.  In

March, 1856--a few days after the publication of the manifesto

announcing the conclusion of peace with the Western Powers--his

Majesty said to the Marshals of Noblesse in Moscow: "For the

removal of certain unfounded reports I consider it necessary to

declare to you that I have not at present the intention of

annihilating serfage; but certainly, as you yourselves know, the

existing manner of possessing serfs cannot remain unchanged.  It is

better to abolish serfage from above than to await the time when it

will begin to abolish itself from below.  I request you, gentlemen,

to consider how this can be put into execution, and to submit my

words to the Noblesse for their consideration."



These words were intended to sound the Noblesse and induce them to

make a voluntary proposal, but they had not the desired effect.

Abolitionist enthusiasm was rare among the great nobles, and those

who really wished to see serfage abolished considered the Imperial

utterance too vague and oracular to justify them in taking the

initiative.  As no further steps were taken for some time, the

excitement caused by the incident soon subsided, and many people

assumed that the consideration of the problem had been indefinitely

postponed.  "The Government," it was said, "evidently intended to

raise the question, but on perceiving the indifference or hostility

of the landed proprietors, it became frightened and drew back."



The Emperor was in reality disappointed.  He had expected that his

"faithful Moscow Noblesse," of which he was wont to say he was

himself a member, would at once respond to his call, and that the

ancient capital would have the honour of beginning the work.  And

if the example were thus given by Moscow, he had no doubt that it

would soon be followed by the other provinces.  He now perceived

that the fundamental principles on which the Emancipation should be

effected must be laid down by the Government, and for this purpose

he created a secret committee composed of several great officers of

State.



This "Chief Committee for Peasant Affairs," as it was afterwards

called, devoted six months to studying the history of the question.

Emancipation schemes were by no means a new phenomenon in Russia.

Ever since the time of Catherine II. the Government had thought of

improving the condition of the serfs, and on more than one occasion

a general emancipation had been contemplated.  In this way the

question had slowly ripened, and certain fundamental principles had

come to be pretty generally recognised.  Of these principles the

most important was that the State should not consent to any project

which would uproot the peasant from the soil and allow him to

wander about at will; for such a measure would render the

collection of the taxes impossible, and in all probability produce

the most frightful agrarian disorders.  And to this general

principle there was an important corollary: if severe restrictions

were to be placed on free migration, it would be necessary to

provide the peasantry with land in the immediate vicinity of the

villages; otherwise they must inevitably fall back under the power

of the proprietors, and a new and worse kind of serfage would thus

be created.  But in order to give land to the peasantry it would be

necessary to take it from the proprietors; and this expropriation

seemed to many a most unjustifiable infringement of the sacred

rights of property.  It was this consideration that had restrained

Nicholas from taking any decisive measures with regard to serfage;

and it had now considerable weight with the members of the

committee, who were nearly all great land-owners.



Notwithstanding the strenuous exertions of the Grand Duke

Constantine, who had been appointed a member for the express

purpose of accelerating the proceedings, the committee did not show

as much zeal and energy as was desired, and orders were given to

take some decided step.  At that moment a convenient opportunity

presented itself.



In the Lithuanian Provinces, where the nobles were Polish by origin

and sympathies, the miserable condition of the peasantry had

induced the Government in the preceding reign to limit the

arbitrary power of the serf-owners by so-called Inventories, in

which the mutual obligations of masters and serfs were regulated

and defined.  These Inventories had caused great dissatisfaction,

and the proprietors now proposed that they should be revised.  Of

this the Government determined to take advantage.  On the somewhat

violent assumption that these proprietors wished to emancipate

their serfs, an Imperial rescript was prepared approving of their

supposed desire, and empowering them to form committees for the

preparation of definite projects.*  In the rescript itself the word

emancipation was studiously avoided, but there could be no doubt as

to the implied meaning, for it was expressly stated in the

supplementary considerations that "the abolition of serfage must be

effected not suddenly, but gradually."  Four days later the

Minister of the Interior, in accordance with a secret order from

the Emperor, sent a circular to the Governors and Marshals of

Noblesse all over Russia proper, informing them that the nobles of

the Lithuanian Provinces "had recognised the necessity of

liberating the peasants," and that "this noble intention" had

afforded peculiar satisfaction to his Majesty.  A copy of the

rescript and the fundamental principles to be observed accompanied

the circular, "in case the nobles of other provinces should express

a similar desire."





* This celebrated document is known as "The Rescript to Nazimof."

More than once in the course of conversation I did all in my power,

within the limits of politeness and discretion, to extract from

General Nazimof a detailed account of this important episode, but

my efforts were unsuccessful.





This circular produced an immense sensation throughout the country.

No one could for a moment misunderstand the suggestion that the

nobles of other provinces MIGHT POSSIBLY express a desire to

liberate their serfs.  Such vague words, when spoken by an

autocrat, have a very definite and unmistakable meaning, which

prudent loyal subjects have no difficulty in understanding.  If any

doubted, their doubts were soon dispelled, for the Emperor, a few

weeks later, publicly expressed a hope that, with the help of God

and the co-operation of the nobles, the work would be successfully

accomplished.



The die was cast, and the Government looked anxiously to see the

result.



The periodical Press--which was at once the product and the

fomenter of the liberal aspirations--hailed the raising of the

question with boundless enthusiasm.  The Emancipation, it was said,

would certainly open a new and glorious epoch in the national

history.  Serfage was described as an ulcer that had long been

poisoning the national blood; as an enormous weight under which the

whole nation groaned; as an insurmountable obstacle, preventing all

material and moral progress; as a cumbrous load which rendered all

free, vigorous action impossible, and prevented Russia from rising

to the level of the Western nations.  If Russia had succeeded in

stemming the flood of adverse fortune in spite of this millstone

round her neck, what might she not accomplish when free and

untrammelled?  All sections of the literary world had arguments to

offer in support of the foregone conclusion.  The moralists

declared that all the prevailing vices were the product of serfage,

and that moral progress was impossible in an atmosphere of slavery;

the lawyers held that the arbitrary authority of the proprietors

over the peasants had no legal basis; the economists explained that

free labour was an indispensable condition of industrial and

commercial prosperity; the philosophical historians showed that the

normal historical development of the country demanded the immediate

abolition of this superannuated remnant of barbarism; and the

writers of the sentimental, gushing type poured forth endless

effusions about brotherly love to the weak and the oppressed.  In a

word, the Press was for the moment unanimous, and displayed a

feverish excitement which demanded a liberal use of superlatives.



This enthusiastic tone accorded perfectly with the feelings of a

large section of the nobles.  Nearly the whole of the Noblesse was

more or less affected by the newborn enthusiasm for everything

just, humanitarian, and liberal.  The aspirations found, of course,

their most ardent representatives among the educated youth; but

they were by no means confined to the younger men, who had passed

through the universities and had always regarded serfage as a stain

on the national honour.  Many a Saul was found among the prophets.

Many an old man, with grey hairs and grandchildren, who had all his

life placidly enjoyed the fruits of serf labour, was now heard to

speak of serfage as an antiquated institution which could not be

reconciled with modern humanitarian ideas; and not a few of all

ages, who had formerly never thought of reading books or

newspapers, now perused assiduously the periodical literature, and

picked up the liberal and humanitarian phrases with which it was

filled.



This Abolitionist fervour was considerably augmented by certain

political aspirations which did not appear in the newspapers, but

which were at that time very generally entertained.  In spite of

the Press-censure a large section of the educated classes had

become acquainted with the political literature of France and

Germany, and had imbibed therefrom an unbounded admiration for

Constitutional government.  A Constitution, it was thought, would

necessarily remove all political evils and create something like a

political Millennium.  And it was not to be a Constitution of the

ordinary sort--the fruit of compromise between hostile political

parties--but an institution designed calmly according to the latest

results of political science, and so constructed that all classes

would voluntarily contribute to the general welfare.  The necessary

prelude to this happy era of political liberty was, of course, the

abolition of serfage.  When the nobles had given up their power

over their serfs they would receive a Constitution as an

indemnification and reward.



There were, however, many nobles of the old school who remained

impervious to all these new feelings and ideas.  On them the

raising of the Emancipation question had a very different effect.

They had no source of revenue but their estates, and they could not

conceive the possibility of working their estates without serf

labour.  If the peasant was indolent and careless even under strict

supervision, what would he become when no longer under the

authority of a master?  If the profits from farming were already

small, what would they be when no one would work without wages?

And this was not the worst, for it was quite evident from the

circular that the land question was to be raised, and that a

considerable portion of each estate would be transferred, at least

for a time, to the emancipated peasants.



To the proprietors who looked at the question in this way the

prospect of Emancipation was certainly not at all agreeable, but we

must not imagine that they felt as English land-owners would feel

if threatened by a similar danger.  In England a hereditary estate

has for the family a value far beyond what it would bring in the

market.  It is regarded as one and indivisible, and any

dismemberment of it would be looked upon as a grave family

misfortune.  In Russia, on the contrary, estates have nothing of

this semi-sacred character, and may be at any time dismembered

without outraging family feeling or traditional associations.

Indeed, it is not uncommon that when a proprietor dies, leaving

only one estate and several children, the property is broken up

into fractions and divided among the heirs.  Even the prospect of

pecuniary sacrifice did not alarm the Russians so much as it would

alarm Englishmen.  Men who keep no accounts and take little thought

for the morrow are much less averse to making pecuniary sacrifices--

whether for a wise or a foolish purpose--than those who carefully

arrange their mode of life according to their income.



Still, after due allowance has been made for these peculiarities,

it must be admitted that the feeling of dissatisfaction and alarm

was very widespread.  Even Russians do not like the prospect of

losing a part of their land and income.  No protest, however, was

entered, and no opposition was made.  Those who were hostile to the

measure were ashamed to show themselves selfish and unpatriotic.

At the same time they knew very well that the Emperor, if he

wished, could effect the Emancipation in spite of them, and that

resistance on their part would draw down upon them the Imperial

displeasure, without affording any compensating advantage.  They

knew, too, that there was a danger from below, so that any useless

show of opposition would be like playing with matches in a powder-

magazine.  The serfs would soon hear that the Tsar desired to set

them free, and they might, if they suspected that the proprietors

were trying to frustrate the Tsar's benevolent intentions, use

violent measures to get rid of the opposition.  The idea of

agrarian massacres had already taken possession of many timid

minds.  Besides this, all classes of the proprietors felt that if

the work was to be done, it should be done by the Noblesse and not

by the bureaucracy.  If it were effected by the nobles the

interests of the land-owners would be duly considered, but if it

were effected by the Administration without their concurrence and

co-operation their interests would be neglected, and there would

inevitably be an enormous amount of jobbery and corruption.  In

accordance with this view, the Noblesse corporations of the various

provinces successively requested permission to form committees for

the consideration of the question, and during the year 1858 a

committee was opened in almost every province in which serfage

existed.



In this way the question was apparently handed over for solution to

the nobles, but in reality the Noblesse was called upon merely to

advise, and not to legislate.  The Government had not only laid

down the fundamental principles of the scheme; it continually

supervised the work of construction, and it reserved to itself the

right of modifying or rejecting the projects proposed by the

committees.



According to these fundamental principles the serfs should be

emancipated gradually, so that for some time they would remain

attached to the glebe and subject to the authority of the

proprietors.  During this transition period they should redeem by

money payments or labour their houses and gardens, and enjoy in

usufruct a certain quantity of land, sufficient to enable them to

support themselves and to fulfil their obligations to the State as

well as to the proprietor.  In return for this land they should pay

a yearly rent in money, produce or labour over and above the yearly

sum paid for the redemption of their houses and gardens.  As to

what should be done after the expiry of the transition period, the

Government seems to have had no clearly conceived intentions.

Probably it hoped that by that time the proprietors and their

emancipated serfs would have invented some convenient modus

vivendi, and that nothing but a little legislative regulation would

be necessary.  But radical legislation is like the letting-out of

water.  These fundamental principles, adopted at first with a view

to mere immediate practical necessity, soon acquired a very

different significance.  To understand this we must return to the

periodical literature.



Until the serf question came to be discussed, the reform

aspirations were very vague, and consequently there was a

remarkable unanimity among their representatives.  The great

majority of the educated classes were unanimously of opinion that

Russia should at once adopt from the West all those liberal

principles and institutions the exclusion of which had prevented

the country from rising to the level of the Western nations.  But

very soon symptoms of a schism became apparent.  Whilst the

literature in general was still preaching the doctrine that Russia

should adopt everything that was "liberal," a few voices began to

be heard warning the unwary that much which bore the name of

liberal was in reality already antiquated and worthless--that

Russia ought not to follow blindly in the footsteps of other

nations, but ought rather to profit by their experience, and avoid

the errors into which they had fallen.  The chief of these errors

was, according to these new teachers, the abnormal development of

individualism--the adoption of that principle of laissez faire

which forms the basis of what may be called the Orthodox School of

Political Economists.  Individualism and unrestricted competition,

it was said, have now reached in the West an abnormal and monstrous

development.  Supported by the laissez faire principle, they have

led--and must always lead--to the oppression of the weak, the

tyranny of capital, the impoverishment of the masses for the

benefit of the few, and the formation of a hungry, dangerous

Proletariat!  This has already been recognised by the most advanced

thinkers of France and Germany.  If the older countries cannot at

once cure those evils, that is no reason for Russia to inoculate

herself with them.  She is still at the commencement of her career,

and it would be folly for her to wander voluntarily for ages in the

Desert, when a direct route to the Promised Land has been already

discovered.



In order to convey some idea of the influence which this teaching

exercised, I must here recall, at the risk of repeating myself,

what I said in a former chapter.  The Russians, as I have there

pointed out, have a peculiar way of treating political and social

questions.  Having received their political education from books,

they naturally attribute to theoretical considerations an

importance which seems to us exaggerated.  When any important or

trivial question arises, they at once launch into a sea of

philosophical principles, and pay less attention to the little

objects close at hand than to the big ones that appear on the

distant horizon of the future.  And when they set to work at any

political reform they begin ab ovo.  As they have no traditional

prejudices to fetter them, and no traditional principles to lead

them, they naturally take for their guidance the latest conclusions

of political philosophy.



Bearing this in mind, let us see how it affected the Emancipation

question.  The Proletariat--described as a dangerous monster which

was about to swallow up society in Western Europe, and which might

at any moment cross the frontier unless kept out by vigorous

measures--took possession of the popular imagination, and aroused

the fears of the reading public.  To many it seemed that the best

means of preventing the formation of a Proletariat in Russia was

the securing of land for the emancipated serfs and the careful

preservation of the rural Commune.  "Now is the moment," it was

said, "for deciding the important question whether Russia is to

fall a prey, like the Western nations, to this terrible evil, or

whether she is to protect herself for ever against it.  In the

decision of this question lies the future destiny of the country.

If the peasants be emancipated without land, or if those Communal

institutions which give to every man a share of the soil and secure

this inestimable boon for the generations still unborn be now

abolished, a Proletariat will be rapidly formed, and the peasantry

will become a disorganised mass of homeless wanderers like the

English agricultural labourers.  If, on the contrary, a fair share

of land be granted to them, and if the Commune be made proprietor

of the land ceded, the danger of a Proletariat is for ever removed,

and Russia will thereby set an example to the civilised world!

Never has a nation had such an opportunity of making an enormous

leap forward on the road of progress, and never again will the

opportunity occur.  The Western nations have discovered their error

when it is too late--when the peasantry have been already deprived

of their land, and the labouring classes of the towns have already

fallen a prey to the insatiable cupidity of the capitalists.  In

vain their most eminent thinkers warn and exhort.  Ordinary

remedies are no longer of any avail.  But Russia may avoid these

dangers, if she but act wisely and prudently in this great matter.

The peasants are still in actual, if not legal, possession of the

land, and there is as yet no Proletariat in the towns.  All that is

necessary, therefore, is to abolish the arbitrary authority of the

proprietors without expropriating the peasants, and without

disturbing the existing Communal institutions, which form the best

barrier against pauperism."



These ideas were warmly espoused by many proprietors, and exercised

a very great influence on the deliberations of the Provincial

Committees.  In these committees there were generally two groups.

The majorities, whilst making large concessions to the claims of

justice and expediency, endeavoured to defend, as far as possible,

the interests of their class; the minorities, though by no means

indifferent to the interests of the class to which they belonged,

allowed the more abstract theoretical considerations to be

predominant.  At first the majorities did all in their power to

evade the fundamental principles laid down by the Government as

much too favourable to the peasantry; but when they perceived that

public opinion, as represented by the Press, went much further than

the Government, they clung to these fundamental principles--which

secured at least the fee simple of the estate to the landlord--as

their anchor of safety.  Between the two parties arose naturally a

strong spirit of hostility, and the Government, which wished to

have the support of the minorities, found it advisable that both

should present their projects for consideration.



As the Provincial Committees worked independently, there was

considerable diversity in the conclusions at which they arrived.

The task of codifying these conclusions, and elaborating out of

them a general scheme of Emancipation, was entrusted to a special

Imperial Commission, composed partly of officials and partly of

landed proprietors named by the Emperor.*  Those who believed that

the question had really been handed over to the Noblesse assumed

that this Commission would merely arrange the materials presented

by the Provincial Committees, and that the Emancipation Law would

thereafter be elaborated by a National Assembly of deputies elected

by the nobles.  In reality the Commission, working in St.

Petersburg under the direct guidance and control of the Government,

fulfilled a very different and much more important function.  Using

the combined projects merely as a storehouse from which it could

draw the proposals it desired, it formed a new project of its own,

which ultimately received, after undergoing modification in detail,

the Imperial assent.  Instead of being a mere chancellerie, as many

expected, it became in a certain sense the author of the

Emancipation Law.





* Known as the Redaktsionnaya Komissiya, or Elaboration Commission.

Strictly speaking, there were two, but they are commonly spoken of

as one.





There was, as we have seen, in nearly all the Provincial Committees

a majority and a minority, the former of which strove to defend the

interests of the proprietors, whilst the latter paid more attention

to theoretical considerations, and endeavoured to secure for the

peasantry a large amount of land and Communal self-government.  In

the Commission there were the same two parties, but their relative

strength was very different.  Here the men of theory, instead of

forming a minority, were more numerous than their opponents, and

enjoyed the support of the Government, which regulated the

proceedings.  In its instructions we see how much the question had

ripened under the influence of the theoretical considerations.

There is no longer any trace of the idea that the Emancipation

should be gradual; on the contrary, it is expressly declared that

the immediate effect of the law should be the complete abolition of

the proprietor's authority.  There is even evidence of a clear

intention of preventing the proprietor as far as possible from

exercising any influence over his former serfs.  The sharp

distinction between the land occupied by the village and the arable

land to be ceded in usufruct likewise disappears, and it is merely

said that efforts should be made to enable the peasants to become

proprietors of the land they required.



The aim of the Government had thus become clear and well defined.

The task to be performed was to transform the serfs at once, and

with the least possible disturbance of the existing economic

conditions, into a class of small Communal proprietors--that is to

say, a class of free peasants possessing a house and garden and a

share of the Communal land.  To effect this it was merely necessary

to declare the serf personally free, to draw a clear line of

demarcation between the Communal land and the rest of the estate,

and to determine the price or rent which should be paid for this

Communal property, inclusive of the land on which the village was

built.



The law was prepared in strict accordance with these principles.

As to the amount of land to be ceded, it was decided that the

existing arrangements, founded on experience, should, as a general

rule, be preserved--in other words, the land actually enjoyed by

the peasants should be retained by them; and in order to prevent

extreme cases of injustice, a maximum and a minimum were fixed for

each district.  In like manner, as to the dues, it was decided that

the existing arrangements should be taken as the basis of the

calculation, but that the sum should be modified according to the

amount of land ceded.  At the same time facilities were to be given

for the transforming of the labour dues into yearly money payments,

and for enabling the peasants to redeem them, with the assistance

of the Government, in the form of credit.



This idea of redemption created, at first, a feeling of alarm among

the proprietors.  It was bad enough to be obliged to cede a large

part of the estates in usufruct, but it seemed to be much worse to

have to sell it.  Redemption appeared to be a species of wholesale

confiscation.  But very soon it became evident that the redeeming

of the land was profitable for both parties.  Cession in perpetual

usufruct was felt to be in reality tantamount to alienation of the

land, whilst the immediate redemption would enable the proprietors,

who had generally little or no ready money to pay their debts, to

clear their estates from mortgages, and to make the outlays

necessary for the transition to free labour.  The majority of the

proprietors, therefore, said openly: "Let the Government give us a

suitable compensation in money for the land that is taken from us,

so that we may be at once freed from all further trouble and

annoyance."



When it became known that the Commission was not merely arranging

and codifying the materials, but elaborating a law of its own and

regularly submitting its decisions for Imperial confirmation, a

feeling of dissatisfaction appeared all over the country.  The

nobles perceived that the question was being taken out of their

hands, and was being solved by a small body composed of bureaucrats

and nominees of the Government.  After having made a voluntary

sacrifice of their rights, they were being unceremoniously pushed

aside.  They had still, however, the means of correcting this.  The

Emperor had publicly promised that before the project should become

law deputies from the Provincial Committees should be summoned to

St. Petersburg to make objections and propose amendments.



The Commission and the Government would have willingly dispensed

with all further advice from the nobles, but it was necessary to

redeem the Imperial promise.  Deputies were therefore summoned to

the capital, but they were not allowed to form, as they hoped, a

public assembly for the discussion of the question.  All their

efforts to hold meetings were frustrated, and they were required

merely to answer in writing a list of printed questions regarding

matters of detail.  The fundamental principles, they were told, had

already received the Imperial sanction, and were consequently

removed from discussion.  Those who desired to discuss details were

invited individually to attend meetings of the Commission, where

they found one or two members ready to engage with them in a little

dialectical fencing.  This, of course, did not give much

satisfaction.  Indeed, the ironical tone in which the fencing was

too often conducted served to increase the existing irritation.  It

was only too evident that the Commission had triumphed, and some of

the members could justly boast that they had drowned the deputies

in ink and buried them under reams of paper.



Believing, or at least professing to believe, that the Emperor was

being deceived in this matter by the Administration, several groups

of deputies presented petitions to his Majesty containing a

respectful protest against the manner in which they had been

treated.  But by this act they simply laid themselves open to "the

most unkindest cut of all."  Those who had signed the petitions

received a formal reprimand through the police.



This treatment of the deputies, and, above all, this gratuitous

insult, produced among the nobles a storm of indignation.  They

felt that they had been entrapped.  The Government had artfully

induced them to form projects for the emancipation of their serfs,

and now, after having been used as a cat's-paw in the work of their

own spoliation, they were being unceremoniously pushed aside as no

longer necessary.  Those who had indulged in the hope of gaining

political rights felt the blow most keenly.  A first gentle and

respectful attempt at remonstrance had been answered by a

dictatorial reprimand through the police!  Instead of being called

to take an active part in home and foreign politics, they were

being treated as naughty schoolboys.  In view of this insult all

differences of opinion were for the moment forgotten, and all

parties resolved to join in a vigorous protest against the

insolence and arbitrary conduct of the bureaucracy.



A convenient opportunity of making this protest in a legal way was

offered by the triennial Provincial Assemblies of the Noblesse

about to be held in several provinces.  So at least it was thought,

but here again the Noblesse was checkmated by the Administration.



Before the opening of the Assemblies a circular was issued

excluding the Emancipation question from their deliberations.  Some

Assemblies evaded this order, and succeeded in making a little

demonstration by submitting to his Majesty that the time had

arrived for other reforms, such as the separation of the

administrative and judicial powers, and the creation of local self-

government, public judicial procedure, and trial by jury.



All these reforms were voluntarily effected by the Emperor a few

years later, but the manner in which they were suggested seemed to

savour of insubordination, and was a flagrant infraction of the

principle that all initiative in public affairs should proceed from

the central Government.  New measures of repression were

accordingly used.  Some Marshals of Noblesse were reprimanded and

others deposed.  Of the conspicuous leaders, two were exiled to

distant provinces and others placed under the supervision of the

police.  Worst of all, the whole agitation strengthened the

Commission by convincing the Emperor that the majority of the

nobles were hostile to his benevolent plans.*





* This was a misinterpretation of the facts.  Very many of those

who joined in the protest sincerely sympathised with the idea of

Emancipation, and were ready to be even more "liberal" than the

Government.





When the Commission had finished its labours, its proposals passed

to the two higher instances--the Committee for Peasant Affairs and

the Council of State--and in both of these the Emperor declared

plainly that he could allow no fundamental changes.  From all the

members he demanded a complete forgetfulness of former differences

and a conscientious execution of his orders; "For you must

remember," he significantly added, "that in Russia laws are made by

the Autocratic Power."  From an historical review of the question

he drew the conclusion that "the Autocratic Power created serfage,

and the Autocratic Power ought to abolish it."  On March 3d

(February 19th, old style), 1861, the law was signed, and by that

act more than twenty millions of serfs were liberated.*  A

Manifesto containing the fundamental principles of the law was at

once sent all over the country, and an order was given that it

should be read in all the churches.





* It is sometimes said that forty millions of serfs have been

emancipated.  The statement is true, if we regard the State

peasants as serfs.  They held, as I have already explained, an

intermediate position between serfage and freedom.  The peculiar

administration under which they lived was partly abolished by

Imperial Orders of September 7th, 1859, and October 23d, 1861.  In

1866 they were placed, as regards administration, on a level with

the emancipated serfs of the proprietors.  As a general rule, they

received rather more land and had to pay somewhat lighter dues than

the emancipated serfs in the narrower sense of the term.





The three fundamental principles laid down by the law were:--



1.  That the serfs should at once receive the civil rights of the

free rural classes, and that the authority of the proprietor should

be replaced by Communal self-government.



2.  That the rural Communes should as far as possible retain the

land they actually held, and should in return pay to the proprietor

certain yearly dues in money or labour.



3.  That the Government should by means of credit assist the

Communes to redeem these dues, or, in other words, to purchase the

lands ceded to them in usufruct.



With regard to the domestic serfs, it was enacted that they should

continue to serve their masters during two years, and that

thereafter they should be completely free, but they should have no

claim to a share of the land.



It might be reasonably supposed that the serfs received with

boundless gratitude and delight the Manifesto proclaiming these

principles.  Here at last was the realisation of their long-

cherished hopes.  Liberty was accorded to them; and not only

liberty, but a goodly portion of the soil--about half of all the

arable land possessed by the proprietors.



In reality the Manifesto created among the peasantry a feeling of

disappointment rather than delight.  To understand this strange

fact we must endeavour to place ourselves at the peasant's point of

view.



In the first place it must be remarked that all vague, rhetorical

phrases about free labour, human dignity, national progress, and

the like, which may readily produce among educated men a certain

amount of temporary enthusiasm, fall on the ears of the Russian

peasant like drops of rain on a granite rock.  The fashionable

rhetoric of philosophical liberalism is as incomprehensible to him

as the flowery circumlocutionary style of an Oriental scribe would

be to a keen city merchant.  The idea of liberty in the abstract

and the mention of rights which lie beyond the sphere of his

ordinary everyday life awaken no enthusiasm in his breast.  And for

mere names he has a profound indifference.  What matters it to him

that he is officially called, not a "serf," but a "free village-

inhabitant," if the change in official terminology is not

accompanied by some immediate material advantage?  What he wants is

a house to live in, food to eat, and raiment wherewithal to be

clothed, and to gain these first necessaries of life with as little

labour as possible.  He looked at the question exclusively from two

points of view--that of historical right and that of material

advantage; and from both of these the Emancipation Law seemed to

him very unsatisfactory.



On the subject of historical right the peasantry had their own

traditional conceptions, which were completely at variance with the

written law.  According to the positive legislation the Communal

land formed part of the estate, and consequently belonged to the

proprietor; but according to the conceptions of the peasantry it

belonged to the Commune, and the right of the proprietor consisted

merely in that personal authority over the serfs which had been

conferred on him by the Tsar.  The peasants could not, of course,

put these conceptions into a strict legal form, but they often

expressed them in their own homely laconic way by saying to their

master, "Mui vashi no zemlya nasha"--that is to say.  "We are

yours, but the land is ours."  And it must be admitted that this

view, though legally untenable, had a certain historical

justification.*





* See preceding chapter.





In olden times the Noblesse had held their land by feudal tenure,

and were liable to be ejected as soon as they did not fulfil their

obligations to the State.  These obligations had been long since

abolished, and the feudal tenure transformed into an unconditional

right of property, but the peasants clung to the old ideas in a way

that strikingly illustrates the vitality of deep-rooted popular

conceptions.  In their minds the proprietors were merely temporary

occupants, who were allowed by the Tsar to exact labour and dues

from the serfs.  What, then, was Emancipation?  Certainly the

abolition of all obligatory labour and money dues, and perhaps the

complete ejectment of the proprietors.  On this latter point there

was a difference of opinion.  All assumed, as a matter of course,

that the Communal land would remain the property of the Commune,

but it was not so clear what would be done with the rest of the

estate.  Some thought that it would be retained by the proprietor,

but very many believed that all the land would be given to the

Communes.  In this way the Emancipation would be in accordance with

historical right and with the material advantage of the peasantry,

for whose exclusive benefit, it was assumed, the reform had been

undertaken.



Instead of this the peasants found that they were still to pay

dues, even for the Communal land which they regarded as

unquestionably their own.  So at least said the expounders of the

law.  But the thing was incredible.  Either the proprietors must be

concealing or misinterpreting the law, or this was merely a

preparatory measure, which would be followed by the real

Emancipation.  Thus were awakened among the peasantry a spirit of

mistrust and suspicion and a widespread belief that there would be

a second Imperial Manifesto, by which all the land would be divided

and all the dues abolished.



On the nobles the Manifesto made a very different impression.  The

fact that they were to be entrusted with the putting of the law

into execution, and the flattering allusions made to the spirit of

generous self-sacrifice which they had exhibited, kindled amongst

them enthusiasm enough to make them forget for a time their just

grievances and their hostility towards the bureaucracy.  They found

that the conditions on which the Emancipation was effected were by

no means so ruinous as they had anticipated; and the Emperor's

appeal to their generosity and patriotism made many of them throw

themselves with ardour into the important task confided to them.



Unfortunately they could not at once begin the work.  The law had

been so hurried through the last stages that the preparations for

putting it into execution were by no means complete when the

Manifesto was published.  The task of regulating the future

relations between the proprietors and the peasantry was entrusted

to local proprietors in each district, who were to be called

Arbiters of the Peace (Mirovuiye Posredniki); but three months

elapsed before these Arbiters could be appointed.  During that time

there was no one to explain the law to the peasants and settle the

disputes between them and the proprietors; and the consequence of

this was that many cases of insubordination and disorder occurred.

The muzhik naturally imagined that, as soon as the Tsar said he was

free, he was no longer obliged to work for his old master--that all

obligatory labour ceased as soon as the Manifesto was read.  In

vain the proprietor endeavoured to convince him that, in regard to

labour, the old relations must continue, as the law enjoined, until

a new arrangement had been made.  To all explanations and

exhortations he turned a deaf ear, and to the efforts of the rural

police he too often opposed a dogged, passive resistance.



In many cases the simple appearance of the higher authorities

sufficed to restore order, for the presence of one of the Tsar's

servants convinced many that the order to work for the present as

formerly was not a mere invention of the proprietors.  But not

infrequently the birch had to be applied.  Indeed, I am inclined to

believe, from the numerous descriptions of this time which I

received from eye-witnesses, that rarely, if ever, had the serfs

seen and experienced so much flogging as during these first three

months after their liberation.  Sometimes even the troops had to be

called out, and on three occasions they fired on the peasants with

ball cartridge.  In the most serious case, where a young peasant

had set up for a prophet and declared that the Emancipation Law was

a forgery, fifty-one peasants were killed and seventy-seven were

more or less seriously wounded.  In spite of these lamentable

incidents, there was nothing which even the most violent alarmist

could dignify with the name of an insurrection.  Nowhere was there

anything that could be called organised resistance.  Even in the

case above alluded to, the three thousand peasants on whom the

troops fired were entirely unarmed, made no attempt to resist, and

dispersed in the utmost haste as soon as they discovered that they

were being shot down.  Had the military authorities shown a little

more judgment, tact, and patience, the history of the Emancipation

would not have been stained even with those three solitary cases of

unnecessary bloodshed.



This interregnum between the eras of serfage and liberty was

brought to an end by the appointment of the Arbiters of the Peace.

Their first duty was to explain the law, and to organise the new

peasant self-government.  The lowest instance, or primary organ of

this self-government, the rural Commune, already existed, and at

once recovered much of its ancient vitality as soon as the

authority and interference of the proprietors were removed.  The

second instance, the Volost--a territorial administrative unit

comprising several contiguous Communes--had to be created, for

nothing of the kind had previously existed on the estates of the

nobles.  It had existed, however, for nearly a quarter of a century

among the peasants of the Domains, and it was therefore necessary

merely to copy an existing model.



As soon as all the Volosts in his district had been thus organised

the Arbiter had to undertake the much more arduous task of

regulating the agrarian relations between the proprietors and the

Communes--with the individual peasants, be it remembered, the

proprietors had no direct relations whatever.  It had been enacted

by the law that the future agrarian relations between the two

parties should be left, as far as possible, to voluntary contract;

and accordingly each proprietor was invited to come to an agreement

with the Commune or Communes on his estate.  On the ground of this

agreement a statute-charter (ustavnaya gramota) was prepared,

specifying the number of male serfs, the quantity of land actually

enjoyed by them, any proposed changes in this amount, the dues

proposed to be levied, and other details.  If the Arbiter found

that the conditions were in accordance with the law and clearly

understood by the peasants, he confirmed the charter, and the

arrangement was complete.  When the two parties could not come to

an agreement within a year, he prepared a charter according to his

own judgment, and presented it for confirmation to the higher

authorities.



The dissolution of partnership, if it be allowable to use such a

term, between the proprietor and his serfs was sometimes very easy

and sometimes very difficult.  On many estates the charter did

little more than legalise the existing arrangements, but in many

instances it was necessary to add to, or subtract from, the amount

of Communal land, and sometimes it was even necessary to remove the

village to another part of the estate.  In all cases there were, of

course, conflicting interests and complicated questions, so that

the Arbiter had always abundance of difficult work.  Besides this,

he had to act as mediator in those differences which naturally

arose during the transition period, when the authority of the

proprietor had been abolished but the separation of the two classes

had not yet been effected.  The unlimited patriarchal authority

which had been formerly wielded by the proprietor or his steward

now passed with certain restriction into the hands of the Arbiter,

and these peacemakers had to spend a great part of their time in

driving about from one estate to another to put an end to alleged

cases of insubordination--some of which, it must be admitted,

existed only in the imagination of the proprietors.



At first the work of amicable settlement proceeded slowly.  The

proprietors generally showed a conciliatory spirit, and some of

them generously proposed conditions much more favourable to the

peasants than the law demanded; but the peasants were filled with

vague suspicions, and feared to commit themselves by "putting pen

to paper."  Even the highly respected proprietors, who imagined

that they possessed the unbounded confidence of the peasantry, were

suspected like the others, and their generous offers were regarded

as well-baited traps.  Often I have heard old men, sometimes with

tears in their eyes, describe the distrust and ingratitude of the

muzhik at this time.  Many peasants still believed that the

proprietors were hiding the real Emancipation Law, and imaginative

or ill-intentioned persons fostered this belief by professing to

know what the real law contained.  The most absurd rumours were

afloat, and whole villages sometimes acted upon them.



In the province of Moscow, for instance, one Commune sent a

deputation to the proprietor to inform him that, as he had always

been a good master, the Mir would allow him to retain his house and

garden during his lifetime.  In another locality it was rumoured

that the Tsar sat daily on a golden throne in the Crimea, receiving

all peasants who came to him, and giving them as much land as they

desired; and in order to take advantage of the Imperial liberality

a large body of peasants set out for the place indicated, and had

to he stopped by the military.



As an illustration of the illusions in which the peasantry indulged

at this time, I may mention here one of the many characteristic

incidents related to me by gentlemen who had served as Arbiters of

the Peace.



In the province of Riazan there was one Commune which had acquired

a certain local notoriety for the obstinacy with which it refused

all arrangements with the proprietor.  My informant, who was

Arbiter for the locality, was at last obliged to make a statute-

charter for it without its consent.  He wished, however, that the

peasants should voluntarily accept the arrangement he proposed, and

accordingly called them together to talk with them on the subject.

After explaining fully the part of the law which related to their

case, he asked them what objection they had to make a fair contract

with their old master.  For some time he received no answer, but

gradually by questioning individuals he discovered the cause of

their obstinacy: they were firmly convinced that not only the

Communal land, but also the rest of the estate, belonged to them.

To eradicate this false idea he set himself to reason with them,

and the following characteristic dialogue ensued:--



Arbiter: "If the Tsar gave all the land to the peasantry, what

compensation could he give to the proprietors to whom the land

belongs?"



Peasant: "The Tsar will give them salaries according to their

service."



Arbiter: "In order to pay these salaries he would require a great

deal more money.  Where could he get that money?  He would have to

increase the taxes, and in that way you would have to pay all the

same."



Peasant: "The Tsar can make as much money as he likes."



Arbiter: "If the Tsar can make as much money as he likes, why does

he make you pay the poll-tax every year?"



Peasant: "It is not the Tsar that receives the taxes we pay."



Arbiter: "Who, then, receives them?"



Peasant (after a little hesitation, and with a knowing smite): "The

officials, of course!"



Gradually, through the efforts of the Arbiters, the peasants came

to know better their real position, and the work began to advance

more rapidly.  But soon it was checked by another influence.  By

the end of the first year the "liberal," patriotic enthusiasm of

the nobles had cooled.  The sentimental, idyllic tendencies had

melted away at the first touch of reality, and those who had

imagined that liberty would have an immediately salutary effect on

the moral character of the serfs confessed themselves disappointed.

Many complained that the peasants showed themselves greedy and

obstinate, stole wood from the forest, allowed their cattle to

wander on the proprietor's fields, failed to fulfil their legal

obligations, and broke their voluntary engagements.  At the same

time the fears of an agrarian rising subsided, so that even the

timid were tranquillised.  From these causes the conciliatory

spirit of the proprietors decreased.



The work of conciliating and regulating became consequently more

difficult, but the great majority of the Arbiters showed themselves

equal to the task, and displayed an impartiality, tact and patience

beyond all praise.  To them Russia is in great part indebted for

the peaceful character of the Emancipation.  Had they sacrificed

the general good to the interests of their class, or had they

habitually acted in that stern, administrative, military spirit

which caused the instances of bloodshed above referred to, the

prophecies of the alarmists would, in all probability, have been

realised, and the historian of the Emancipation would have had a

terrible list of judicial massacres to record.  Fortunately they

played the part of mediators, as their name signified, rather than

that of administrators in the bureaucratic sense of the term, and

they were animated with a just and humane rather than a merely

legal spirit.  Instead of simply laying down the law, and ordering

their decisions to be immediately executed, they were ever ready to

spend hours in trying to conquer, by patient and laborious

reasoning, the unjust claims of proprietors or the false

conceptions and ignorant obstinacy of the peasants.  It was a new

spectacle for Russia to see a public function fulfilled by

conscientious men who had their heart in their work, who sought

neither promotion nor decorations, and who paid less attention to

the punctilious observance of prescribed formalities than to the

real objects in view.



There were, it is true, a few men to whom this description does not

apply.  Some of these were unduly under the influence of the

feelings and conceptions created by serfage.  Some, on the

contrary, erred on the other side.  Desirous of securing the future

welfare of the peasantry and of gaining for themselves a certain

kind of popularity, and at the same time animated with a violent

spirit of pseudo-liberalism, these latter occasionally forgot that

their duty was to be, not generous, but just, and that they had no

right to practise generosity at other people's expense.  All this I

am quite aware of--I could even name one or two Arbiters who were

guilty of positive dishonesty--but I hold that these were rare

exceptions.  The great majority did their duty faithfully and well.



The work of concluding contracts for the redemption of the dues,

or, in other words, for the purchase of the land ceded in perpetual

usufruct, proceeded slowly.  The arrangement was as follows:--



The dues were capitalised at six per cent., and the Government paid

at once to the proprietors four-fifths of the whole sum.  The

peasants were to pay to the proprietor the remaining fifth, either

at once or in installments, and to the Government six per cent. for

forty-nine years on the sum advanced.  The proprietors willingly

adopted this arrangement, for it provided them with a sum of ready

money, and freed them from the difficult task of collecting the

dues.  But the peasants did not show much desire to undertake the

operation.  Some of them still expected a second Emancipation, and

those who did not take this possibility into their calculations

were little disposed to make present sacrifices for distant

prospective advantages which would not be realised for half a

century.  In most cases the proprietor was obliged to remit, in

whole or in part, the fifth to be paid by the peasants.  Many

Communes refused to undertake the operation on any conditions and

in consequence of this not a few proprietors demanded the so-called

obligatory redemption, according to which they accepted the four-

fifths from the Government as full payment, and the operation was

thus effected without the peasants being consulted.  The total

number of male serfs emancipated was about nine millions and three-

quarters,* and of these, only about seven millions and a quarter

had, at the beginning of 1875, made redemption contracts.  Of the

contracts signed at that time, about sixty-three per cent, were

"obligatory."  In 1887 the redemption was made obligatory for both

parties, so that all Communes are now proprietors of the land

previously held in perpetual usufruct; and in 1932 the debt will

have been extinguished by the sinking fund, and all redemption

payments will have ceased.





* This does not include the domestic serfs who did not receive

land.





The serfs were thus not only liberated, but also made possessors of

land and put on the road to becoming Communal proprietors, and the

old Communal institutions were preserved and developed.  In answer

to the question, Who effected this gigantic reform? we may say that

the chief merit undoubtedly belongs to Alexander II.  Had he not

possessed a very great amount of courage he would neither have

raised the question nor allowed it to be raised by others, and had

he not shown a great deal more decision and energy than was

expected, the solution would have been indefinitely postponed.

Among the members of his own family he found an able and energetic

assistant in his brother, the Grand Duke Constantine, and a warm

sympathiser with the cause in the Grand Duchess Helena, a German

Princess thoroughly devoted to the welfare of her adopted country.

But we must not overlook the important part played by the nobles.

Their conduct was very characteristic.  As soon as the question was

raised a large number of them adopted the liberal ideas with

enthusiasm; and as soon as it became evident that Emancipation was

inevitable, all made a holocaust of their ancient rights and

demanded to be liberated at once from all relations with their

serfs.  Moreover, when the law was passed it was the proprietors

who faithfully put it into execution.  Lastly, we should remember

that praise is due to the peasantry for their patience under

disappointment and for their orderly conduct as soon as they

understood the law and recognised it to be the will of the Tsar.

Thus it may justly be said that the Emancipation was not the work

of one man, or one party, or one class, but of the nation as a

whole.*





* The names most commonly associated with the Emancipation are

General Rostoftsef, Lanskoi (Minister of the Interior), Nicholas

Milutin, Prince Tchererkassky, G. Samarin, Koshelef.  Many others,

such as I. A. Solovief, Zhukofski, Domontovitch, Giers--brother of

M. Giers, afterwards Minister for Foreign Affairs--are less known,

but did valuable work.  To all of these, with the exception of the

first two, who died before my arrival in Russia, I have to confess

my obligations.  The late Nicholas Milutin rendered me special

service by putting at my disposal not only all the official papers

in his possession, but also many documents of a more private kind.

By his early and lamented death Russia lost one of the greatest

statesmen she has yet produced.


