





CHAPTER XXXVIII



TERRITORIAL EXPANSION AND FOREIGN POLICY





Rapid Growth of Russia--Expansive Tendency of Agricultural Peoples--

The Russo-Slavonians--The Northern Forest and the Steppe--

Colonisation--The Part of the Government in the Process of

Expansion--Expansion towards the West--Growth of the Empire

Represented in a Tabular Form--Commercial Motive for Expansion--The

Expansive Force in the Future--Possibilities of Expansion in

Europe--Persia, Afghanistan, and India--Trans-Siberian Railway and

Weltpolitik--A Grandiose Scheme--Determined Opposition of Japan--

Negotiations and War--Russia's Imprudence Explained--Conclusion.





The rapid growth of Russia is one of the most remarkable facts of

modern history.  An insignificant tribe, or collection of tribes,

which, a thousand years ago, occupied a small district near the

sources of the Dnieper and Western Dvina, has grown into a great

nation with a territory stretching from the Baltic to the Northern

Pacific, and from the Polar Ocean to the frontiers of Turkey,

Persia, Afghanistan, and China.  We have here a fact well deserving

of investigation, and as the process is still going on and is

commonly supposed to threaten our national interests, the

investigation ought to have for us more than a mere scientific

interest.  What is the secret of this expansive power?  Is it a

mere barbarous lust of territorial aggrandisement, or is it some

more reasonable motive?  And what is the nature of the process?  Is

annexation followed by assimilation, or do the new acquisitions

retain their old character?  Is the Empire in its present extent a

homogeneous whole, or merely a conglomeration of heterogenous units

held together by the outward bond of centralised administration?

If we could find satisfactory answers to these questions, we might

determine how far Russia is strengthened or weakened by her

annexations of territory, and might form some plausible conjectures

as to how, when, and where the process of expansion is to stop.



By glancing at her history from the economic point of view we may

easily detect one prominent cause of expansion.



An agricultural people, employing merely the primitive methods of

agriculture, has always a strong tendency to widen its borders.

The natural increase of population demands a constantly increasing

production of grain, whilst the primitive methods of cultivation

exhaust the soil and steadily diminish its productivity.  With

regard to this stage of economic development, the modest assertion

of Malthus, that the supply of food does not increase so rapidly as

the population, often falls far short of the truth.  As the

population increases, the supply of food may decrease not only

relatively, but absolutely.  When a people finds itself in this

critical position, it must adopt one of two alternatives: either it

must prevent the increase of population, or it must increase the

production of food.  In the former case it may legalise the custom

of "exposing" infants, as was done in ancient Greece; or it may

regularly sell a large portion of the young women and children, as

was done until recently in Circassia; or the surplus population may

emigrate to foreign lands, as the Scandinavians did in the ninth

century, and as we ourselves are doing in a more peaceable fashion

at the present day.  The other alternative may be effected either

by extending the area of cultivation or by improving the system of

agriculture.



The Russo-Slavonians, being an agricultural people, experienced

this difficulty, but for them it was not serious.  A convenient way

of escape was plainly indicated by their peculiar geographical

position.  They were not hemmed in by lofty mountains or stormy

seas.  To the south and east--at their very doors, as it were--lay

a boundless expanse of thinly populated virgin soil, awaiting the

labour of the husbandman, and ready to repay it most liberally.

The peasantry therefore, instead of exposing their infants, selling

their daughters, or sweeping the seas as Vikings, simply spread out

towards the east and south.  This was at once the most natural and

the wisest course, for of all the expedients for preserving the

equilibrium between population and food-production, increasing the

area of cultivation is, under the circumstances just described, the

easiest and most effective.  Theoretically the same result might

have been obtained by improving the method of agriculture, but

practically this was impossible.  Intensive culture is not likely

to be adopted so long as expansion is easy.  High farming is a

thing to be proud of when there is a scarcity of land, but it would

be absurd to attempt it where there is abundance of virgin soil in

the vicinity.



The process of expansion, thus produced by purely economic causes,

was accelerated by influences of another kind, especially during

the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries.  The increase in the

number of officials, the augmentation of the taxes, the merciless

exactions of the Voyevods and their subordinates, the

transformation of the peasants and "free wandering people" into

serfs, the ecclesiastical reforms and consequent persecution of the

schismatics, the frequent conscriptions and violent reforms of

Peter the Great--these and other kinds of oppression made thousands

flee from their homes and seek a refuge in the free territory,

where there were no officials, no tax-gatherers, and no

proprietors.  But the State, with its army of tax-gatherers and

officials, followed close on the heels of the fugitives, and those

who wished to preserve their liberty had to advance still further.

Notwithstanding the efforts of the authorities to retain the

population in the localities actually occupied, the wave of

colonisation moved steadily onwards.



The vast territory which lay open to the colonists consisted of two

contiguous regions, separated from each other by no mountains or

rivers, but widely differing from each other in many respects.  The

one, comprising all the northern part of Eastern Europe and of

Asia, even unto Kamchatka, may be roughly described as a land of

forests, intersected by many rivers, and containing numerous lakes

and marshes; the other, stretching southwards to the Black Sea, and

eastwards far away into Central Asia, is for the most part what

Russians call "the Steppe," and Americans would call the prairies.



Each of these two regions presented peculiar inducements and

peculiar obstacles to colonisation.  So far as the facility of

raising grain was concerned, the southern region was decidedly

preferable.  In the north the soil had little natural fertility,

and was covered with dense forests, so that much time and labour

had to be expended in making a clearing before the seed could be

sown.*  In the south, on the contrary, the squatter had no trees to

fell, and no clearing to make.  Nature had cleared the land for

him, and supplied him with a rich black soil of marvellous

fertility, which has not yet been exhausted by centuries of

cultivation.  Why, then, did the peasant often prefer the northern

forests to the fertile Steppe where the land was already prepared

for him?





* The modus operandi has been already described; vide supra, pp.

104 et seq.





For this apparent inconsistency there was a good and valid reason.

The muzhik had not, even in those good old times, any passionate

love of labour for its own sake, nor was he by any means insensible

to the facilities for agriculture afforded by the Steppe.  But he

could not regard the subject exclusively from the agricultural

point of view.  He had to take into consideration the fauna as well

as the flora of the two regions.  At the head of the fauna in the

northern forests stood the peace-loving, laborious Finnish tribes,

little disposed to molest settlers who did not make themselves

obnoxiously aggressive; on the Steppe lived the predatory, nomadic

hordes, ever ready to attack, plunder, and carry off as slaves the

peaceful agricultural population.  These facts, as well as the

agricultural conditions, were known to intending colonists, and

influenced them in their choice of a new home.  Though generally

fearless and fatalistic in a higher degree, they could not entirely

overlook the dangers of the Steppe, and many of them preferred to

encounter the hard work of the forest region.



These differences in the character and population of the two

regions determined the character of the colonisation.  Though the

colonisation of the northern regions was not effected entirely

without bloodshed, it was, on the whole, of a peaceful kind, and

consequently received little attention from the contemporary

chroniclers.  The colonisation of the Steppe, on the contrary,

required the help of the Cossacks, and forms, as I have already

shown, one of the bloodiest pages of European history.



Thus, we see, the process of expansion towards the north, east, and

south may be described as a spontaneous movement of the

agricultural population.  It must, however, be admitted that this

is an imperfect and one-sided representation of the phenomenon.

Though the initiative unquestionably came from the people, the

Government played an important part in the movement.



In early times when Russia was merely a conglomeration of

independent principalities, the Princes were under the moral and

political obligation of protecting their subjects, and this

obligation coincided admirably with their natural desire to extend

their dominions.  When the Grand Princes of Muscovy, in the

fifteenth century, united the numerous principalities and

proclaimed themselves Tsars, they accepted this obligation for the

whole country, and conceived much grander schemes of territorial

aggrandisement.  Towards the north and northeast no strenuous

efforts were required.  The Republic of Novgorod easily gained

possession of Northern Russia as far as the Ural Mountains, and

Siberia was conquered by a small band of Cossacks without the

authorisation of Muscovy, so that the Tsars had merely to annex the

already conquered territory.  In the southern region the part

played by the Government was very different.  The agricultural

population had to be constantly protected along a frontier of

enormous length, lying open at all points to the incursions of

nomadic tribes.  To prevent raids it was necessary to keep up a

military cordon, and this means did not always ensure protection to

those living near the frontier.  The nomads often came in

formidable hordes, which could be successfully resisted only by

large armies, and sometimes the armies were not large enough to

cope with them.  Again and again during the thirteenth and

fourteenth centuries Tartar hordes swept over the country--burning

the villages and towns, and spreading devastation wherever they

appeared--and during more than two centuries Russia had to pay a

heavy tribute to the Khans.



Gradually the Tsars threw off this galling yoke.  Ivan the Terrible

annexed the three Khanates of the Lower Volga--Kazan, Kipttchak,

and Astrakhan--and in that way removed the danger of a foreign

domination.  But permanent protection was not thereby secured to

the outlying provinces.  The nomadic tribes living near the

frontier continued their raids, and in the slave markets of the

Crimea the living merchandise was supplied by Russia and Poland.



To protect an open frontier against the incursions of nomadic

tribes three methods are possible: the construction of a great

wall, the establishment of a strong military cordon, and the

permanent subjugation of the marauders.  The first of these

expedients, adopted by the Romans in Britain and by the Chinese on

their northwestern frontier, is enormously expensive, and was

utterly impossible in a country like Southern Russia, where there

is no stone for building purposes; the second was constantly tried,

and constantly found wanting; the third alone proved practicable

and efficient.  Though the Government has long since recognised

that the acquisition of barren, thinly populated steppes is a

burden rather than an advantage, it has been induced to go on

making annexations for the purpose of self-defence, as well as for

other reasons.



In consequence of this active part which the Government took in the

extension of the territory, the process of political expansion

sometimes got greatly ahead of the colonisation.  After the Turkish

wars and consequent annexations in the time of Catherine II., for

example, a great part of Southern Russia was almost uninhabited,

and the deficiency had to be corrected, as we have seen, by

organised emigration.  At the present day, in the Asiatic

provinces, there are still immense tracts of unoccupied land, some

of which are being gradually colonised.



If we turn now from the East to the West we shall find that the

expansion in this direction was of an entirely different kind.  The

country lying to the westward of the early Russo-Slavonian

settlements had a poor soil and a comparatively dense population,

and consequently held out little inducement to emigration.  Besides

this, it was inhabited by warlike agricultural races, who were not

only capable of defending their own territory, but even strongly

disposed to make encroachments on their eastern neighbours.

Russian expansion to the westward was, therefore, not a spontaneous

movement of the agricultural population, but the work of the

Government, acting slowly and laboriously by means of diplomacy and

military force; it had, however, a certain historical

justification.



No sooner had Russia freed herself, in the fifteenth century, from

the Tartar domination, than her political independence, and even

her national existence, were threatened from the West.  Her western

neighbours, were like herself, animated with that tendency to

national expansion which I have above described; and for a time it

seemed doubtful who should ultimately possess the vast plains of

Eastern Europe.  The chief competitors were the Tsars of Moscow and

the Kings of Poland, and the latter appeared to have the better

chance.  In close connection with Western Europe, they had been

able to adopt many of the improvements which had recently been made

in the art of war, and they already possessed the rich valley of

the Dnieper.  Once, with the help of the free Cossacks, they

succeeded in overrunning the whole of Muscovy, and a son of the

Polish king was elected Tsar in Moscow.  By attempting to

accomplish their purpose in a too hasty and reckless fashion, they

raised a storm of religious and patriotic fanaticism, which very

soon drove them out of their newly acquired possessions.  The

country remained, however, in a very precarious position, and its

more intelligent rulers perceived plainly that, in order to carry

on the struggle successfully, they must import something of that

Western civilisation which gave such an advantage to their

opponents.



Some steps had already been taken in that direction.  In the year

1553 an English navigator, whilst seeking for a short route to

China and India, had accidentally discovered the port of Archangel

on the White Sea, and since that time the Tsars had kept up an

intermittent diplomatic and commercial intercourse with England.

But this route was at all times tedious and dangerous, and during a

great part of the year it was closed by the ice.  In view of these

difficulties the Tsars tried to import "cunning foreign

artificers," by way of the Baltic; but their efforts were hampered

by the Livonian Order, who at that time held the east coast, and

who considered, like the Europeans on the coast of Africa at the

present day, that the barbarous natives of the interior should not

be supplied with arms and ammunition.  All the other routes to the

West traversed likewise the territory of rivals, who might at any

time become avowed enemies.  Under these circumstances the Tsars

naturally desired to break through the barrier which hemmed them

in, and the acquisition of the eastern coast of the Baltic became

one of the chief objects of Russia's foreign policy.



After Poland, Russia's most formidable rival was Sweden.  That

power early acquired a large amount of territory to the east of the

Baltic--including the mouths of the Neva, where St. Petersburg now

stands--and long harboured ambitious schemes of further conquest.

In the troublous times when the Poles overran the Tsardom of

Muscovy, she took advantage of the occasion to annex a considerable

amount of territory, and her expansion in this direction went on in

intermittent fashion until it was finally stopped by Peter the

Great.



In comparison with these two rivals Russia was weak in all that

regarded the art of war; but she had two immense advantages: she

had a very large population, and a strong, stable Government that

could concentrate the national forces for any definite purpose.

All that she required for success in the competition was an army on

the European model.  Peter the Great created such an army, and won

the prize.  After this the political disintegration of Poland

proceeded rapidly, and when that unhappy country fell to pieces

Russia naturally took for herself the lion's share of the spoil.

Sweden, too, sank to political insignificance, and gradually lost

all her trans-Baltic possessions.  The last of them--the Grand

Duchy of Finland, which stretches from the Gulf of Finland to the

Polar Ocean--was ceded to Russia by the peace of Friederichshamm in

1809.



The territorial extent of all these acquisitions will be best shown

in a tabular form.  The following table represents the process of

expansion from the time when Ivan III. united the independent

principalities and threw off the Tartar yoke, down to the accession

of Peter the Great in 1682:





                                                 English

                                               Sq. Miles.

In 1505 the Tsardom of Muscovy contained about    784,000

 " 1583        "          "       "        "      996,000

 " 1584        "          "       "        "    2,650,000

 " 1598        "          "       "        "    3,328,000

 " 1676        "          "       "        "    5,448,000

 " 1682        "          "       "        "    5,618,000





Of these 5,618,000 English square miles about 1,696,000 were in

Europe and about 3,922,000 in Asia.  Peter the Great, though famous

as a conqueror, did not annex nearly so much territory as many of

his predecessors and successors.  At his death, in 1752, the Empire

contained, in round numbers, 1,738,000 square miles in Europe and

4,092,000 in Asia.  The following table shows the subsequent

expansion:





                                        In Europe and

                                         the Caucasus   In Asia.

                                          Eng. sq. m   Eng. sq. m.

In 1725 the Russian Empire contained about 1,738,000    4,092,000

 " 1770        "       "       "       "   1,780,000    4,452,000

 " 1800        "       "       "       "   2,014,000    4,452,000

 " 1825        "       "       "       "   2,226,000    4,452,000

 " 1855        "       "       "       "   2,261,250    5,194,000

 " 1867        "       "       "       "   2,267,360    5,267,560

 " 1897        "       "       "       "   2,267,360    6,382,321



In this table is not included the territory in the North-west of

America--containing about 513,250 English square miles--which was

annexed to Russia in 1799 and ceded to the United States in 1867.





When once Russia has annexed she does not readily relax her grasp.

She has, however, since the death of Peter the Great, on four

occasions ceded territory which had come into her possession.  To

Persia she ceded, in 1729, Mazanderan and Astrabad, and in 1735 a

large portion of the Caucasus; in 1856, by the Treaty of Paris, she

gave up the mouths of the Danube and part of Bessarabia; in 1867

she sold to the United States her American possessions; in 1881 she

retroceded to China the greater part of Kuldja, which she had

occupied for ten years; and now she is releasing her hold on

Manchuria under the pressure of Japan.



The increase in the population--due in part to territorial

acquisitions--since 1722, when the first census was taken, has been

as follows:--





In 1722 the Empire contained about 14 million inhabitants.

 " 1742       "       "       "    16        "

 " 1762       "       "       "    19        "

 " 1782       "       "       "    28        "

 " 1796       "       "       "    36        "

 " 1812       "       "       "    41        "

 " 1815       "       "       "    45        "

 " 1835       "       "       "    60        "

 " 1851       "       "       "    68        "

 " 1858       "       "       "    44        "

 " 1897       "       "       "   129        "





So much for the past.  To sum up, we may say that, if we have read

Russian history aright, the chief motives of expansion have been

spontaneous colonisation, self-defence against nomadic tribes, and

high political aims, such as the desire to reach the sea-coast; and

that the process has been greatly facilitated by peculiar

geographical conditions and the autocratic form of government.

Before passing to the future, I must mention another cause of

expansion which has recently come into play, and which has already

acquired very great importance.



Russia is rapidly becoming, as I have explained in a previous

chapter, a great industrial and commercial nation, and is anxious

to acquire new markets for her manufactured goods.  Though her

industries cannot yet supply her own wants, she likes to peg out

claims for the future, so as not to be forestalled by more advanced

nations.  I am not sure that she ever makes a conquest exclusively

for this purpose, but whenever it happens that she has other

reasons for widening her borders, the idea of acquiring commercial

advantages acts as a subsidiary incentive, and as soon as the

territory is annexed she raises round it a line of commercial

fortifications in the shape of custom-houses, through which foreign

goods have great difficulty in forcing their way.



This policy is quite intelligible from the patriotic point of view,

but Russians like to justify it, and condemn English competition,

on higher ground.  England, they say, is like a successful

manufacturer who has oustripped his rivals and who seeks to prevent

any new competitors from coming into the field.  By her mercantile

policy she has become the great blood-sucker of other nations.

Haying no cause to fear competition, she advocates the insidious

principles of Free Trade, and deluges foreign countries with her

manufactures to such an extent that unprotected native industries

are inevitably ruined.  Thus all nations have long paid tribute to

England, but the era of emancipation had dawned.  The fallacies of

Free Trade have been detected and exposed, and Russia, like other

nations, has found in the beneficent power of protective tariffs a

means of escape from British economic thraldom.  Henceforth, not

only the muzhiks of European Russia, but also the populations of

Central Asia, will be saved from the heartless exploitation of

Manchester and Birmingham--and be handed over, I presume, to the

tender mercies of the manufacturers of Moscow and St. Petersburg,

who sell their goods much dearer than their English rivals.



Having thus analysed the expansive tendency, let us endeavour to

determine how the various factors of which it is composed are

acting in the present and are likely to act in the future.  In this

investigation it will be well to begin with the simpler, and

proceed gradually to the more complex parts of the problem.



Towards the north and the west the history of Russian expansion may

almost be regarded as closed.  Northwards there is nothing to be

annexed but the Arctic Ocean and the Polar regions; and, westwards,

annexations at the expense of Germany are not to be thought of.

There remain, therefore, only Sweden and Norway.  They may

possibly, at some future time, come within the range of Russia's

territorial appetite, but at present the only part of the

Scandinavian Peninsula on which she is supposed to cast longing

eyes is a barren district in the extreme north, which is said to

contain an excellent warm-water port.



Towards the south-west there are possibilities of future expansion,

and already some people talk of Austrian Galicia being

geographically and ethnographically a part of Russia; but so long

as the Austro-Hungarian Empire holds together such possibilities do

not come within the sphere of practical politics.



Farther east, towards the Balkan Peninsula, the expansive tendency

is much more complicated and of very ancient date.  The Russo-Slavs

who held the valley of the Dnieper from the ninth to the thirteenth

century belonged to those numerous frontier tribes which the

tottering Byzantine Empires attempted to ward off by diplomacy and

rich gifts, and by giving to the troublesome chiefs, on condition

of their accepting Christianity, princesses of the Imperial family

as brides.  Vladimir, Prince of Kief, now recognised as a Saint by

the Russian Church, accepted Christianity in this way (A. D. 988),

and his subjects followed his example.  Russia thus became

ecclesiastically a part of the Patriarchate of Constantinople, and

the people learned to regard Tsargrad--that is, the City of the

Tsar, as the Byzantine Emperor was then called--with peculiar

veneration.



All through the long Tartar domination, when the nomadic hordes

held the valley of the Dnieper and formed a barrier between Russia

and the Balkan Peninsula, the capital of the Greek Orthodox world

was remembered and venerated by the Russian people, and in the

fifteenth century it acquired in their eyes a new significance.  At

that time the relative positions of Constantinople and Moscow were

changed.  Constantinople fell under the power of the Mahometan

Turks, whilst Moscow threw off the yoke of the Mahometan Tartars,

the northern representatives of the Turkish race.  The Grand Prince

of Moscow thereby became the Protector of the Faith, and in some

sort the successor of the Byzantine Tsars.  To strengthen this

claim, Ivan III. married a niece of the last Byzantine Emperor, and

his successors went further in the same direction by assuming the

title of Tsar, and inventing a fable about their ancestor Rurik

having been a descendant of Caesar Augustus.



All this would seem to a lawyer, or even to a diplomatist, a very

shadowy title, and none of the Russian monarchs--except perhaps

Catherine II., who conceived the project of resuscitating the

Byzantine Empire, and caused one of her grandsons to learn modern

Greek, in view of possible contingencies--ever thought seriously of

claiming the imaginary heritage; but the idea that the Tsars ought

to reign in Tsargrad, and that St. Sophia, polluted by Moslem

abominations, should be restored to the Orthodox Christians, struck

deep root in the minds of the Russian people, and is still by no

means extinct.  As soon as serious disturbances break out in the

East the peasantry begin to think that perhaps the time has come

for undertaking a crusade for the recovery of the Holy City on the

Bosphorus, and for the liberation of their brethren in the faith

who groan under Turkish bondage.



Essentially different from this religious sentiment, but often

blended with it, is a vague feeling of racial affinity, which has

long existed among the various Slav nationalities, and which was

greatly developed during last century by writers of the Panslavist

school.  When Germans and Italians were striving after political

independence and unity, it naturally occurred to the Slavs that

they might do likewise.  The idea became popular among the subject

Slav nationalities of Austria and Turkey, and it awoke a certain

amount of enthusiasm in Moscow, where it was hoped that "all the

Slav streams would unite in the great Russian Sea."  It required no

great political perspicacity to foresee that in any confederation

of Slav nationalities the hegemony must necessarily devolve on

Russia, the only Slav State which has succeeded in becoming a Great

Power.



Those two currents of national feeling ran parallel to, and

intermingled with, the policy of the Government.  Desirous of

becoming a great naval Power, Russia has always striven to reach

the sea-coast and obtain good harbours.  In the north and north-

west she succeeded in a certain degree, but neither the White Sea

nor the Baltic satisfied her requirements, and she naturally turned

her eyes to the Mediterranean.  With difficulty she gained

possession of the northern shores of the Black Sea, but her designs

were thereby only half realised, because the Turks held the only

outlet to the Mediterranean, and could effectually blockade, so far

as the open sea is concerned, all her Black Sea ports, without

employing a single ship of war.  Thus the possession of the

Straits, involving necessarily the possession of Constantinople,

became a cardinal point of Russia's foreign policy.  Any

description of the various methods adopted by her at different

times for the attainment of this end does not enter into my present

programme, but I may say briefly that the action of the three

factors above mentioned--the religious feeling, the Panslavist

sentiment, and the political aims--has never been better

exemplified than in the last struggle with Turkey, culminating in

the Treaty of San Stefano and the Congress of Berlin.



For all classes in Russia the result of that struggle was a feeling

of profound disappointment.  The peasantry bewailed the fact that

the Crescent on St. Sophia had not been replaced by the Cross; the

Slavophil patriots were indignant that the "little brothers" had

shown themselves unworthy of the generous efforts and sacrifices

made on their behalf, and that a portion of the future Slav

confederation had passed under the domination of Austria; and the

Government recognised that the acquisition of the Straits must be

indefinitely postponed.  Then history repeated itself.  After the

Crimean War, in accordance with Prince Gortchakoff's famous

epigram, La Russie ne boude pas elle se recueille, the Government

had for some years abandoned an active policy in Europe, and

devoted itself to the work of internal reorganisation; whilst the

military party had turned their attention to making new

acquisitions of territory and influence in Asia.  In like manner,

after the Turkish campaign of 1877-78, Alexander III., turning his

back on the Slav brethren, inaugurated an era of peace in Europe

and of territorial expansion in the east.  In this direction the

expansive force was not affected by religious feeling, or

Panslavist sentiment, and was controlled and guided by purely

political considerations.  It is consequently much easier to

determine in this field of action what the political aims really

are.



In Asia, as in Europe, the dominant factor in the policy of the

Government has been the desire to reach the sea-coast; and in both

continents the ports first acquired were in northern latitudes

where the coasts are free from ice during only a part of the year.

In this respect, Nikolaefsk and Vladivostok in the Far East

correspond to Archangel and St. Petersburg in Europe.  Such ports

could not fulfil all the requirements, and consequently the

expansive tendency turned southwards--in Europe towards the Black

Sea and the Mediterranean, and in Asia towards the Persian Gulf,

the Indian Ocean and the Gulf of Pechili.



In Persia the Russian Government pursues the policy of pacific

infiltration, and already the northern half of the Shah's dominions

is pretty well permeated with Russian influence, commercial and

political.  In the southern half the infiltration is to some extent

checked by physical obstacles and British influence, but it is

steadily advancing, and the idea of obtaining a port on the Persian

Gulf is coming within the range of practical politics.



In Afghanistan also the pressure is felt, and here too the

expansive tendency meets with opposition from England.  More than

once the two great Powers have come dangerously near to war--

notably in 1885, at the moment of the Penjdeh incident, when the

British Parliament voted 11,000,000 pounds for military

preparations.  Fortunately on that occasion the problem was solved

by diplomacy.  The northern frontier of Afghanistan was demarcated

by a joint commission, and an agreement was come to by which this

line should form the boundary of the British and Russian spheres of

influence.  For some years Russia scrupulously respected this

agreement, but during our South African difficulties she showed

symptoms of departing from it, and at one moment orders were issued

from St. Petersburg for a military demonstration on the Afghan

frontier.  Strange to say, the military authorities, who are

usually very bellicose, deprecated such a movement, on the ground

that a military demonstration in a country like Afghanistan might

easily develop into a serious campaign, and that a serious campaign

ought not to be undertaken in that region until after the

completion of the strategical railways from Orenburg to Tashkent.



As this important line has now been completed, and other strategic

lines are in contemplation, the question arises whether Russia

meditates an attack on India.  It is a question which is not easily

answered.  No doubt there are many Russians who think it would be a

grand thing to annex our Indian Empire, with its teeming millions

and its imaginary fabulous treasures, and not a few young officers

imagine that it would be an easy task.  Further, it is certain that

the problem of an invasion has been studied by the Headquarters

Staff in St. Petersburg, just as the problem of an invasion of

England has been studied by the Headquarters Staff in Berlin.  It

may be pretty safely asserted, however, that the idea of a conquest

of India has never been seriously entertained in the Russian

official world.  What has been seriously entertained, not only in

the official world, but by the Government itself, is the idea--

strongly recommended by the late General Skobelef--that Russia

should, as quickly as possible, get within striking distance of our

Indian possessions, so that she may always be able to bring strong

diplomatic pressure on the British Government, and in the event of

a conflict immobilise a large part of the British army.



The expansive tendency in the direction of the Persian Gulf and the

Indian Ocean was considerably weakened by the completion of the

Trans-Siberian Railway and the rapid development of an aggressive

policy in the Far east.  Never, perhaps, has the construction of a

single line produced such deep and lasting changes in the sphere of

Weltpolitik.



As soon as the Trans-Siberian was being rapidly constructed a

magnificent prospect opened up to the gaze of imaginative

politicians in St. Petersburg.  The foreground was Manchuria a

region of 364,000 square miles, endowed by nature with enormous

mineral resources, and presenting a splendid field for agricultural

colonisation and commercial enterprise.  Beyond was seen Korea,

geographically an appendix of Manchuria, possessing splendid

harbours, and occupied by an effete, unwarlike population, wholly

incapable of resisting a European Power.  That was quite enough to

inflame the imagination of patriotic Russians; but there was

something more, dimly perceived in the background.  Once in

possession of Manchuria, supplied with a network of railways,

Russia would dominate Peking and the whole of Northern China, and

she would thus be able to play a decisive part in the approaching

struggle of the European Powers for the Far-Eastern Sick Man's

inheritance.



Of course there were obstacles in the way of realising this

grandiose scheme, and there were some cool heads in St. Petersburg

who were not slow to point them out.  In the first place the

undertaking must be extremely costly, and the economic condition of

Russia proper was not such as to justify the expenditure of an

enormous capital which must be for many years unproductive.  Any

superfluous capital which the country might possess was much more

urgently required for purposes of internal development, and the

impoverished agricultural population ought not to be drained of

their last meagre reserves for the sake of gigantic political

schemes which did not directly contribute to their material

welfare.  To this the enthusiastic advocates of the forward policy

replied that the national finances had never been in such a

prosperous condition, that the revenue was increasing by leaps and

bounds, that the money invested in the proposed enterprise would

soon be repaid with interest; and that if Russia did not at once

seize the opportunity she would find herself forestalled by

energetic rivals.  There was still, however, one formidable

objection.  Such an enormous increase of Russia's power in the Far

East would inevitably arouse the jealousy and opposition of other

Powers, especially of Japan, for whom the future of Korea and

Manchuria was a question of life and death.  Here again these

advocates of the forward policy had their answer ready.  They

declared that the danger was more apparent than real.  In Far-

Eastern diplomacy the European Powers could not compete with

Russia, and they might easily be bought off by giving them a very

modest share of the spoil; as for Japan, she was not formidable,

for she was just emerging from Oriental barbarism, and all her

boasted progress was nothing more than a thin veneer of European

civilisation.  As the Moscow patriots on the eve of the Crimean War

said contemptuously of the Allies, "We have only to throw our hats

at them," so now the believers in Russia's historic mission in the

Far East spoke of their future opponents as "monkeys" and

"parrots."



The war between China and Japan in 1894-5, terminating in the

Treaty of Shimonoseki, which ceded to Japan the Liaotung Peninsula,

showed Russia that if she was not to be forestalled she must be up

and doing.  She accordingly formed a coalition with France and

Germany, and compelled Japan to withdraw from the mainland, on the

pretext that the integrity of China must be maintained.  In this

way China recovered, for a moment, a bit of lost territory, and

further benefits were conferred on her by a guarantee for a foreign

loan, and by the creation of the Russo-Chinese Bank, which would

assist her in her financial affairs.  For these and other favours

she was expected to be grateful, and it was suggested to her that

her gratitude might take the form of facilitating the construction

of the Trans-Siberian Railway.  If constructed wholly on Russian

territory the line would have to make an enormous bend to the

northward, whereas if it went straight from Lake Baikal to

Vladivostok it would be very much shorter, and would confer a very

great benefit on the north-eastern provinces of the Celestial

Empire.  This benefit, moreover, might be greatly increased by

making a branch line to Talienwan and Port Arthur, which would some

day be united with Peking.  Gradually Li-Hung-Chang and other

influential Chinese officials were induced to sympathise with the

scheme, and a concession was granted for the direct line to

Vladivostok through Chinese territory.



The retrocession of the Liaotung Peninsula had not been effected by

Russia alone.  Germany and France had co-operated, and they also

expected from China a mark of gratitude in some tangible form.  On

this point the statesmen of Berlin held very strong views, and they

thought it advisable to obtain a material guarantee for the

fulfilment of their expectations by seizing Kiaochau, on the ground

that German missionaries had been murdered by Chinese fanatics.



For Russia this was a most unwelcome incident.  She had earmarked

Kiaochau for her own purposes, and had already made an agreement

with the authorities in Peking that the harbour might be used

freely by her fleet.  And this was not the worst.  The incident

might inaugurate an era of partition for which she was not yet

prepared, and another port which she had earmarked for her own use

might be seized by a rival.  Already English ships of war were

reported to be prowling about in the vicinity of the Liaotung

Peninsula.  She hastened to demand, therefore, as a set-off for the

loss of Kiaochau, a lease of Port Arthur and Talienwan, and a

railway concession to unite these ports with the Trans-Siberian

Railway.  The Chinese Government was too weak to think of refusing

the demands, and the process of gradually absorbing Manchuria

began, in accordance with a plan already roughly sketched out in

St. Petersburg.



In the light of a few authentic documents and many subsequent

events, the outline of this plan can be traced with tolerable

accuracy.  In the region through which the projected railways were

to run there was a large marauding population, and consequently the

labourers and the works would have to be protected; and as Chinese

troops can never be thoroughly relied on, the protecting force must

be Russian.  Under this rather transparent disguise a small army of

occupation could be gradually introduced, and in establishing a

modus vivendi between it and the Chinese civil and military

authorities a predominant influence in the local administration

could be established.  At the same time, by energetic diplomatic

action at Peking, which would be brought within striking-distance

by the railways, all rival foreign influences might be excluded

from the occupied provinces, and the rest might be left to the

action of "spontaneous infiltration."  Thus, while professing to

uphold the principle of the territorial integrity of the Celestial

Empire, the Cabinet of St. Petersburg might practically annex the

whole of Manchuria and transform Port Arthur into a great naval

port and arsenal, a far more effectual "Dominator of the East" than

Vladivostok, which was intended, as its name implies, to fulfil

that function.  From Manchuria the political influence and the

spontaneous infiltration would naturally extend to Korea, and on

the deeply indented coast of the Hermit Kingdom new ports and

arsenals, far more spacious and strategically more important than

Port Arthur, might be constructed.



The grandiose scheme was carefully laid, and for a time it was

favoured by circumstances.  In 1900 the Boxer troubles justified

Russia in sending a large force into Manchuria, and enabled her

subsequently to play the part of China's protector against the

inordinate demands of the Western Powers for compensation and

guarantees.  For a moment it seemed as if the slow process of

gradual infiltration might be replaced by a more expeditious mode

of annexation.  As the dexterous diplomacy of Ignatief in 1858 had

induced the Son of Heaven to cede to Russia the rich Primorsk

provinces between the Amur and the sea, as compensation for Russian

protection against the English and French, who had burnt his Summer

Palace, so his successor might now perhaps be induced to cede

Manchuria to the Tsar for similar reasons.



No such cession actually took place, but the Russian diplomatists

in Peking could use the gratitude argument in support of their

demands for an extension of the rights and privileges of the

"temporary" occupation; and when China sought to resist the

pressure by leaning on the rival Powers she found them to be little

better than broken reeds.  France could not openly oppose her ally,

and Germany had reasons of her own for conciliating the Tsar,

whilst England and the United States, though avowedly opposing the

scheme as dangerous to their commercial interests, were not

prepared to go to war in defence of their policy.  It seemed,

therefore, that by patience, tenacity and diplomatic dexterity

Russia might ultimately attain her ends; but a surprise was in

store for her.  There was one Power which recognised that her own

vital interests were at stake, and which was ready to undertake a

life-and-death struggle in defence of them.



Though still smarting under the humiliation of her expulsion from

the Liaotung Peninsula in 1895, and watching with the keenest

interest every move in the political game, Japan had remained for

some time in the background, and had confined her efforts to

resisting Russian influence in Korea and supporting diplomatically

the Powers who were upholding the policy of the open door.  Now,

when it had become evident that the Western Powers would not

prevent the realisation of the Russian scheme, she determined to

intervene energetically, and to stake her national existence on the

result.  Ever since 1895 she had been making military and naval

preparations for the day of the revanche, and now that day was at

hand.  Against the danger of a coalition such as had checkmated her

on the previous occasion she was protected by the alliance which

she had concluded with England in 1902, and she felt confident that

with Russia alone she was quite capable of dealing single-handed.

Her position is briefly and graphically described in a despatch,

telegraphed at that time (28th July, 1903) by the Japanese

Government to its representative at St. Petersburg, instructing him

to open negotiations:





"The recent conduct of Russia in making new demands at Peking and

tightening her hold upon Manchuria has led the Imperial Government

to believe that she must have abandoned her intention of retiring

from that province.  At the same time, her increased activity upon

the Korean frontier is such as to raise doubts as to the limits of

her ambition.  The unconditional and permanent occupation of

Manchuria by Russia would create a state of things prejudicial to

the security and interests of Japan.  The principle of equal

opportunity (the open door) would thereby be annulled, and the

territorial integrity of China impaired.  There is, however, a

still more serious consideration for the Japanese Government.  If

Russia were established on the flank of Korea she would constantly

menace the separate existence of that Empire, or at least exercise

in it a predominant influence; and as Japan considers Korea an

important outpost in her line of defence, she regards its

independence as absolutely essential to her own repose and safety.

Moreover, the political as well as commercial and industrial

interests and influence which Japan possesses in Korea are

paramount over those of other Powers; she cannot, having regard to

her own security, consent to surrender them to, or share them with,

another Power."





In accordance with this view of the situation the Japanese

Government informed Count Lamsdorff that, as it desired to remove

from the relations of the two Empires every cause of future

misunderstanding, it would be glad to enter with the Imperial

Russian Government upon an examination of the condition of affairs

in the Far East, with a view to defining the respective special

interests of the two countries in those regions.



Though Count Lamsdorff accepted the proposal with apparent

cordiality and professed to regard it as a means of preventing any

outsider from sowing the seeds of discord between the two

countries, the idea of a general discussion was not at all welcome.

Careful definition of respective interests was the last thing the

Russian Government desired.  Its policy was to keep the whole

situation in a haze until it had consolidated its position in

Manchuria and on the Korean frontier to such an extent that it

could dictate its own terms in any future arrangement.  It could

not, however, consistently with its oft-repeated declarations of

disinterestedness and love of peace, decline to discuss the

subject.  It consented, therefore, to an exchange of views, but in

order to ensure that the tightening of its hold on the territories

in question should proceed pari passu with the diplomatic action,

it made an extraordinary departure from ordinary procedure,

entrusting the conduct of the affair, not to Count Lamsdorff and

the Foreign Office, but to Admiral Alexeyef, the newly created

Viceroy of the Far East, in whom was vested the control of all

civil, military, naval, and diplomatic affairs relating to that

part of the world.



From the commencement of the negotiations, which lasted from August

12th, 1903, to February 6th, 1904, the irreconcilable differences

of the two rivals became apparent, and all through the

correspondence, in which a few apparent concessions were offered by

Japan, neither Power retreated a step from the positions originally

taken up.  What Japan suggested was, roughly speaking, a mutual

engagement to uphold the independence and integrity of the Chinese

and Korean empires, and at the same time a bilateral arrangement by

which the special interests of the two contracting parties in

Manchuria and in Korea should be formally recognised, and the means

of protecting them clearly defined.  The scheme did not commend

itself to the Russians.  They systematically ignored the interests

of Japan in Manchuria, and maintained that she had no right to

interfere in any arrangements they might think fit to make with the

Chinese Government with regard to that province.  In their opinion,

Japan ought to recognise formally that Manchuria lay outside her

sphere of interest, and the negotiations should be confined to

limiting her freedom of action in Korea.



With such a wide divergence in principle the two parties were not

likely to agree in matters of detail.  Their conflicting aims came

out most clearly in the question of the open door.  The Japanese

insisted on obtaining the privileges of the open door, including

the right of settlement in Manchuria, and Russia obstinately

refused.  Having marked out Manchuria as a close reserve for her

own colonisation, trade, and industry, and knowing that she could

not compete with the Japanese if they were freely admitted, she

could not adopt the principle of "equal opportunity" which her

rivals recommended.  A fidus achates of Admiral Alexeyef explained

to me quite frankly, during the negotiations, why no concessions

could be made on that point.  In the work of establishing law and

order in Manchuria, constructing roads, bridges, railways, and

towns, Russia had expended an enormous sum--estimated by Count

Cassini at 60,000,000 pounds--and until that capital was recovered,

or until a reasonable interest was derived from the investment,

Russia could not think of sharing with any one the fruits of the

prosperity which she had created.



We need not go further into the details of the negotiations.  Japan

soon convinced herself that the onward march of the Colossus was

not to be stopped by paper barricades, and knowing well that her

actual military and naval superiority was being rapidly diminished

by Russia's warlike preparations,* she suddenly broke off

diplomatic relations and commenced hostilities.





* According to an estimate made by the Japanese authorities,

between April, 1903, and the outbreak of the war, Russia increased

her naval and military forces in the Far East by nineteen war

vessels, aggregating 82,415 tons, and 40,000 soldiers.  In addition

to this, one battleship, three cruisers, seven torpedo destroyers,

and four torpedo boats, aggregating about 37,040 tons, were on

their way to the East, and preparations had been made for

increasing the land forces by 200,000 men.  For further details,

see Asakawa, "The Russo-Japanese Conflict" (London, 1904), pp. 352-

54.





Russia thus found herself engaged in a war of the first magnitude,

of which no one can predict the ultimate consequences, and the

question naturally arises as to why, with an Emperor who lately

aspired to play in politics the part of a great peacemaker, she

provoked a conflict, for which she was very imperfectly prepared--

imposing on herself the obligation of defending a naval fortress,

hastily constructed on foreign territory, and united with her base

by a single line of railway 6,000 miles long.  The question is

easily answered: she did not believe in the possibility of war.

The Emperor was firmly resolved that he would not attack Japan, and

no one would admit for a moment that Japan could have the audacity

to attack the great Russian Empire.  In the late autumn of 1903, it

is true, a few well-informed officials in St. Petersburg,

influenced by the warnings of Baron Rosen, the Russian Minister in

Tokio, began to perceive that perhaps Japan would provoke a

conflict, but they were convinced that the military and naval

preparations already made were quite sufficient to repel the

attack.  One of these officials--probably the best informed of all--

said to me quite frankly: "If Japan had attacked us in May or

June, we should have been in a sorry plight, but now [November,

1903] we are ready."



The whole past history of territoral expansion in Asia tended to

confirm the prevailing illusions.  Russia had advanced steadily

from the Ural and the Caspian to the Hindu Kush and the Northern

Pacific without once encountering serious resistance.  Not once had

she been called on to make a great national effort, and the armed

resistance of the native races had never inflicted on her anything

worse than pin-pricks.  From decrepit China, which possessed no

army in the European sense of the term, a more energetic resistance

was not to be expected.  Had not Muravieff Amurski with a few

Cossacks quietly occupied her Amur territories without provoking

anything more dangerous than a diplomatic protest; and had not

Ignatief annexed her rich Primorsk provinces, including the site of

Vladivostok, by purely diplomatic means?  Why should not Count

Cassini, a diplomatist of the same type as Ignatief, imitate his

adroit predecessor, and secure for Russia, if not the formal

annexation, at least the permanent occupation, of Manchuria?

Remembering all this, we can perceive that the great mistake of the

Russian Government is not so very difficult to explain.  It

certainly did not want war--far from it--but it wanted to obtain

Manchuria by a gradual, painless process of absorption, and it did

not perceive that this could not be attained without a life-and-

death struggle with a young, vigorous nationality, which has

contrived to combine the passions and virtues of a primitive race

with the organising powers and scientific appliances of the most

advanced civilisation.



Russian territorial expansion has thus been checked, for some years

to come, on the Pacific coast; but the expansive tendency will re-

appear soon in other regions, and it behooves us to be watchful,

because, whatever direction it may take, it is likely to affect our

interests directly or indirectly.  Will it confine itself for some

years to a process of infiltration in Mongolia and Northern Thibet,

the line of least resistance?  Or will it impinge on our Indian

frontier, directed by those who desire to avenge themselves on

Japan's ally for the reverses sustained in Manchuria?  Or will it

once more take the direction of the Bosphorous, where a campaign

might be expected to awaken religious and warlike enthusiasm among

the masses?  To these questions I cannot give any answer, because

so much depends on the internal consequences of the present war,

and on accidental circumstances which no one can at present

foresee.  I have always desired, and still desire, that we should

cultivate friendly relations with our great rival, and that we

should learn to appreciate the many good qualities of her people;

but I have at the same time always desired that we should keep a

watchful eye on her irrepressible tendency to expand, and that we

should take timely precautions against any unprovoked aggression,

however justifiable it may seem to her from the point of view of

her own national interests.


