




CHAPTER XXI



LANDED PROPRIETORS OF THE OLD SCHOOL





Russian Hospitality--A Country-House--Its Owner Described--His

Life, Past and Present--Winter Evenings--Books---Connection with

the Outer World--The Crimean War and the Emancipation--A Drunken,

Dissolute Proprietor--An Old General and his Wife--"Name Days"--A

Legendary Monster--A Retired Judge--A Clever Scribe--Social

Leniency--Cause of Demoralisation.





Of all the foreign countries in which I have travelled, Russia

certainly bears off the palm in the matter of hospitality.  Every

spring I found myself in possession of a large number of

invitations from landed proprietors in different parts of the

country--far more than I could possibly accept--and a great part of

the summer was generally spent in wandering about from one country-

house to another.  I have no intention of asking the reader to

accompany me in all these expeditions--for though pleasant in

reality, they might be tedious in description--but I wish to

introduce him to some typical examples of the landed proprietors.

Among them are to be found nearly all ranks and conditions of men,

from the rich magnate, surrounded with the refined luxury of West-

European civilisation, to the poor, ill-clad, ignorant owner of a

few acres which barely supply him with the necessaries of life.

Let us take, first of all, a few specimens from the middle ranks.



In one of the central provinces, near the bank of a sluggish,

meandering stream, stands an irregular group of wooden

constructions--old, unpainted, blackened by time, and surmounted by

high, sloping roofs of moss-covered planks.  The principal building

is a long, one-storied dwelling-house, constructed at right angles

to the road.  At the front of the house is a spacious, ill-kept

yard, and at the back an equally spacious shady, garden, in which

art carries on a feeble conflict with encroaching nature.  At the

other side of the yard, and facing the front door--or rather the

front doors, for there are two--stand the stables, hay-shed, and

granary, and near to that end of the house which is farthest from

the road are two smaller houses, one of which is the kitchen, and

the other the Lyudskaya, or servants' apartments.  Beyond these we

can perceive, through a single row of lime-trees, another group of

time-blackened wooden constructions in a still more dilapidated

condition.  That is the farmyard.



There is certainly not much symmetry in the disposition of these

buildings, but there is nevertheless a certain order and meaning in

the apparent chaos.  All the buildings which do not require stoves

are built at a considerable distance from the dwelling-house and

kitchen, which are more liable to take fire; and the kitchen stands

by itself, because the odour of cookery where oil is used is by no

means agreeable, even for those whose olfactory nerves are not very

sensitive.  The plan of the house is likewise not without a certain

meaning.  The rigorous separation of the sexes, which formed a

characteristic trait of old Russian society, has long since

disappeared, but its influence may still be traced in houses built

on the old model.  The house in question is one of these, and

consequently it is composed of three sections--at the one end the

male apartments, at the other the female apartments, and in the

middle the neutral territory, comprising the dining-room and the

salon.  This arrangement has its conveniences, and explains the

fact that the house has two front doors.  At the back is a third

door, which opens from the neutral territory into a spacious

verandah overlooking the garden.



Here lives, and has lived for many years, Ivan Ivanovitch K----, a

gentleman of the old school, and a very worthy man of his kind.  If

we look at him as he sits in his comfortable armchair, with his

capacious dressing-gown hanging loosely about him, we shall be able

to read at a glance something of his character.  Nature endowed him

with large bones and broad shoulders, and evidently intended him to

be a man of great muscular power, but he has contrived to frustrate

this benevolent intention, and has now more fat than muscle.  His

close-cropped head is round as a bullet, and his features are

massive and heavy, but the heaviness is relieved by an expression

of calm contentment and imperturbable good-nature, which

occasionally blossoms into a broad grin.  His face is one of those

on which no amount of histrionic talent could produce a look of

care and anxiety, and for this it is not to blame, for such an

expression has never been demanded of it.  Like other mortals, he

sometimes experiences little annoyances, and on such occasions his

small grey eyes sparkle and his face becomes suffused with a

crimson glow that suggests apoplexy; but ill-fortune has never been

able to get sufficiently firm hold of him to make him understand

what such words as care and anxiety mean.  Of struggle,

disappointment, hope, and all the other feelings which give to

human life a dramatic interest, he knows little by hearsay and

nothing by experience.  He has, in fact, always lived outside of

that struggle for existence which modern philosophers declare to be

the law of nature.



Somewhere about seventy years ago Ivan Ivan'itch was born in the

house where he still lives.  His first lessons he received from the

parish priest, and afterwards he was taught by a deacon's son, who

had studied in the ecclesiastical seminary to so little purpose

that he was unable to pass the final examination.  By both of these

teachers he was treated with extreme leniency, and was allowed to

learn as little as he chose.  His father wished him to study hard,

but his mother was afraid that study might injure his health, and

accordingly gave him several holidays every week.  Under these

circumstances his progress was naturally not very rapid, and he was

still very slightly acquainted with the elementary rules of

arithmetic, when his father one day declared that he was already

eighteen years of age, and must at once enter the service.



But what kind of service?  Ivan had no natural inclination for any

kind of activity.  The project of entering him as a Junker in a

cavalry regiment, the colonel of which was an old friend of the

family, did not at all please him.  He had no love for military

service, and positively disliked the prospect of an examination.

Whilst seeming, therefore, to bow implicitly to the paternal

authority, he induced his mother to oppose the scheme.



The dilemma in which Ivan found himself was this: in deference to

his father he wished to be in the service and gain that official

rank which every Russian noble desires to possess, and at the same

time, in deference to his mother and his own tastes, he wished to

remain at home and continue his indolent mode of life.  The Marshal

of the Noblesse, who happened to call one day, helped him out of

the difficulty by offering to inscribe him as secretary in the

Dvoryanskaya Opeka, a bureau which acts as curator for the estates

of minors.  All the duties of this office could be fulfilled by a

paid secretary, and the nominal occupant would be periodically

promoted as if he were an active official.  This was precisely what

Ivan required.  He accepted eagerly the proposal, and obtained, in

the course of seven years, without any effort on his part, the rank

of "collegiate secretary," corresponding to the "capitaine-en-

second" of the military hierarchy.  To mount higher he would have

had to seek some place where he could not have fulfilled his duty

by proxy, so he determined to rest on his laurels, and sent in his

resignation.



Immediately after the termination of his official life his married

life began.  Before his resignation had been accepted he suddenly

found himself one morning on the high road to matrimony.  Here

again there was no effort on his part.  The course of true love,

which is said never to run smooth for ordinary mortals, ran smooth

for him.  He never had even the trouble of proposing.  The whole

affair was arranged by his parents, who chose as bride for their

son the only daughter of their nearest neighbour.  The young lady

was only about sixteen years of age, and was not remarkable for

beauty, talent, or any other peculiarity, but she had one very

important qualification--she was the daughter of a man who had an

estate contiguous to their own, and who might give as a dowry a

certain bit of land which they had long desired to add to their own

property.  The negotiations, being of a delicate nature, were

entrusted to an old lady who had a great reputation for diplomatic

skill in such matters, and she accomplished her mission with such

success that in the course of a few weeks the preliminaries were

arranged and the day fixed for the wedding.  Thus Ivan Ivan'itch

won his bride as easily as he had won his tchin of "collegiate

secretary."



Though the bridegroom had received rather than taken to himself a

wife, and did not imagine for a moment that he was in love, he had

no reason to regret the choice that was made for him.  Maria

Petrovna was exactly suited by character and education to be the

wife of a man like Ivan Ivan'itch.  She had grown up at home in the

society of nurses and servant-maids, and had never learned anything

more than could be obtained from the parish priest and from

"Ma'mselle," a personage occupying a position midway between a

servant-maid and a governess.  The first events of her life were

the announcement that she was to be married and the preparations

for the wedding.  She still remembers the delight which the

purchase of her trousseau afforded her, and keeps in her memory a

full catalogue of the articles bought.  The first years of her

married life were not very happy, for she was treated by her

mother-in-law as a naughty child who required to be frequently

snubbed and lectured; but she bore the discipline with exemplary

patience, and in due time became her own mistress and autocratic

ruler in all domestic affairs.  From that time she has lived an

active, uneventful life.  Between her and her husband there is as

much mutual attachment as can reasonably be expected in phlegmatic

natures after half a century of matrimony.  She has always devoted

her energies to satisfying his simple material wants--of

intellectual wants he has none--and securing his comfort in every

possible way.  Under this fostering care he "effeminated himself"

(obabilsya), as he is wont to say.  His love of shooting died out,

he cared less and less to visit his neighbours, and each successive

year he spent more and more time in his comfortable arm-chair.



The daily life of this worthy couple is singularly regular and

monotonous, varying only with the changing seasons.  In summer Ivan

Ivan'itch gets up about seven o'clock, and puts on, with the

assistance of his valet de chambre, a simple costume, consisting

chiefly of a faded, plentifully stained dressing-gown.  Having

nothing particular to do, he sits down at the open window and looks

into the yard.  As the servants pass he stops and questions them,

and then gives them orders, or scolds them, as circumstances

demand.  Towards nine o'clock tea is announced, and he goes into

the dining-room--a long, narrow apartment with bare wooden floor

and no furniture but a table and chairs, all in a more or less

rickety condition.  Here he finds his wife with the tea-urn before

her.  In a few minutes the grandchildren come in, kiss their

grandpapa's hand, and take their places round the table.  As this

morning meal consists merely of bread and tea, it does not last

long; and all disperse to their several occupations.  The head of

the house begins the labours of the day by resuming his seat at the

open window.  When he has smoked some cigarettes and indulged in a

proportionate amount of silent contemplation, he goes out with the

intention of visiting the stables and farmyard, but generally

before he has crossed the court he finds the heat unbearable, and

returns to his former position by the open window.  Here he sits

tranquilly till the sun has so far moved round that the verandah at

the back of the house is completely in the shade, when he has his

arm-chair removed thither, and sits there till dinner-time.



Maria Petrovna spends her morning in a more active way.  As soon as

the breakfast table has been cleared she goes to the larder, takes

stock of the provisions, arranges the menu du jour, and gives to

the cook the necessary materials, with detailed instructions as to

how they are to be prepared.  The rest of the morning she devotes

to her other household duties.



Towards one o'clock dinner is announced, and Ivan Ivan'itch

prepares his appetite by swallowing at a gulp a wineglassful of

home-made bitters.  Dinner is the great event of the day.  The food

is abundant and of good quality, but mushrooms, onions, and fat

play a rather too important part in the repast, and the whole is

prepared with very little attention to the recognised principles of

culinary hygiene.  Many of the dishes, indeed, would make a British

valetudinarian stand aghast, but they seem to produce no bad effect

on those Russian organisms which have never been weakened by town

life, nervous excitement, or intellectual exertion.



No sooner has the last dish been removed than a deathlike stillness

falls upon the house: it is the time of the after-dinner siesta.

The young folks go into the garden, and all the other members of

the household give way to the drowsiness naturally engendered by a

heavy meal on a hot summer day.  Ivan Ivan'itch retires to his own

room, from which the flies have been carefully expelled.  Maria

Petrovna dozes in an arm-chair in the sitting-room, with a pocket-

handkerchief spread over her face.  The servants snore in the

corridors, the garret, or the hay-shed; and even the old watch-dog

in the corner of the yard stretches himself out at full length on

the shady side of his kennel.



In about two hours the house gradually re-awakens.  Doors begin to

creak; the names of various servants are bawled out in all tones,

from bass to falsetto; and footsteps are heard in the yard.  Soon a

man-servant issues from the kitchen bearing an enormous tea-urn,

which puffs like a little steam-engine.  The family assembles for

tea.  In Russia, as elsewhere, sleep after a heavy meal produces

thirst, so that the tea and other beverages are very acceptable.

Then some little delicacies are served--such as fruit and wild

berries, or cucumbers with honey, or something else of the kind,

and the family again disperses.  Ivan Ivan'itch takes a turn in the

fields on his begovuiya droshki--an extremely light vehicle

composed of two pairs of wheels joined together by a single board,

on which the driver sits stride-legged; and Maria Petrovna probably

receives a visit from the Popadya (the priest's wife), who is the

chief gossipmonger of the neighbourhood.  There is not much scandal

in the district, but what little there is the Popadya carefully

collects, and distributes among her acquaintances with

undiscriminating generosity.



In the evening it often happens that a little group of peasants

come into the court, and ask to see the "master."  The master goes

to the door, and generally finds that they have some favour to

request.  In reply to his question, "Well, children, what do you

want?" they tell their story in a confused, rambling way, several

of them speaking at a time, and he has to question and cross-

question them before he comes to understand clearly what they

desire.  If he tells them he cannot grant it, they probably do not

accept a first refusal, but endeavour by means of supplication to

make him reconsider his decision.  Stepping forward a little, and

bowing low, one of the group begins in a half-respectful, half-

familiar, caressing tone: "Little Father, Ivan Ivan'itch, be

gracious; you are our father, and we are your children"--and so on.

Ivan Ivan'itch good-naturedly listens, and again explains that he

cannot grant what they ask; but they have still hopes of gaining

their point by entreaty, and continue their supplications till at

last his patience is exhausted and he says to them in a paternal

tone, "Now, enough! enough! you are blockheads--blockheads all

round!  There's no use talking; it can't be done."  And with these

words he enters the house, so as to prevent all further discussion.



A regular part of the evening's occupation is the interview with

the steward.  The work that has just been done, and the programme

for the morrow, are always discussed at great length; and much time

is spent in speculating as to the weather during the next few days.

On this latter point the calendar is always carefully consulted,

and great confidence is placed in its predictions, though past

experience has often shown that they are not to be implicitly

trusted.  The conversation drags on till supper is announced, and

immediately after that meal, which is an abridged repetition of

dinner, all retire for the night.



Thus pass the days and weeks and months in the house of Ivan

Ivan'itch, and rarely is there any deviation from the ordinary

programme.  The climate necessitates, of course, some slight

modifications.  When it is cold, the doors and windows have to be

kept shut, and after heavy rains those who do not like to wade in

mud have to remain in the house or garden.  In the long winter

evenings the family assembles in the sitting-room, and all kill

time as best they can.  Ivan Ivan'itch smokes and meditates or

listens to the barrel-organ played by one of the children.  Maria

Petrovna knits a stocking.  The old aunt, who commonly spends the

winter with them, plays Patience, and sometimes draws from the game

conclusions as to the future.  Her favourite predictions are that a

stranger will arrive, or that a marriage will take place, and she

can determine the sex of the stranger and the colour of the

bridegroom's hair; but beyond this her art does not go, and she

cannot satisfy the young ladies' curiosity as to further details.



Books and newspapers are rarely seen in the sitting-room, but for

those who wish to read there is a book-case full of miscellaneous

literature, which gives some idea of the literary tastes of the

family during several generations.  The oldest volumes were bought

by Ivan Ivan'itch's grandfather--a man who, according to the family

traditions, enjoyed the confidence of the great Catherine.  Though

wholly overlooked by recent historians, he was evidently a man who

had some pretensions to culture.  He had his portrait painted by a

foreign artist of considerable talent--it still hangs in the

sitting-room--and he bought several pieces of Sevres ware, the last

of which stands on a commode in the corner and contrasts strangely

with the rude home-made furniture and squalid appearance of the

apartment.  Among the books which bear his name are the tragedies

of Sumarokof, who imagined himself to be "the Russian Voltaire";

the amusing comedies of Von-Wisin, some of which still keep the

stage; the loud-sounding odes of the courtly Derzhavin; two or

three books containing the mystic wisdom of Freemasonry as

interpreted by Schwarz and Novikoff; Russian translations of

Richardson's "Pamela," "Sir Charles Grandison," and "Clarissa

Harlowe"; Rousseau's "Nouvelle Heloise," in Russian garb; and three

or four volumes of Voltaire in the original.  Among the works

collected at a somewhat later period are translations of Ann

Radcliffe, of Scott's early novels, and of Ducray Dumenil, whose

stories, "Lolotte et Fanfan" and "Victor," once enjoyed a great

reputation.  At this point the literary tastes of the family appear

to have died out, for the succeeding literature is represented

exclusively by Kryloff's Fables, a farmer's manual, a handbook of

family medicine, and a series of calendars.  There are, however,

some signs of a revival, for on the lowest shelf stand recent

editions of Pushkin, Lermontof, and Gogol, and a few works by

living authors.



Sometimes the monotony of the winter is broken by visiting

neighbours and receiving visitors in return, or in a more decided

way by a visit of a few days to the capital of the province.  In

the latter case Maria Petrovna spends nearly all her time in

shopping, and brings home a large collection of miscellaneous

articles.  The inspection of these by the assembled family forms an

important domestic event, which completely throws into the shade

the occasional visits of peddlers and colporteurs.  Then there are

the festivities at Christmas and Easter, and occasionally little

incidents of less agreeable kind.  It may be that there is a heavy

fall of snow, so that it is necessary to cut roads to the kitchen

and stables; or wolves enter the courtyard at night and have a

fight with the watch-dogs; or the news is brought that a peasant

who had been drinking in a neighbouring village has been found

frozen to death on the road.



Altogether the family live a very isolated life, but they have one

bond of connection with the great outer world.  Two of the sons are

officers in the army and both of them write home occasionally to

their mother and sisters.  To these two youths is devoted all the

little stock of sentimentality which Maria Petrovna possesses.  She

can talk of them by the hour to any one who will listen to her, and

has related to the Popadya a hundred times every trivial incident

of their lives.  Though they have never given her much cause for

anxiety, and they are now men of middle age, she lives in constant

fear that some evil may befall them.  What she most fears is that

they may be sent on a campaign or may fall in love with actresses.

War and actresses are, in fact, the two bug-bears of her existence,

and whenever she has a disquieting dream she asks the priest to

offer up a moleben for the safety of her absent ones.  Sometimes

she ventures to express her anxiety to her husband, and recommends

him to write to them; but he considers writing a letter a very

serious bit of work, and always replies evasively, "Well, well, we

must think about it."



During the Crimean War Ivan Ivan'itch half awoke from his habitual

lethargy, and read occasionally the meagre official reports

published by the Government.  He was a little surprised that no

great victories were reported, and that the army did not at once

advance on Constantinople.  As to causes he never speculated.  Some

of his neighbours told him that the army was disorganised, and the

whole system of Nicholas had been proved to be utterly worthless.

That might all be very true, but he did not understand military and

political matters.  No doubt it would all come right in the end.

All did come right, after a fashion, and he again gave up reading

newspapers; but ere long he was startled by reports much more

alarming than any rumours of war.  People began to talk about the

peasant question, and to say openly that the serfs must soon be

emancipated.  For once in his life Ivan Ivan'itch asked

explanations.  Finding one of his neighbours, who had always been a

respectable, sensible man, and a severe disciplinarian, talking in

this way, he took him aside and asked what it all meant.  The

neighbour explained that the old order of things had shown itself

bankrupt and was doomed, that a new epoch was opening, that

everything was to be reformed, and that the Emperor, in accordance

with a secret clause of the Treaty with the Allies, was about to

grant a Constitution!  Ivan Ivan'itch listened for a little in

silence, and then, with a gesture of impatience, interrupted the

speaker: "Polno duratchitsya! enough of fun and tomfoolery.

Vassili Petrovitch, tell me seriously what you mean."



When Vassili Petrovitch vowed that he spoke in all seriousness, his

friend gazed at him with a look of intense compassion, and

remarked, as he turned away, "So you, too, have gone out of your

mind!"



The utterances of Vassili Petrovitch, which his lethargic, sober-

minded friend regarded as indicating temporary insanity in the

speaker, represented fairly the mental condition of very many

Russian nobles at that time, and were not without a certain

foundation.  The idea about a secret clause in the Treaty of Paris

was purely imaginary, but it was quite true that the country was

entering on an epoch of great reforms, among which the Emancipation

question occupied the chief place.  Of this even the sceptical Ivan

Ivan'itch was soon convinced.  The Emperor formally declared to the

Noblesse of the province of Moscow that the actual state of things

could not continue forever, and called on the landed proprietors to

consider by what means the condition of their serfs might be

ameliorated.  Provincial committees were formed for the purpose of

preparing definite projects, and gradually it became apparent that

the emancipation of the serfs was really at hand.



Ivan Ivan'itch was alarmed at the prospect of losing his authority

over his serfs.  Though he had never been a cruel taskmaster, he

had not spared the rod when he considered it necessary, and he

believed birch twigs to be a necessary instrument in the Russian

system of agriculture.  For some time he drew consolation from the

thought that peasants were not birds of the air, that they must

under all circumstances require food and clothing, and that they

would be ready to serve him as agricultural labourers; but when he

learned that they were to receive a large part of the estate for

their own use, his hopes fell, and he greatly feared that he would

be inevitably ruined.



These dark forebodings have not been by any means realised.  His

serfs were emancipated and received about a half of the estate, but

in return for the land ceded they paid him annually a considerable

sum, and they were always ready to cultivate his fields for a fair

remuneration.  The yearly outlay was considerably greater, but the

price of grain rose, and this counterbalanced the additional yearly

expenditure.  The administration of the estate has become much less

patriarchal; much that was formerly left to custom and tacit

understanding is now regulated by express agreement on purely

commercial principles; a great deal more money is paid out and a

great deal more received; there is much less authority in the hands

of the master, and his responsibilities are proportionately

diminished; but in spite of all these changes, Ivan Ivan'itch would

have great difficulty in deciding whether he is a richer or a

poorer man.  He has fewer horses and fewer servants, but he has

still more than he requires, and his mode of life has undergone no

perceptible alteration.  Maria Petrovna complains that she is no

longer supplied with eggs, chickens, and homespun linen by the

peasants, and that everything is three times as dear as it used to

be; but somehow the larder is still full, and abundance reigns in

the house as of old.



Ivan Ivan'itch certainly does not possess transcendent qualities of

any kind.  It would be impossible to make a hero out of him, even

though his own son should be his biographer.  Muscular Christians

may reasonably despise him, an active, energetic man may fairly

condemn him for his indolence and apathy.  But, on the other hand,

he has no very bad qualities.  His vices are of the passive,

negative kind.  He is a respectable if not a distinguished member

of society, and appears a very worthy man when compared with many

of his neighbours who have been brought up in similar conditions.

Take, for instance, his younger brother Dimitri, who lives a short

way off.



Dimitri Ivanovitch, like his brother Ivan, had been endowed by

nature with a very decided repugnance to prolonged intellectual

exertion, but as he was a man of good parts he did not fear a

Junker's examination--especially when he could count on the

colonel's protection--and accordingly entered the army.  In his

regiment were a number of jovial young officers like himself,

always ready to relieve the monotony of garrison life by boisterous

dissipation, and among these he easily acquired the reputation of

being a thoroughly good fellow.  In drinking bouts he could hold

his own with the best of them, and in all mad pranks invariably

played the chief part.  By this means he endeared himself to his

comrades, and for a time all went well.  The colonel had himself

sown wild oats plentifully in his youth, and was quite disposed to

overlook, as far as possible, the bacchanalian peccadilloes of his

subordinates.  But before many years had passed, the regiment

suddenly changed its character.  Certain rumours had reached

headquarters, and the Emperor Nicholas appointed as colonel a stern

disciplinarian of German origin, who aimed at making the regiment a

kind of machine that should work with the accuracy of a

chronometer.



This change did not at all suit the tastes of Dimitri Ivan'itch.

He chafed under the new restraints, and as soon as he had gained

the rank of lieutenant retired from the service to enjoy the

freedom of country life.  Shortly afterwards his father died, and

he thereby became owner of an estate, with two hundred serfs.  He

did not, like his elder brother, marry, and "effeminate himself,"

but he did worse.  In his little independent kingdom--for such was

practically a Russian estate in the good old times--he was lord of

all he surveyed, and gave full scope to his boisterous humour, his

passion for sport, and his love of drinking and dissipation.  Many

of the mad pranks in which he indulged will long be preserved by

popular tradition, but they cannot well be related here.



Dimitri Ivan'itch is now a man long past middle age, and still

continues his wild, dissipated life.  His house resembles an ill-

kept, disreputable tavern.  The floor is filthy, the furniture

chipped and broken, the servants indolent, slovenly, and in rags.

Dogs of all breeds and sizes roam about the rooms and corridors.

The master, when not asleep, is always in a more or less complete

state of intoxication.  Generally he has one or two guests staying

with him--men of the same type as himself--and days and nights are

spent in drinking and card-playing.  When he cannot have his usual

boon-companions he sends for one or two small proprietors who live

near--men who are legally nobles, but who are so poor that they

differ little from peasants.  Formerly, when ordinary resources

failed, he occasionally had recourse to the violent expedient of

ordering his servants to stop the first passing travellers, whoever

they might be, and bring them in by persuasion or force, as

circumstances might demand.  If the travellers refused to accept

such rough, undesired hospitality, a wheel would be taken off their

tarantass, or some indispensable part of the harness would be

secreted, and they might consider themselves fortunate if they

succeeded in getting away next morning.*





* This custom has fortunately gone out of fashion even in outlying

districts, but an incident of the kind happened to a friend of mine

as late as 1871.  He was detained against his will for two whole

days by a man whom he had never seen before, and at last effected

his escape by bribing the servants of his tyrannical host.





In the time of serfage the domestic serfs had much to bear from

their capricious, violent master.  They lived in an atmosphere of

abusive language, and were subjected not unfrequently to corporal

punishment.  Worse than this, their master was constantly

threatening to "shave their forehead"--that is to say, to give them

as recruits--and occasionally he put his threat into execution, in

spite of the wailings and entreaties of the culprit and his

relations.  And yet, strange to say, nearly all of them remained

with him as free servants after the Emancipation.



In justice to the Russian landed proprietors, I must say that the

class represented by Dimitri Ivan'itch has now almost disappeared.

It was the natural result of serfage and social stagnation--of a

state of society in which there were few legal and moral

restraints, and few inducements to honourable activity.



Among the other landed proprietors of the district, one of the best

known is Nicolai Petrovitch B----, an old military man with the

rank of general.  Like Ivan Ivan'itch, he belongs to the old

school; but the two men must be contrasted rather than compared.

The difference in their lives and characters is reflected in their

outward appearance.  Ivan Ivan'itch, as we know, is portly in form

and heavy in all his movements, and loves to loll in his arm-chair

or to loaf about the house in a capacious dressing-gown.  The

General, on the contrary, is thin, wiry, and muscular, wears

habitually a close-buttoned military tunic, and always has a stern

expression, the force of which is considerably augmented by a

bristly moustache resembling a shoe-brush.  As he paces up and down

the room, knitting his brows and gazing at the floor, he looks as

if he were forming combinations of the first magnitude; but those

who know him well are aware that this is an optical delusion, of

which he is himself to some extent a victim.  He is quite innocent

of deep thought and concentrated intellectual effort.  Though he

frowns so fiercely he is by no means of a naturally ferocious

temperament.  Had he passed all his life in the country he would

probably have been as good-natured and phlegmatic as Ivan Ivan'itch

himself, but, unlike that worshipper of tranquillity, he had

aspired to rise in the service, and had adopted the stern, formal

bearing which the Emperor Nicholas considered indispensable in an

officer.  The manner which he had at first put on as part of his

uniform became by the force of habit almost a part of his nature,

and at the age of thirty he was a stern disciplinarian and

uncompromising formalist, who confined his attention exclusively to

drill and other military duties.  Thus he rose steadily by his own

merit, and reached the goal of his early ambition--the rank of

general.



As soon as this point was reached he determined to leave the

service and retire to his property.  Many considerations urged him

to take this step.  He enjoyed the title of Excellency which he had

long coveted, and when he put on his full uniform his breast was

bespangled with medals and decorations.  Since the death of his

father the revenues of his estate had been steadily decreasing, and

report said that the best wood in his forest was rapidly

disappearing.  His wife had no love for the country, and would have

preferred to settle in Moscow or St. Petersburg, but they found

that with their small income they could not live in a large town in

a style suitable to their rank.



The General determined to introduce order into his estate, and

become a practical farmer; but a little experience convinced him

that his new functions were much more difficult than the commanding

of a regiment.  He has long since given over the practical

management of the property to a steward, and he contents himself

with exercising what he imagines to be an efficient control.

Though he wishes to do much, he finds small scope for his activity,

and spends his days in pretty much the same way as Ivan Ivan'itch,

with this difference, that he plays cards whenever he gets an

opportunity, and reads regularly the Moscow Gazette and Russki

Invalid, the official military paper.  What specially interests him

is the list of promotions, retirements, and Imperial rewards for

merit and seniority.  When he sees the announcement that some old

comrade has been made an officer of his Majesty's suite or has

received a grand cordon, he frowns a little more than usual, and is

tempted to regret that he retired from the service.  Had he waited

patiently, perhaps a bit of good fortune might have fallen likewise

to his lot.  This idea takes possession of him, and during the

remainder of the day he is taciturn and morose.  His wife notices

the change, and knows the reason of it, but has too much good sense

and tact to make any allusion to the subject.



Anna Alexandrovna--as the good lady is called--is an elderly dame

who does not at all resemble the wife of Ivan Ivan'itch.  She was

long accustomed to a numerous military society, with dinner-

parties, dancing, promenades, card-playing, and all the other

amusements of garrison life, and she never contracted a taste for

domestic concerns.  Her knowledge of culinary affairs is extremely

vague, and she has no idea of how to make preserves, nalivka, and

other home-made delicacies, though Maria Petrovna, who is

universally acknowledged to be a great adept in such matters, has

proposed a hundred times to give her some choice recipes.  In

short, domestic affairs are a burden to her, and she entrusts them

as far as possible to the housekeeper.  Altogether she finds

country life very tiresome, but, possessing that placid,

philosophical temperament which seems to have some casual

connection with corpulence, she submits without murmuring, and

tries to lighten a little the unavoidable monotony by paying visits

and receiving visitors.  The neighbours within a radius of twenty

miles are, with few exceptions, more or less of the Ivan Ivan'itch

and Maria Petrovna type--decidedly rustic in their manners and

conceptions; but their company is better than absolute solitude,

and they have at least the good quality of being always able and

willing to play cards for any number of hours.  Besides this, Anna

Alexandrovna has the satisfaction of feeling that amongst them she

is almost a great personage, and unquestionably an authority in all

matters of taste and fashion; and she feels specially well disposed

towards those of them who frequently address her as "Your

Excellency."



The chief festivities take place on the "name-days" of the General

and his spouse--that is to say, the days sacred to St. Nicholas and

St. Anna.  On these occasions all the neighbours come to offer

their congratulations, and remain to dinner as a matter of course.

After dinner the older visitors sit down to cards, and the young

people extemporise a dance.  The fete is specially successful when

the eldest son comes home to take part in it, and brings a brother

officer with him.  He is now a general like his father.*  In days

gone by one of his comrades was expected to offer his hand to Olga

Nekola'vna, the second daughter, a delicate young lady who had been

educated in one of the great Instituts--gigantic boarding-schools,

founded and kept up by the Government, for the daughters of those

who are supposed to have deserved well of their country.

Unfortunately the expected offer was never made, and she and her

sister live at home as old maids, bewailing the absence of

"civilised" society, and killing time in a harmless, elegant way by

means of music, needlework, and light literature.





* Generals are much more common in Russia than in other countries.

A few years ago there was an old lady in Moscow who had a family of

ten sons, all of whom were generals!  The rank may be obtained in

the civil as well as the military service.





At these "name-day" gatherings one used to meet still more

interesting specimens of the old school.  One of them I remember

particularly.  He was a tall, corpulent old man, in a threadbare

frock-coat, which wrinkled up about his waist.  His shaggy eyebrows

almost covered his small, dull eyes, his heavy moustache partially

concealed a large mouth strongly indicating sensuous tendencies.

His hair was cut so short that it was difficult to say what its

colour would be if it were allowed to grow.  He always arrived in

his tarantass just in time for the zakuska--the appetising

collation that is served shortly before dinner--grunted out a few

congratulations to the host and hostess and monosyllabic greetings

to his acquaintances, ate a copious meal, and immediately

afterwards placed himself at a card-table, where he sat in silence

as long as he could get any one to play with him.  People did not

like, however, to play with Andrei Vassil'itch, for his society was

not agreeable, and he always contrived to go home with a well-

filled purse.



Andrei Vassil'itch was a noted man in the neighbourhood.  He was

the centre of a whole cycle of legends, and I have often heard that

his name was used with effect by nurses to frighten naughty

children.  I never missed an opportunity of meeting him, for I was

curious to see and study a legendary monster in the flesh.  How far

the numerous stories told about him were true I cannot pretend to

say, but they were certainly not without foundation.  In his youth

he had served for some time in the army, and was celebrated, even

in an age when martinets had always a good chance of promotion, for

his brutality to his subordinates.  His career was cut short,

however, when he had only the rank of captain.  Having compromised

himself in some way, he found it advisable to send in his

resignation and retire to his estate.  Here he organised his house

on Mahometan rather than Christian principles, and ruled his

servants and peasants as he had been accustomed to rule his

soldiers--using corporal punishment in merciless fashion.  His wife

did not venture to protest against the Mahometan arrangements, and

any peasant who stood in the way of their realisation was at once

given as a recruit, or transported to Siberia, in accordance with

his master's demand.*  At last his tyranny and extortion drove his

serfs to revolt.  One night his house was surrounded and set on

fire, but he contrived to escape the fate that was prepared for

him, and caused all who had taken part in the revolt to be

mercilessly punished.  This was a severe lesson, but it had no

effect upon him.  Taking precautions against a similar surprise, he

continued to tyrannise and extort as before, until in 1861 the

serfs were emancipated, and his authority came to an end.





* When a proprietor considered any of his serfs unruly he could,

according to law, have them transported to Siberia without trial,

on condition of paying the expenses of transport.  Arrived at their

destination, they received land, and lived as free colonists, with

the single restriction that they were not allowed to leave the

locality where they settled.





A very different sort of man was Pavel Trophim'itch, who likewise

came regularly to pay his respects and present his congratulations

to the General and "Gheneralsha."*  It was pleasant to turn from

the hard, wrinkled, morose features of the legendary monster to the

soft, smooth, jovial face of this man, who had been accustomed to

look at the bright side of things, till his face had caught

something of their brightness.  "A good, jovial, honest face!" a

stranger might exclaim as he looked at him.  Knowing something of

his character and history, I could not endorse such an opinion.

Jovial he certainly was, for few men were more capable of making

and enjoying mirth.  Good he might he also called, if the word were

taken in the sense of good-natured, for he never took offence, and

was always ready to do a kindly action if it did not cost him any

trouble.  But as to his honesty, that required some qualification.

Wholly untarnished his reputation certainly could not be, for he

had been a judge in the District Court before the time of the

judicial reforms; and, not being a Cato, he had succumbed to the

usual temptations.  He had never studied law, and made no

pretensions to the possession of great legal knowledge.  To all who

would listen to him he declared openly that he knew much more about

pointers and setters than about legal formalities.  But his estate

was very small, and he could not afford to give up his appointment.





* The female form of the word General.





Of these unreformed Courts, which are happily among the things of

the past, I shall have occasion to speak in the sequel.  For the

present I wish merely to say that they were thoroughly corrupt, and

I hasten to add that Pavel Trophim'itch was by no means a judge of

the worst kind.  He had been known to protect widows and orphans

against those who wished to despoil them, and no amount of money

would induce him to give an unjust decision against a friend who

had privately explained the case to him; but when he knew nothing

of the case or of the parties he readily signed the decision

prepared by the secretary, and quietly pocketed the proceeds,

without feeling any very disagreeable twinges of conscience.  All

judges, he knew, did likewise, and he had no pretension to being

better than his fellows.



When Pavel Trophim'itch played cards at the General's house or

elsewhere, a small, awkward, clean-shaven man, with dark eyes and a

Tartar cast of countenance, might generally be seen sitting at the

same table.  His name was Alexei Petrovitch T----.  Whether he

really had any Tartar blood in him it is impossible to say, but

certainly his ancestors for one or two generations were all good

orthodox Christians.  His father had been a poor military surgeon

in a marching regiment, and he himself had become at an early age a

scribe in one of the bureaux of the district town.  He was then

very poor, and had great difficulty in supporting life on the

miserable pittance which he received as a salary; but he was a

sharp, clever youth, and soon discovered that even a scribe had a

great many opportunities of extorting money from the ignorant

public.



These opportunities Alexei Petrovitch used with great ability, and

became known as one of the most accomplished bribe-takers

(vzyatotchniki) in the district.  His position, however, was so

very subordinate that he would never have become rich had he not

fallen upon a very ingenious expedient which completely succeeded.

Hearing that a small proprietor, who had an only daughter, had come

to live in the town for a few weeks, he took a room in the inn

where the newcomers lived, and when he had made their acquaintance

he fell dangerously ill.  Feeling his last hours approaching, he

sent for a priest, confided to him that he had amassed a large

fortune, and requested that a will should be drawn up.  In the will

he bequeathed large sums to all his relations, and a considerable

sum to the parish church.  The whole affair was to be kept a secret

till after his death, but his neighbour--the old gentleman with the

daughter--was called in to act as a witness.  When all this had

been done he did not die, but rapidly recovered, and now induced

the old gentleman to whom he had confided his secret to grant him

his daughter's hand.  The daughter had no objections to marry a man

possessed of such wealth, and the marriage was duly celebrated.

Shortly after this the father died--without discovering, it is to

be hoped, the hoax that had been perpetrated--and Alexei Petrovitch

became virtual possessor of a very comfortable little estate.  With

the change in his fortunes he completely changed his principles, or

at least his practice.  In all his dealings he was strictly honest.

He lent money, it is true, at from ten to fifteen per cent., but

that was considered in these parts not a very exorbitant rate of

interest, nor was he unnecessarily hard upon his debtors.



It may seem strange that an honourable man like the General should

receive in his house such a motley company, comprising men of

decidedly tarnished reputation; but in this respect he was not at

all peculiar.  One constantly meets in Russian society persons who

are known to have been guilty of flagrant dishonesty, and we find

that men who are themselves honourable enough associate with them

on friendly terms.  This social leniency, moral laxity, or whatever

else it may be called, is the result of various causes.  Several

concurrent influences have tended to lower the moral standard of

the Noblesse.  Formerly, when the noble lived on his estate, he

could play with impunity the petty tyrant, and could freely indulge

his legitimate and illegitimate caprices without any legal or moral

restraint.  I do not at all mean to assert that all proprietors

abused their authority, but I venture to say that no class of men

can long possess such enormous arbitrary power over those around

them without being thereby more or less demoralised.  When the

noble entered the service he had not the same immunity from

restraint--on the contrary, his position resembled rather that of

the serf--but he breathed an atmosphere of peculation and jobbery,

little conducive to moral purity and uprightness.  If an official

had refused to associate with those who were tainted with the

prevailing vices, he would have found himself completely isolated,

and would have been ridiculed as a modern Don Quixote.  Add to this

that all classes of the Russian people have a certain kindly,

apathetic good-nature which makes them very charitable towards

their neighbours, and that they do not always distinguish between

forgiving private injury and excusing public delinquencies.  If we

bear all this in mind, we may readily understand that in the time

of serfage and maladministration a man could be guilty of very

reprehensible practises without incurring social excommunication.



During the period of moral awakening, after the Crimean War and the

death of Nicholas I., society revelled in virtuous indignation

against the prevailing abuses, and placed on the pillory the most

prominent delinquents; but the intensity of the moral feeling has

declined, and something of the old apathy has returned.  This might

have been predicted by any one well acquainted with the character

and past history of the Russian people.  Russia advances on the

road of progress, not in that smooth, gradual, prosaic way to which

we are accustomed, but by a series of unconnected, frantic efforts,

each of which is naturally followed by a period of temporary

exhaustion.

