





CHAPTER XXXVI



INDUSTRIAL PROGRESS AND THE PROLETARIAT





Russia till Lately a Peasant Empire--Early Efforts to Introduce

Arts and Crafts--Peter the Great and His Successors--Manufacturing

Industry Long Remains an Exotic--The Cotton Industry--The Reforms

of Alexander II.--Protectionists and Free Trade--Progress under

High Tariffs--M. Witte's Policy--How Capital Was Obtained--Increase

of Exports--Foreign Firms Cross the Customs Frontier--Rapid

Development of Iron Industry--A Commercial Crisis--M. Witte's

Position Undermined by Agrarians and Doctrinaires--M. Plehve a

Formidable Opponent--His Apprehensions of Revolution--Fall of M.

Witte--The Industrial Proletariat.





Fifty years ago Russia was still essentially a peasant empire,

living by agriculture of a primitive type, and supplying her other

wants chiefly by home industries, as was the custom in Western

Europe during the Middle Ages.



For many generations her rulers had been trying to transplant into

their wide dominions the art and crafts of the West, but they had

formidable difficulties to contend with, and their success was not

nearly as great as they desired.  We know that as far back as the

fourteenth century there were cloth-workers in Moscow, for we read

in the chronicles that the workshops of these artisans were sacked

when the town was stormed by the Tartars.  Workers in metal had

also appeared in some of the larger towns by that time, but they do

not seem to have risen much above the level of ordinary

blacksmiths.  They were destined, however, to make more rapid

progress than other classes of artisans, because the old Tsars of

Muscovy, like other semi-barbarous potentates, admired and envied

the industries of more civilised countries mainly from the military

point of view.  What they wanted most was a plentiful supply of

good arms wherewith to defend themselves and attack their

neighbours, and it was to this object that their most strenuous

efforts were directed.



As early as 1475 Ivan III., the grandfather of Ivan the Terrible,

sent a delegate to Venice to seek out for him an architect who, in

addition to his own craft, knew how to make guns; and in due course

appeared in the Kremlin a certain Muroli, called Aristotle by his

contemporaries on account of his profound learning.  He undertook

"to build churches and palaces, to cast big bells and cannons, to

fire off the said cannons, and to make every sort of castings very

cunningly"; and for the exercise of these various arts it was

solemnly stipulated in a formal document that he should receive the

modest salary of ten roubles monthly.  With regard to the military

products, at least, the Venetian faithfully fulfilled his contract,

and in a short time the Tsar had the satisfaction of possessing a

"cannon-house," subsequently dignified with the name of "arsenal."

Some of the natives learned the foreign art, and exactly a century

later (1856) a Russian, or at least a Slav, called Tchekhof,

produced a famous "Tsar-cannon," weighing as much as 96,000 lbs.

The connection thus established with the mechanical arts of the

West was always afterwards maintained, and we find frequent notices

of the fact in contemporary writers.  In the reign of the

grandfather of Peter the Great, for example, two paper-works were

established by an Italian; and velvet for the Tsar and his Boyars,

gold brocades for ecclesiastical vestments, and rude kinds of glass

for ordinary purposes were manufactured under the august patronage

of the enlightened ruler.  His son Alexis went a good many steps

further, and scandalised his God-fearing orthodox subjects by his

love of foreign heretical inventions.  It was in his German suburb

of Moscow that young Peter, who was to be crowned "the Great," made

his first acquaintance with the useful arts of the West.



When the great reformer came to the throne he found in his Tsardom,

besides many workshops, some ten foundries, all of which were under

orders "to cast cannons, bombs, and bullets, and to make arms for

the service of the State."  This seemed to him only a beginning,

especially for the mining and iron industry, in which he was

particularly interested.  By importing foreign artificers and

placing at their disposal big estates, with numerous serfs, in the

districts where minerals were plentiful, and by carefully

stipulating that these foreigners should teach his subjects well,

and conceal from them none of the secrets of the craft, he created

in the Ural a great iron industry, which still exists at the

present day.  Finding by experience that State mines and State

ironworks were a heavy drain on his insufficiently replenished

treasury, he transferred some of them to private persons, and this

policy was followed occasionally by his successors.  Hence the

gigantic fortunes of the Demidofs and other families.  The

Shuvalovs, for example, in 1760 possessed, for the purpose of

working their mines and ironworks, no less than 33,000 serfs and a

corresponding amount of land.  Unfortunately the concessions were

generally given not to enterprising business-men, but to

influential court-dignitaries, who confined their attention to

squandering the revenues, and not a few of the mines and works

reverted to the Government.



The army required not only arms and ammunition, but also uniforms

and blankets.  Great attention, therefore, was paid to the woollen

industry from the reign of Peter downwards.  In the time of

Catherine there were already 120 cloth factories, but they were on

a very small scale, according to modern conceptions.  Ten factories

in Moscow, for example, had amongst them only 104 looms, 130

workers, and a yearly output for 200,000 roubles.



While thus largely influenced in its economic policy by military

considerations, the Government did not entirely neglect other

branches of manufacturing industry.  Ever since Russia had

pretensions to being a civilised power its rulers have always been

inclined to pay more attention to the ornamental than the useful--

to the varnish rather than the framework of civilisation--and we

need not therefore be surprised to find that long before the native

industry could supply the materials required for the ordinary wants

of humble life, attempts were made to produce such things as

Gobelin tapestries.  I mention this merely as an illustration of a

characteristic trait of the national character, the influence of

which may be found in many other spheres of official activity.



If Russia did not attain the industrial level of Western Europe, it

was not from want of ambition and effort on the part of the rulers.

They worked hard, if not always wisely, for this end.

Manufacturers were exempted from rates and taxes, and even from

military service, and some of them, as I have said, received large

estates from the Crown on the understanding that the serfs should

be employed as workmen.  At the same time they were protected from

foreign competition by prohibitive tariffs.  In a word, the

manufacturing industry was nursed and fostered in a way to satisfy

the most thorough-going protectionist, especially those branches

which worked up native raw material such as ores, flax, hemp, wool,

and tallow.  Occasionally the official interference and anxiety to

protect public interests went further than the manufacturers

desired.  On more than one occasion the authorities fixed the price

of certain kinds of manufactured goods, and in 1754 the Senate,

being anxious to protect the population from fires, ordered all

glass and iron works within a radius of 200 versts around Moscow to

be destroyed!  In spite of such obstacles, the manufacturing

industry as a whole made considerable progress.  Between 1729 and

1762 the number of establishments officially recognised as

factories rose from 26 to 335.



These results did not satisfy Catherine II., who ascended the

throne in 1762.  Under the influence of her friends, the French

Encyclopedistes, she imagined for a time that the official control

might be relaxed, and that the system of employing serfs in the

factories and foundries might be replaced by free labour, as in

Western Europe; monopolies might be abolished, and all liege

subjects, including the peasants, might be allowed to embark in

industrial undertakings as they pleased, "for the benefit of the

State and the nation."  All this looked very well on paper, but

Catherine never allowed her sentimental liberalism to injure

seriously the interests of her Empire, and she accordingly

refrained from putting the laissez-faire principle largely into

practice.  Though a good deal has been written about her economic

policy, it is hardly distinguishable from that of her predecessors.

Like them, she maintained high tariffs, accorded large subsidies,

and even prevented the export of raw material, in the hope that it

might be worked up at home; and when the prices in the woollen

market rose very high, she compelled the manufacturers to supply

the army with cloth at a price fixed by the authorities.  In short,

the old system remained practically unimpaired, and notwithstanding

the steady progress made during the reign of Nicholas I. (1825-55),

when the number of factory hands rose from 210,000 to 380,000, the

manufacturing industry as a whole continued to be, until the serfs

were emancipated in 1861, a hothouse plant which could flourish

only in an officially heated atmosphere.



There was one branch of it, however, to which this remark does not

apply.  The art of cotton-spinning and cotton-weaving struck deep

root in Russian soil.  After remaining for generations in the

condition of a cottage industry--the yarn being distributed among

the peasants and worked up by them in their own homes--it began,

about 1825, to be modernised.  Though it still required to be

protected against foreign competition, it rapidly outgrew the

necessity for direct official support.  Big factories driven by

steam-power were constructed, the number of hands employed rose to

110,000, and the foundations of great fortunes were laid.  Strange

to say, many of the future millionaires were uneducated serfs.

Sava Morozof, for example, who was to become one of the industrial

magnates of Moscow, was a serf belonging to a proprietor called

Ryumin; most of the others were serfs of Count Sheremetyef--the

owner of a large estate on which the industrial town of Ivanovo had

sprung up--who was proud of having millionaires among his serfs,

and who never abused his authority over them.  The great movement,

however, was not effected without the assistance of foreigners.

Foreign foremen were largely employed, and in the work of

organisation a leading part was played by a German called Ludwig

Knoop.  Beginning life as a commercial traveller for an English

firm, he soon became a large cotton importer, and when in 1840 a

feverish activity was produced in the Russian manufacturing world

by the Government's permission to import English machines, his firm

supplied these machines to the factories on condition of obtaining

a share in the business.  It has been calculated that it obtained

in this way a share in no less than 122 factories, and hence arose

among the peasantry a popular saying:





"Where there is a church, there you find a pope,

And where there is a factory, there you find a Knoop."*





The biggest creation of the firm was a factory built at Narva in

1856, with nearly half a million spindles driven by water-power.





* Gdye tserkov--tam pop;

A gdye fabrika--tam Knop.





In the second half of last century a revolution was brought about

in the manufacturing industry generally by the emancipation of the

serfs, the rapid extension of railways, the facilities for creating

limited liability companies, and by certain innovations in the

financial policy of the Government.  The emancipation put on the

market an unlimited supply of cheap labour; the construction of

railways in all directions increased a hundredfold the means of

communication; and the new banks and other credit institutions,

aided by an overwhelming influx of foreign capital, encouraged the

foundation and extension of industrial and commercial enterprise of

every description.  For a time there was great excitement.  It was

commonly supposed that in all matters relating to trade and

industry Russia had suddenly jumped up to the level of Western

Europe, and many people in St. Petersburg, carried away by the

prevailing enthusiasm for liberalism in general and the doctrines

of Free Trade in particular, were in favour of abolishing

protectionism as an antiquated restriction on liberty and an

obstacle to economic progress.



At one moment the Government was disposed to yield to the current,

but it was restrained by an influential group of conservative

Political Economists, who appealed to patriotic sentiment, and by

the Moscow manufacturers, who declared that Free Trade would ruin

the country.  After a little hesitation it proceeded to raise,

instead of lowering, the protectionist tariff.  In 1869-76 the ad

valorem duties were, on an average, under thirteen per cent., but

from that time onwards they rose steadily, until the last five

years of the century, when they averaged thirty-three per cent.,

and were for some articles very much higher.  In this way the

Moscow industrial magnates were protected against the influx of

cheap foreign goods, but they were not saved from foreign

competition, for many foreign manufacturers, in order to enjoy the

benefit of the high duties, founded factories in Russia.  Even the

firmly established cotton industry suffered from these intruders.

Industrial suburbs containing not a few cotton factories sprang up

around St. Petersburg; and a small Polish village called Lodz, near

the German frontier, grew rapidly into a prosperous town of 300,000

inhabitants, and became a serious rival to the ancient Muscovite

capital.  So severely was the competition of this young upstart

felt, that the Moscow merchants petitioned the Emperor to protect

them by drawing a customs frontier round the Polish provinces, but

their petition was not granted.



Under the shelter of the high tariffs the manufacturing industry as

a whole has made rapid progress, and the cotton trade has kept well

to the front.  In that branch, between 1861 and 1897, the number of

hands employed rose from 120,000 to 325,000, and the estimated

value of the products from 72 to 478 millions of roubles.  In 1899

the number of spindles was considerably over six millions, and the

number of automatic weaving machines 145,000.



The iron industry has likewise progressed rapidly, though it has

not yet outgrown the necessity for Government support, and it is

not yet able to provide for all home wants.  About forty years ago

it received a powerful impulse from the discovery that in the

provinces to the north of the Crimea and the Sea of Azof there were

enormous quantities of iron ore and beds of good coal in close

proximity to each other.  Thanks to this discovery and to other

facts of which I shall have occasion to speak presently, this

district, which had previously been agricultural and pastoral, has

outstripped the famous Ural region, and has become the Black

Country of Russia.  The vast lonely steppe, where formerly one saw

merely the peasant-farmer, the shepherd, and the Tchumak,* driving

along somnolently with his big, long-horned, white bullocks, is now

dotted over with busy industrial settlements of mushroom growth,

and great ironworks--some of them unfinished; while at night the

landscape is lit up with the lurid flames of gigantic blast-

furnaces.  In this wonderful transformation, as in the history of

Russian industrial progress generally, a great part was played by

foreigners.  The pioneer who did most in this district was an

Englishman, John Hughes, who began life as the son and pupil of a

Welsh blacksmith, and whose sons are now directors of the biggest

of the South Russian ironworks.





* The Tchumak, a familiar figure in the songs and legends of Little

Russia, was the carrier who before the construction of railways

transported the grain to the great markets, and brought back

merchandise to the interior.  He is gradually disappearing.





Much as the South has progressed industrially in recent years, it

still remains far behind those industrial portions of the country

which were thickly settled at an earlier date.  From this point of

view the most important region is the group of provinces clustering

round Moscow; next comes the St. Petersburg region, including

Livonia; and thirdly Poland.  As for the various kinds of industry,

the most important category is that of textile fabrics, the second

that of articles of nutrition, and the third that of ores and

metals.  The total production, if we may believe certain

statistical authorities, places Russia now among the industrial

nations of the world in the fifth place, immediately after the

United States, England, Germany, and France, and a little before

Austria.



The man who has in recent times carried out most energetically the

policy of protecting and fostering native industries is M. Witte, a

name now familiar to Western Europe.  An avowed disciple of the

great German economist, Friedrich List, about whose works he

published a brochure in 1888, he held firmly, from his youth

upwards, the doctrine that "each nation should above all things

develop harmoniously its natural resources to the highest possible

degree of independence, protecting its own industries and

preferring the national aim to the pecuniary advantage of

individuals."  As a corollary to this principle he declared that

purely agricultural countries are economically backward and

intellectually stagnant, being condemned to pay tribute to the

nations who have learned to work up their raw products into more

valuable commodities.  The good old English doctrine that certain

countries were intended by Providence to be eternally agricultural,

and that their function in the economy of the universe is to supply

raw material for the industrial nations, was always in his eyes an

abomination--an ingenious, nefarious invention of the Manchester

school, astutely invented for the purpose of keeping the younger

nations permanently in a state of economic bondage for the benefit

of English manufacturers.  To emancipate Russia from this thraldom

by enabling her to create a great native industry, sufficient to

supply all her own wants, was the aim of his policy and the

constant object of his untiring efforts.  Those who have had the

good fortune to know him personally must have often heard him

discourse eloquently on this theme, supporting his views by

quotations from the economists of his own school, and by

illustrations drawn from the history of his own and other

countries.



A necessary condition of realising this aim was that there should

be high tariffs.  These already existed, and they might be raised

still higher, but in themselves they were not enough.  For the

rapid development of the native industry an enormous capital was

required, and the first problem to be solved was how this capital

could be obtained.  At one moment the energetic minister conceived

the project of creating a fictitious capital by inflating the paper

currency; but this idea proved unpopular.  When broached in the

Council of State it encountered determined opposition.  Some of the

members of that body, especially M. Bunge, who had been himself

Minister of Finance, and who remembered the evil effects of the

inordinate inflation of the currency on foreign exchanges during

the Turkish War, advocated strongly the directly opposite course--a

return to gold monometallism, for which M. Vishnegradski, M.

Witte's immediate predecessor, had made considerable preparations.

Being a practical man without inveterate prejudices, M. Witte gave

up the scheme which he could not carry through, and adopted the

views of his opponents.  He would introduce the gold currency as

recommended; but how was the requisite capital to be obtained?  It

must be procured from abroad, somehow, and the simplest way seemed

to be to stimulate the export of native products.  For this purpose

the railways were extended,* the traffic rates manipulated, and the

means of transport improved generally.





* In 1892, when M. Witte undertook the financial administration,

there were 30,620 versts of railway, and at the end of 1900 there

were 51,288 versts.





A certain influx of gold was thus secured, but not nearly enough

for the object in view.*  Some more potent means, therefore, had to

be employed, and the inventive minister evolved a new scheme.  If

he could only induce foreign capitalists to undertake manufacturing

industries in Russia, they would, at one and the same time, bring

into the country the capital required, and they would cooperate

powerfully in that development of the national industry which he so

ardently wished.  No sooner had he roughly sketched out his plan--

for he was not a man to let the grass grow under his feet--than he

set himself to put it into execution by letting it be known in the

financial world that the Government was ready to open a great field

for lucrative investments, in the form of profitable enterprises

under the control of those who subscribed the capital.





* In 1891 the total value of the exports was roughly 70,000,000

pounds.  It then fell, in consequence of bad harvests, to 45

millions, and did not recover the previous maximum until 1897, when

it stood at 73 millions.  Thereafter there was a steady rise till

1901, when the total was estimated at 76 millions.





Foreign capitalists responded warmly to the call.  Crowds of

concession-hunters, projectors, company promoters, et hoc genus

omne, collected in St. Petersburg, offering their services on the

most tempting terms; and all of them who could make out a plausible

case were well received at the Ministry of Finance.  It was there

explained to them that in many branches of industry, such as the

manufacture of textile fabrics, there was little or no room for

newcomers, but that in others the prospects were most brilliant.

Take, for example, the iron industries of Southern Russia.  The

boundless mineral wealth of that region was still almost intact,

and the few works which had been there established were paying very

large dividends.  The works founded by John Hughes, for example,

had repeatedly divided considerably over twenty per cent., and

there was little fear for the future, because the Government had

embarked on a great scheme of railway extension, requiring an

unlimited amount of rails and rolling-stock.  What better opening

could be desired?  Certainly the opening seemed most attractive,

and into it rushed the crowd of company promoters, followed by

stock-jobbers and brokers, playing lively pieces of what the

Germans call Zukunftsmusik.  An unwary and confiding public,

especially in Belgium and France, listened to the enchanting

strains of the financial syrens, and invested largely.  Quickly the

number of completed ironworks in that region rose from nine to

seventeen, and in the short space of three years the output of pig-

iron was nearly doubled.  In 1900 there were 44 blast furnaces in

working order, and ten more were in course of construction.  And

all this time the Imperial revenue increased by leaps and bounds,

so that the introduction of the gold currency was effected without

difficulty.  M. Witte was declared to be the greatest minister of

his time--a Russian Colbert or Turgot, or perhaps the two rolled

into one.



Then came a change.  Competition and over-production led naturally

to a fall in prices, and at the same time the demand decreased,

because the railway-building activity of the Government slackened.

Alarmed at this state of things, the banks which had helped to

start and foster the huge and costly enterprises contracted their

credits.  By the end of 1899 the disenchantment was general and

widespread.  Some of the companies were so weighted by the

preliminary financial obligations, and had conducted their affairs

in such careless, reckless fashion, that they had soon to shut down

their mines and close their works.  Even solid undertakings

suffered.  The shares of the Briansk works, for example, which had

given dividends as high as 30 per cent., fell from 500 to 230.  The

Mamontof companies--supposed to be one of the strongest financial

groups in the country--had to suspend payment, and numerous other

failures occurred.  Nearly all the commercial banks, having

directly participated in the industrial concerns, were rudely

shaken.  M. Witte, who had been for a time the idol of a certain

section of the financial world, became very unpopular, and was

accused of misleading the investing public.  Among the accusations

brought against him some at least could easily be refuted.  He may

have made mistakes in his policy, and may have been himself over-

sanguine, but surely, as he subsequently replied to his accusers,

it was no part of his duty to warn company promoters and directors

that they should refrain from over-production, and that their

enterprises might not be as remunerative as they expected.  As to

whether there is any truth in the assertion that he held out

prospects of larger Government orders than he actually gave, I

cannot say.  That he cut down prices, and showed himself a hard man

to deal with, there seems no doubt.



The reader may naturally be inclined to jump to the conclusion that

the commercial crisis just referred to was the cause of M. Witte's

fall.  Such a conclusion would be entirely erroneous.  The crisis

happened in the winter of 1899-1900, and M. Witte remained Finance

Minister until the autumn of 1903.  His fall was the result of

causes of a totally different kind, and these I propose now to

explain, because the explanation will throw light on certain very

curious and characteristic conceptions at present current in the

Russian educated classes.



Of course there were certain causes of a purely personal kind, but

I shall dismiss them in a very few words.  I remember once asking a

well-informed friend of M. Witte's what he thought of him as an

administrator and a statesman.  The friend replied: "Imagine a

negro of the Gold Coast let loose in modern European civilisation!"

This reply, like most epigrammatic remarks, is a piece of gross

exaggeration, but it has a modicum of truth in it.  In the eyes of

well-trained Russian officials M. Witte was a titanic, reckless

character, capable at any moment of playing the part of the bull in

the china-shop.  As a masterful person, brusque in manner and

incapable of brooking contradiction, he had made for himself many

enemies; and his restless, irrepressible energy had led him to

encroach on the provinces of all his colleagues.  Possessing as he

did the control of the purse, his interference could not easily be

resisted.  The Ministers of Interior, War, Agriculture, Public

Works, Public Instruction, and Foreign Affairs had all occasion to

complain of his incursions into their departments.  In contrast to

his colleagues, he was not only extremely energetic, but he was

ever ready to assume an astounding amount of responsibility; and as

he was something of an opportunist, he was perhaps not always

quixotically scrupulous in the choice of expedients for attaining

his ends.



Altogether M. Witte was an inconvenient personage in an

administration in which strong personality is regarded as entirely

out of place, and in which personal initiative is supposed to

reside exclusively in the Tsar.  In addition to all this he was a

man who felt keenly, and when he was irritated he did not always

keep the unruly member under strict control.  If I am correctly

informed, it was some imprudent and not very respectful remarks,

repeated by a subordinate and transmitted by a Grand Duke to the

Tsar, which were the immediate cause of his transfer from the

influential post of Minister of Finance to the ornamental position

of President of the Council of Ministers; but that was merely the

proverbial last straw that broke the camel's back.  His position

was already undermined, and it is the undermining process which I

wish to describe.



The first to work for his overthrow were the Agrarian

Conservatives.  They could not deny that, from the purely fiscal

point of view, his administration was a marvellous success; for he

was rapidly doubling the revenue, and he had succeeded in replacing

the fluctuating depreciated paper currency by a gold coinage; but

they maintained that he was killing the goose that laid the golden

eggs.  Evidently the tax-paying power of the rural classes was

being overstrained, for they were falling more and more into

arrears in the payment of their taxes, and their impoverishment was

yearly increasing.  All their reserves had been exhausted, as was

shown by the famines of 1891-92, when the Government had to spend

hundreds of millions to feed them.  Whilst the land was losing its

fertility, those who had to live by it were increasing in numbers

at an alarming rate.  Already in some districts one-fifth of the

peasant households had no longer any land of their own, and of

those who still possessed land a large proportion had no longer the

cattle and horses necessary to till and manure their allotments.

No doubt M. Witte was beginning to perceive his mistake, and had

done something to palliate the evils by improving the system of

collecting the taxes and abolishing the duty on passports, but such

merely palliative remedies could have little effect.  While a few

capitalists were amassing gigantic fortunes, the masses were slowly

and surely advancing to the brink of starvation.  The welfare of

the agriculturists, who constitute nine-tenths of the whole

population, was being ruthlessly sacrificed, and for what?  For the

creation of a manufacturing industry which rested on an artificial,

precarious basis, and which had already begun to decline.



So far the Agrarians, who champion the interests of the

agricultural classes.  Their views were confirmed and their

arguments strengthened by an influential group of men whom I may

call, for want of a better name, the philosophers or doctrinaire

interpreters of history, who have, strange to say, more influence

in Russia than in any other country.



The Russian educated classes desire that the nation should be

wealthy and self-supporting, and they recognise that for this

purpose a large manufacturing industry is required; but they are

reluctant to make the sacrifices necessary to attain the object in

view, and they imagine that, somehow or other, these sacrifices may

be avoided.  Sympathising with this frame of mind, the doctrinaires

explain that the rich and prosperous countries of Europe and

America obtained their wealth and prosperity by so-called

"Capitalism"--that is to say, by a peculiar social organisation in

which the two main factors are a small body of rich capitalists and

manufacturers and an enormous pauper proletariat living from hand

to mouth, at the mercy of the heartless employers of labour.

Russia has lately followed in the footsteps of those wealthy

countries, and if she continues to do so she will inevitably be

saddled with the same disastrous results--plutocracy, pauperism,

unrestrained competition in all spheres of activity, and a greatly

intensified struggle for life, in which the weaker will necessarily

go to the wall.*





* Free competition in all spheres of activity, leading to social

inequality, plutocracy, and pauperism, is the favourite bugbear of

Russian theorists; and who is not a theorist in Russia?  The fact

indicates the prevalence of Socialist ideas in the educated

classes.





Happily there is, according to these theorists, a more excellent

way, and Russia can adopt it if she only remains true to certain

mysterious principles of her past historic development.  Without

attempting to expound those mysterious principles, to which I have

repeatedly referred in previous chapters, I may mention briefly

that the traditional patriarchal institutions on which the

theorists found their hopes of a happy social future for their

country are the rural Commune, the native home-industries, and the

peculiar co-operative institutions called Artels.  How these

remnants of a semi-patriarchal state of society are to be

practically developed in such a way as to withstand the competition

of manufacturing industry organised on modern "capitalist" lines,

no one has hitherto been able to explain satisfactorily, but many

people indulge in ingenious speculations on the subject, like

children planning the means of diverting with their little toy

spades a formidable inundation.  In my humble opinion, the whole

theory is a delusion; but it is held firmly--I might almost say

fanatically--by those who, in opposition to the indiscriminate

admirers of West-European and American civilisation, consider

themselves genuine Russians and exceptionally good patriots.  M.

Witte has never belonged to that class.  He believes that there is

only one road to national prosperity--the road by which Western

Europe has travelled--and along this road he tried to drive his

country as rapidly as possible.  He threw himself, therefore, heart

and soul into what his opponents call "Capitalism," by raising

State loans, organising banks and other credit institutions,

encouraging the creation and extension of big factories, which must

inevitably destroy the home industry, and even--horribile dictu!--

undermining the rural Commune, and thereby adding to the ranks of

the landless proletariat, in order to increase the amount of cheap

labour for the benefit of the capitalists.



With the arguments thus supplied by Agrarians and doctrinaires,

quite honest and well-meaning, according to their lights, it was

easy to sap M. Witte's position.  Among his opponents, the most

formidable was the late M. Plehve, Minister of Interior--a man of a

totally different stamp.  A few months before his tragic end I had

a long and interesting conversation with him, and I came away

deeply impressed.  Having repeatedly had conversations of a similar

kind with M. Witte, I could compare, or rather contrast, the two

men.  Both of them evidently possessed an exceptional amount of

mental power and energy, but in the one it was volcanic, and in the

other it was concentrated and thoroughly under control.  In

discussion, the one reminded me of the self-taught, slashing

swordsman; the other of the dexterous fencer, carefully trained in

the use of the foils, who never launches out beyond the point at

which he can quickly recover himself.  As to whether M. Plehve was

anything more than a bold, energetic, clever official there may be

differences of opinion, but he certainly could assume the airs of a

profound and polished statesman, capable of looking at things from

a much higher point of view than the ordinary tchinovnik, and he

had the talent of tacitly suggesting that a great deal of genuine,

enlightened statesmanship lay hidden under the smooth surface of

his cautious reserve.  Once or twice I could perceive that when

criticising the present state of things he had his volcanic

colleague in his mind's eye; but the covert allusions were so vague

and so carefully worded that the said colleague, if he had been

present, would hardly have been justified in entering a personal

protest.  A statesman of the higher type, I was made to feel,

should deal not with personalities, but with things, and it would

be altogether unbecoming to complain of a colleague in presence of

an outsider.  Thus his attitude towards his opponent was most

correct, but it was not difficult to infer that he had little

sympathy with the policy of the Ministry of Finance.



From other sources I learned the cause of this want of sympathy.

Being Minister of Interior, and having served long in the Police

Department, M. Plehve considered that his first duty was the

maintenance of public order and the protection of the person and

autocracy of his august master.  He was therefore the determined

enemy of revolutionary tendencies, in whatever garb or disguise

they might appear; and as a statesman he had to direct his

attention to everything likely to increase those tendencies in the

future.  Now it seemed that in the financial policy which had been

followed for some years there were germs of future revolutionary

fermentation.  The peasantry were becoming impoverished, and were

therefore more likely to listen to the insidious suggestions of

Socialist agitators; and already agrarian disturbances had occurred

in the provinces of Kharkof and Poltava.  The industrial

proletariat which was being rapidly created was being secretly

organised by the revolutionary Social Democrats, and already there

had been serious labour troubles in some of the large towns.  For

any future revolutionary movement the proletariat would naturally

supply recruits.  Then, at the other end of the social scale, a

class of rich capitalists was being created, and everybody who has

read a little history knows that a rich and powerful tiers etat

cannot be permanently conciliated with autocracy.  Though himself

neither an agrarian nor a Slavophil doctrinaire, M. Plehve could

not but have a certain sympathy with those who were forging

thunderbolts for the official annihilation of M. Witte.  He was too

practical a man to imagine that the hands on the dial of economic

progress could be set back and a return made to moribund

patriarchal institutions; but he thought that at least the pace

might be moderated.  The Minister of Finance need not be in such a

desperate, reckless hurry, and it was desirable to create

conservative forces which might counteract the revolutionary forces

which his impulsive colleague was inadvertently calling into

existence.



Some of the forgers of thunderbolts went a great deal further, and

asserted or insinuated that M. Witte was himself consciously a

revolutionist, with secret, malevolent intentions.  In support of

their insinuations they cited certain cases in which well-known

Socialists had been appointed professors in academies under the

control of the Ministry of Finance, and they pointed to the Peasant

Bank, which enjoyed M. Witte's special protection.  At first it had

been supposed that the bank would have an anti-revolutionary

influence by preventing the formation of a landless proletariat and

increasing the number of small land-owners, who are always and

everywhere conservative so far as the rights of private property

are concerned.



Unfortunately its success roused the fears of the more conservative

section of the landed proprietors.  These gentlemen, as I have

already mentioned, pointed out that the estates of the nobles were

rapidly passing into the hands of the peasantry, and that if this

process were allowed to continue the hereditary Noblesse, which had

always been the civilising element in the rural population, and the

surest support of the throne, would drift into the towns and there

sink into poverty or amalgamate with the commercial plutocracy, and

help to form a tiers etat which would be hostile to the Autocratic

Power.



In these circumstances it was evident that the headstrong Minister

of Finance could maintain his position only so long as he enjoyed

the energetic support of the Emperor, and this support, for reasons

which I have indicated above, failed him at the critical moment.

When his work was still unfinished he was suddenly compelled, by

the Emperor's command, to relinquish his post and accept a position

in which, it was supposed, he would cease to have any influence in

the administration.



Thus fell the Russian Colbert-Turgot, or whatever else he may be

called.  Whether financial difficulties in the future will lead to

his reinstatement as Minister of Finance remains to be seen; but in

any case his work cannot be undone.  He has increased manufacturing

industry to an unprecedented extent, and, as M. Plehve perceived,

the industrial proletariat which manufacturing industry on

capitalist lines always creates has provided a new field of

activity for the revolutionists.  I return, therefore, to the

evolution of the revolutionary movement in order to describe its

present phase, the first-fruits of which have been revealed in the

labour disturbances in St. Petersburg and other industrial centres.


