




Russia


  by Donald Mackenzie Wallace







PREFACE





The first edition of this work, published early in January, 1877,

contained the concentrated results of my studies during an

uninterrupted residence of six years in Russia--from the beginning

of 1870 to the end of 1875.  Since that time I have spent in the

European and Central Asian provinces, at different periods, nearly

two years more; and in the intervals I have endeavoured to keep in

touch with the progress of events.  My observations thus extend

over a period of thirty-five years.



When I began, a few months ago, to prepare for publication the

results of my more recent observations and researches, my intention

was to write an entirely new work under the title of "Russia in the

Twentieth Century," but I soon perceived that it would be

impossible to explain clearly the present state of things without

referring constantly to events of the past, and that I should be

obliged to embody in the new work a large portion of the old one.

The portion to be embodied grew rapidly to such proportions that,

in the course of a few weeks, I began to ask myself whether it

would not be better simply to recast and complete my old material.

With a view to deciding the question I prepared a list of the

principal changes which had taken place during the last quarter of

a century, and when I had marshalled them in logical order, I

recognised that they were neither so numerous nor so important as I

had supposed.  Certainly there had been much progress, but it had

been nearly all on the old lines.  Everywhere I perceived

continuity and evolution; nowhere could I discover radical changes

and new departures.  In the central and local administration the

reactionary policy of the latter half of Alexander II.'s reign had

been steadily maintained; the revolutionary movement had waxed and

waned, but its aims were essentially the same as of old; the Church

had remained in its usual somnolent condition; a grave agricultural

crisis affecting landed proprietors and peasants had begun, but it

was merely a development of a state of things which I had

previously described; the manufacturing industry had made gigantic

strides, but they were all in the direction which the most

competent observers had predicted; in foreign policy the old

principles of guiding the natural expansive forces along the lines

of least resistance, seeking to reach warm-water ports, and pegging

out territorial claims for the future were persistently followed.

No doubt there were pretty clear indications of more radical

changes to come, but these changes must belong to the future, and

it is merely with the past and the present that a writer who has no

pretensions to being a prophet has to deal.



Under these circumstances it seemed to me advisable to adopt a

middle course.  Instead of writing an entirely new work I

determined to prepare a much extended and amplified edition of the

old one, retaining such information about the past as seemed to me

of permanent value, and at the same time meeting as far as possible

the requirements of those who wish to know the present condition of

the country.



In accordance with this view I have revised, rearranged, and

supplemented the old material in the light of subsequent events,

and I have added five entirely new chapters--three on the

revolutionary movement, which has come into prominence since 1877;

one on the industrial progress, with which the latest phase of the

movement is closely connected; and one on the main lines of the

present situation as it appears to me at the moment of going to

press.



During the many years which I have devoted to the study of Russia,

I have received unstinted assistance from many different quarters.

Of the friends who originally facilitated my task, and to whom I

expressed my gratitude in the preface and notes of the early

editions, only three survive--Mme. de Novikoff, M. E. I. Yakushkin,

and Dr. Asher.  To the numerous friends who have kindly assisted me

in the present edition I must express my thanks collectively, but

there are two who stand out from the group so prominently that I

may be allowed to mention them personally: these are Prince

Alexander Grigorievitch Stcherbatof, who supplied me with

voluminous materials regarding the agrarian question generally and

the present condition of the peasantry in particular, and M. Albert

Brockhaus, who placed at my disposal the gigantic Russian

Encyclopaedia recently published by his firm (Entsiklopeditcheski

Slovar, Leipzig and St. Petersburg, 1890-1904).  This monumental

work, in forty-one volumes, is an inexhaustible storehouse of

accurate and well-digested information on all subjects connected

with the Russian Empire, and it has often been of great use to me

in matters of detail.



With regard to the last chapter of this edition I must claim the

reader's indulgence, because the meaning of the title, "the present

situation," changes from day to day, and I cannot foresee what

further changes may occur before the work reaches the hands of the

public.



LONDON, 22nd May, 1905.
