





XIII





Darrow, late that evening, threw himself into an armchair

before his fire and mused.



The room was propitious to meditation.  The red-veiled lamp,

the corners of shadow, the splashes of firelight on the

curves of old full-bodied wardrobes and cabinets, gave it an

air of intimacy increased by its faded hangings, its

slightly frayed and threadbare rugs.  Everything in it was

harmoniously shabby, with a subtle sought-for shabbiness in

which Darrow fancied he discerned the touch of Fraser Leath.

But Fraser Leath had grown so unimportant a factor in the

scheme of things that these marks of his presence caused the

young man no emotion beyond that of a faint retrospective

amusement.



The afternoon and evening had been perfect.



After a moment of concern over her step-son's departure,

Anna had surrendered herself to her happiness with an

impetuosity that Darrow had never suspected in her.  Early

in the afternoon they had gone out in the motor, traversing

miles of sober-tinted landscape in which, here and there, a

scarlet vineyard flamed, clattering through the streets of

stony villages, coming out on low slopes above the river, or

winding through the pale gold of narrow wood-roads with the

blue of clear-cut hills at their end.  Over everything lay a

faint sunshine that seemed dissolved in the still air, and

the smell of wet roots and decaying leaves was merged in the

pungent scent of burning underbrush.  Once, at the turn of a

wall, they stopped the motor before a ruined gateway and,

stumbling along a road full of ruts, stood before a little

old deserted house, fantastically carved and chimneyed,

which lay in a moat under the shade of ancient trees.  They

paced the paths between the trees, found a mouldy Temple of

Love on an islet among reeds and plantains, and, sitting on

a bench in the stable-yard, watched the pigeons circling

against the sunset over their cot of patterned brick. Then

the motor flew on into the dusk...



When they came in they sat beside the fire in the oak

drawing-room, and Darrow noticed how delicately her head

stood out against the sombre panelling, and mused on the

enjoyment there would always be in the mere fact of watching

her hands as they moved about among the tea-things...



They dined late, and facing her across the table, with its

low lights and flowers, he felt an extraordinary pleasure in

seeing her again in evening dress, and in letting his eyes

dwell on the proud shy set of her head, the way her dark

hair clasped it, and the girlish thinness of her neck above

the slight swell of the breast.  His imagination was struck

by the quality of reticence in her beauty.  She suggested a

fine portrait kept down to a few tones, or a Greek vase on

which the play of light is the only pattern.



After dinner they went out on the terrace for a look at the

moon-misted park.  Through the crepuscular whiteness the

trees hung in blotted masses.  Below the terrace, the garden

drew its dark diagrams between statues that stood like

muffled conspirators on the edge of the shadow.  Farther

off, the meadows unrolled a silver-shot tissue to the

mantling of mist above the river; and the autumn stars

trembled overhead like their own reflections seen in dim

water.



He lit his cigar, and they walked slowly up and down the

flags in the languid air, till he put an arm about her,

saying: "You mustn't stay till you're chilled"; then they

went back into the room and drew up their chairs to the

fire.



It seemed only a moment later that she said: "It must be

after eleven," and stood up and looked down on him, smiling

faintly.  He sat still, absorbing the look, and thinking:

"There'll be evenings and evenings"--till she came nearer,

bent over him, and with a hand on his shoulder said: "Good

night."



He got to his feet and put his arms about her.



"Good night," he answered, and held her fast; and they gave

each other a long kiss of promise and communion.



The memory of it glowed in him still as he sat over his

crumbling fire; but beneath his physical exultation he felt

a certain gravity of mood.  His happiness was in some sort

the rallying-point of many scattered purposes.  He summed it

up vaguely by saying to himself that to be loved by a woman

like that made "all the difference"...He was a little tired

of experimenting on life; he wanted to "take a line", to

follow things up, to centralize and concentrate, and produce

results.  Two or three more years of diplomacy--with her

beside him!--and then their real life would begin: study,

travel and book-making for him, and for her--well, the joy,

at any rate, of getting out of an atmosphere of bric-a-brac

and card-leaving into the open air of competing activities.



The desire for change had for some time been latent in him,

and his meeting with Mrs. Leath the previous spring had

given it a definite direction.  With such a comrade to focus

and stimulate his energies he felt modestly but agreeably

sure of "doing something".  And under this assurance was the

lurking sense that he was somehow worthy of his opportunity.

His life, on the whole, had been a creditable affair.  Out

of modest chances and middling talents he had built himself

a fairly marked personality, known some exceptional people,

done a number of interesting and a few rather difficult

things, and found himself, at thirty-seven, possessed of an

intellectual ambition sufficient to occupy the passage to a

robust and energetic old age. As for the private and

personal side of his life, it had come up to the current

standards, and if it had dropped, now and then, below a more

ideal measure, even these declines had been brief,

parenthetic, incidental.  In the recognized essentials he

had always remained strictly within the limit of his

scruples.



From this reassuring survey of his case he came back to the

contemplation of its crowning felicity.  His mind turned

again to his first meeting with Anna Summers and took up one

by one the threads of their faintly sketched romance.  He

dwelt with pardonable pride on the fact that fate had so

early marked him for the high privilege of possessing her:

it seemed to mean that they had really, in the truest sense

of the ill-used phrase, been made for each other.



Deeper still than all these satisfactions was the mere

elemental sense of well-being in her presence.  That, after

all, was what proved her to be the woman for him: the

pleasure he took in the set of her head, the way her hair

grew on her forehead and at the nape, her steady gaze when

he spoke, the grave freedom of her gait and gestures.  He

recalled every detail of her face, the fine veinings of the

temples, the bluish-brown shadows in her upper lids, and the

way the reflections of two stars seemed to form and break up

in her eyes when he held her close to him...



If he had had any doubt as to the nature of her feeling for

him those dissolving stars would have allayed it. She was

reserved, she was shy even, was what the shallow and

effusive would call "cold".  She was like a picture so hung

that it can be seen only at a certain angle: an angle known

to no one but its possessor.  The thought flattered his

sense of possessorship...He felt that the smile on his lips

would have been fatuous had it had a witness.  He was

thinking of her look when she had questioned him about his

meeting with Owen at the theatre: less of her words than of

her look, and of the effort the question cost her: the

reddening of her cheek, the deepening of the strained line

between her brows, the way her eyes sought shelter and then

turned and drew on him.  Pride and passion were in the

conflict--magnificent qualities in a wife!  The sight almost

made up for his momentary embarrassment at the rousing of a

memory which had no place in his present picture of himself.



Yes!  It was worth a good deal to watch that fight between

her instinct and her intelligence, and know one's self the

object of the struggle...



Mingled with these sensations were considerations of another

order.  He reflected with satisfaction that she was the kind

of woman with whom one would like to be seen in public.  It

would be distinctly agreeable to follow her into drawing-

rooms, to walk after her down the aisle of a theatre, to get

in and out of trains with her, to say "my wife" of her to

all sorts of people.  He draped these details in the

handsome phrase "She's a woman to be proud of", and felt

that this fact somehow justified and ennobled his

instinctive boyish satisfaction in loving her.



He stood up, rambled across the room and leaned out for a

while into the starry night.  Then he dropped again into his

armchair with a sigh of deep content.



"Oh, hang it," he suddenly exclaimed, "it's the best thing

that's ever happened to me, anyhow!"





The next day was even better.  He felt, and knew she felt,

that they had reached a clearer understanding of each other.

It was as if, after a swim through bright opposing waves,

with a dazzle of sun in their eyes, they had gained an inlet

in the shades of a cliff, where they could float on the

still surface and gaze far down into the depths.



Now and then, as they walked and talked, he felt a thrill of

youthful wonder at the coincidence of their views and their

experiences, at the way their minds leapt to the same point

in the same instant.



"The old delusion, I suppose," he smiled to himself. "Will

Nature never tire of the trick?"



But he knew it was more than that.  There were moments in

their talk when he felt, distinctly and unmistakably, the

solid ground of friendship underneath the whirling dance of

his sensations.  "How I should like her if I didn't love

her!" he summed it up, wondering at the miracle of such a

union.



In the course of the morning a telegram had come from Owen

Leath, announcing that he, his grandmother and Effie would

arrive from Dijon that afternoon at four. The station of the

main line was eight or ten miles from Givre, and Anna, soon

after three, left in the motor to meet the travellers.



When she had gone Darrow started for a walk, planning to get

back late, in order that the reunited family might have the

end of the afternoon to themselves.  He roamed the country-

side till long after dark, and the stable-clock of Givre was

striking seven as he walked up the avenue to the court.



In the hall, coming down the stairs, he encountered Anna.

Her face was serene, and his first glance showed him that

Owen had kept his word and that none of her forebodings had

been fulfilled.



She had just come down from the school-room, where Effie and

the governess were having supper; the little girl, she told

him, looked immensely better for her Swiss holiday, but was

dropping with sleep after the journey, and too tired to make

her habitual appearance in the drawing-room before being put

to bed.  Madame de Chantelle was resting, but would be down

for dinner; and as for Owen, Anna supposed he was off

somewhere in the park--he had a passion for prowling about

the park at nightfall...



Darrow followed her into the brown room, where the tea-table

had been left for him.  He declined her offer of tea, but

she lingered a moment to tell him that Owen had in fact kept

his word, and that Madame de Chantelle had come back in the

best of humours, and unsuspicious of the blow about to fall.



"She has enjoyed her month at Ouchy, and it has given her a

lot to talk about--her symptoms, and the rival doctors, and

the people at the hotel.  It seems she met your Ambassadress

there, and Lady Wantley, and some other London friends of

yours, and she's heard what she calls 'delightful things'

about you: she told me to tell you so.  She attaches great

importance to the fact that your grandmother was an Everard

of Albany.  She's prepared to open her arms to you.  I don't

know whether it won't make it harder for poor Owen...the

contrast, I mean...There are no Ambassadresses or Everards

to vouch for HIS choice!  But you'll help me, won't you?

You'll help me to help him?  To-morrow I'll tell you the

rest.  Now I must rush up and tuck in Effie..."



"Oh, you'll see, we'll pull it off for him!" he assured her;

"together, we can't fail to pull it off."



He stood and watched her with a smile as she fled down the

half-lit vista to the hall.

