






BOOK II



IX





The light of the October afternoon lay on an old high-roofed

house which enclosed in its long expanse of brick and

yellowish stone the breadth of a grassy court filled with

the shadow and sound of limes.



From the escutcheoned piers at the entrance of the court a

level drive, also shaded by limes, extended to a white-

barred gate beyond which an equally level avenue of grass,

cut through a wood, dwindled to a blue-green blur against a

sky banked with still white slopes of cloud.



In the court, half-way between house and drive, a lady

stood.  She held a parasol above her head, and looked now at

the house-front, with its double flight of steps meeting

before a glazed door under sculptured trophies, now down the

drive toward the grassy cutting through the wood.  Her air

was less of expectancy than of contemplation: she seemed not

so much to be watching for any one, or listening for an

approaching sound, as letting the whole aspect of the place

sink into her while she held herself open to its influence.

Yet it was no less apparent that the scene was not new to

her. There was no eagerness of investigation in her survey:

she seemed rather to be looking about her with eyes to

which, for some intimate inward reason, details long since

familiar had suddenly acquired an unwonted freshness.



This was in fact the exact sensation of which Mrs. Leath was

conscious as she came forth from the house and descended

into the sunlit court.  She had come to meet her step-son,

who was likely to be returning at that hour from an

afternoon's shooting in one of the more distant plantations,

and she carried in her hand the letter which had sent her in

search of him; but with her first step out of the house all

thought of him had been effaced by another series of

impressions.



The scene about her was known to satiety.  She had seen

Givre at all seasons of the year, and for the greater part

of every year, since the far-off day of her marriage; the

day when, ostensibly driving through its gates at her

husband's side, she had actually been carried there on a

cloud of iris-winged visions.



The possibilities which the place had then represented were

still vividly present to her.  The mere phrase "a French

chateau" had called up to her youthful fancy a throng of

romantic associations, poetic, pictorial and emotional; and

the serene face of the old house seated in its park among

the poplar-bordered meadows of middle France, had seemed, on

her first sight of it, to hold out to her a fate as noble

and dignified as its own mien.



Though she could still call up that phase of feeling it had

long since passed, and the house had for a time become to

her the very symbol of narrowness and monotony.  Then, with

the passing of years, it had gradually acquired a less

inimical character, had become, not again a castle of

dreams, evoker of fair images and romantic legend, but the

shell of a life slowly adjusted to its dwelling: the place

one came back to, the place where one had one's duties,

one's habits and one's books, the place one would naturally

live in till one died: a dull house, an inconvenient house,

of which one knew all the defects, the shabbinesses, the

discomforts, but to which one was so used that one could

hardly, after so long a time, think one's self away from it

without suffering a certain loss of identity.



Now, as it lay before her in the autumn mildness, its

mistress was surprised at her own insensibility.  She had

been trying to see the house through the eyes of an old

friend who, the next morning, would be driving up to it for

the first time; and in so doing she seemed to be opening her

own eyes upon it after a long interval of blindness.



The court was very still, yet full of a latent life: the

wheeling and rustling of pigeons about the rectangular yews

and across the sunny gravel; the sweep of rooks above the

lustrous greyish-purple slates of the roof, and the stir of

the tree-tops as they met the breeze which every day, at

that hour, came punctually up from the river.



Just such a latent animation glowed in Anna Leath.  In every

nerve and vein she was conscious of that equipoise of bliss

which the fearful human heart scarce dares acknowledge.  She

was not used to strong or full emotions; but she had always

known that she should not be afraid of them.  She was not

afraid now; but she felt a deep inward stillness.



The immediate effect of the feeling had been to send her

forth in quest of her step-son.  She wanted to stroll back

with him and have a quiet talk before they re-entered the

house.  It was always easy to talk to him, and at this

moment he was the one person to whom she could have spoken

without fear of disturbing her inner stillness.  She was

glad, for all sorts of reasons, that Madame de Chantelle and

Effie were still at Ouchy with the governess, and that she

and Owen had the house to themselves.  And she was glad that

even he was not yet in sight.  She wanted to be alone a

little longer; not to think, but to let the long slow waves

of joy break over her one by one.



She walked out of the court and sat down on one of the

benches that bordered the drive.  From her seat she had a

diagonal view of the long house-front and of the domed

chapel terminating one of the wings.  Beyond a gate in the

court-yard wall the flower-garden drew its dark-green

squares and raised its statues against the yellowing

background of the park.  In the borders only a few late

pinks and crimsons smouldered, but a peacock strutting in

the sun seemed to have gathered into his out-spread fan all

the summer glories of the place.



In Mrs. Leath's hand was the letter which had opened her

eyes to these things, and a smile rose to her lips at the

mere feeling of the paper between her fingers. The thrill it

sent through her gave a keener edge to every sense.  She

felt, saw, breathed the shining world as though a thin

impenetrable veil had suddenly been removed from it.



Just such a veil, she now perceived, had always hung between

herself and life.  It had been like the stage gauze which

gives an illusive air of reality to the painted scene behind

it, yet proves it, after all, to be no more than a painted

scene.



She had been hardly aware, in her girlhood, of differing

from others in this respect.  In the well-regulated well-fed

Summers world the unusual was regarded as either immoral or

ill-bred, and people with emotions were not visited.

Sometimes, with a sense of groping in a topsy-turvy

universe, Anna had wondered why everybody about her seemed

to ignore all the passions and sensations which formed the

stuff of great poetry and memorable action.  In a community

composed entirely of people like her parents and her

parents' friends she did not see how the magnificent things

one read about could ever have happened.  She was sure that

if anything of the kind had occurred in her immediate circle

her mother would have consulted the family clergyman, and

her father perhaps even have rung up the police; and her

sense of humour compelled her to own that, in the given

conditions, these precautions might not have been

unjustified.



Little by little the conditions conquered her, and she

learned to regard the substance of life as a mere canvas for

the embroideries of poet and painter, and its little swept

and fenced and tended surface as its actual substance.  It

was in the visioned region of action and emotion that her

fullest hours were spent; but it hardly occurred to her that

they might be translated into experience, or connected with

anything likely to happen to a young lady living in West

Fifty- fifth Street.



She perceived, indeed, that other girls, leading outwardly

the same life as herself, and seemingly unaware of her world

of hidden beauty, were yet possessed of some vital secret

which escaped her.  There seemed to be a kind of freemasonry

between them; they were wider awake than she, more alert,

and surer of their wants if not of their opinions.  She

supposed they were "cleverer", and accepted her inferiority

good-humouredly, half aware, within herself, of a reserve of

unused power which the others gave no sign of possessing.



This partly consoled her for missing so much of what made

their "good time"; but the resulting sense of exclusion, of

being somehow laughingly but firmly debarred from a share of

their privileges, threw her back on herself and deepened the

reserve which made envious mothers cite her as a model of

ladylike repression.

Love, she told herself, would one day release her from this

spell of unreality.  She was persuaded that the sublime

passion was the key to the enigma; but it was difficult to

relate her conception of love to the forms it wore in her

experience.  Two or three of the girls she had envied for

their superior acquaintance with the arts of life had

contracted, in the course of time, what were variously

described as "romantic" or "foolish" marriages; one even

made a runaway match, and languished for a while under a

cloud of social reprobation.  Here, then, was passion in

action, romance converted to reality; yet the heroines of

these exploits returned from them untransfigured, and their

husbands were as dull as ever when one had to sit next to

them at dinner.



Her own case, of course, would be different.  Some day she

would find the magic bridge between West Fifty-fifth Street

and life; once or twice she had even fancied that the clue

was in her hand.  The first time was when she had met young

Darrow.  She recalled even now the stir of the encounter.

But his passion swept over her like a wind that shakes the

roof of the forest without reaching its still glades or

rippling its hidden pools.  He was extraordinarily

intelligent and agreeable, and her heart beat faster when he

was with her.  He had a tall fair easy presence and a mind

in which the lights of irony played pleasantly through the

shades of feeling.  She liked to hear his voice almost as

much as to listen to what he was saying, and to listen to

what he was saying almost as much as to feel that he was

looking at her; but he wanted to kiss her, and she wanted to

talk to him about books and pictures, and have him insinuate

the eternal theme of their love into every subject they

discussed.



Whenever they were apart a reaction set in.  She wondered

how she could have been so cold, called herself a prude and

an idiot, questioned if any man could really care for her,

and got up in the dead of night to try new ways of doing her

hair.  But as soon as he reappeared her head straightened

itself on her slim neck and she sped her little shafts of

irony, or flew her little kites of erudition, while hot and

cold waves swept over her, and the things she really wanted

to say choked in her throat and burned the palms of her

hands.



Often she told herself that any silly girl who had waltzed

through a season would know better than she how to attract a

man and hold him; but when she said "a man" she did not

really mean George Darrow.



Then one day, at a dinner, she saw him sitting next to one

of the silly girls in question: the heroine of the elopement

which had shaken West Fifty-fifth Street to its base.  The

young lady had come back from her adventure no less silly

than when she went; and across the table the partner of her

flight, a fat young man with eye-glasses, sat stolidly

eating terrapin and talking about polo and investments.



The young woman was undoubtedly as silly as ever; yet after

watching her for a few minutes Miss Summers perceived that

she had somehow grown luminous, perilous, obscurely menacing

to nice girls and the young men they intended eventually to

accept.  Suddenly, at the sight, a rage of possessorship

awoke in her.  She must save Darrow, assert her right to him

at any price.  Pride and reticence went down in a hurricane

of jealousy.  She heard him laugh, and there was something

new in his laugh...She watched him talking, talking...He sat

slightly sideways, a faint smile beneath his lids, lowering

his voice as he lowered it when he talked to her.  She

caught the same inflections, but his eyes were different.

It would have offended her once if he had looked at her like

that.  Now her one thought was that none but she had a right

to be so looked at.  And that girl of all others!  What

illusions could he have about a girl who, hardly a year ago,

had made a fool of herself over the fat young man stolidly

eating terrapin across the table?  If that was where romance

and passion ended, it was better to take to district

visiting or algebra!



All night she lay awake and wondered: "What was she saying

to him?  How shall I learn to say such things?" and she

decided that her heart would tell her--that the next time

they were alone together the irresistible word would spring

to her lips.  He came the next day, and they were alone, and

all she found was: "I didn't know that you and Kitty Mayne

were such friends."



He answered with indifference that he didn't know it either,

and in the reaction of relief she declared: "She's certainly

ever so much prettier than she was..."



"She's rather good fun," he admitted, as though he had not

noticed her other advantages; and suddenly Anna saw in his

eyes the look she had seen there the previous evening.



She felt as if he were leagues and leagues away from her.

All her hopes dissolved, and she was conscious of sitting

rigidly, with high head and straight lips, while the

irresistible word fled with a last wing-beat into the golden

mist of her illusions...





She was still quivering with the pain and bewilderment of

this adventure when Fraser Leath appeared.  She met him

first in Italy, where she was travelling with her parents;

and the following winter he came to New York. In Italy he

had seemed interesting: in New York he became remarkable.

He seldom spoke of his life in Europe, and let drop but the

most incidental allusions to the friends, the tastes, the

pursuits which filled his cosmopolitan days; but in the

atmosphere of West Fifty-fifth Street he seemed the

embodiment of a storied past.  He presented Miss Summers

with a prettily-bound anthology of the old French poets and,

when she showed a discriminating pleasure in the gift,

observed with his grave smile: "I didn't suppose I should

find any one here who would feel about these things as I

do."  On another occasion he asked her acceptance of a half-

effaced eighteenth century pastel which he had surprisingly

picked up in a New York auction-room. "I know no one but you

who would really appreciate it," he explained.



He permitted himself no other comments, but these conveyed

with sufficient directness that he thought her worthy of a

different setting.  That she should be so regarded by a man

living in an atmosphere of art and beauty, and esteeming

them the vital elements of life, made her feel for the first

time that she was understood.  Here was some one whose scale

of values was the same as hers, and who thought her opinion

worth hearing on the very matters which they both considered

of supreme importance.  The discovery restored her self-

confidence, and she revealed herself to Mr. Leath as she had

never known how to reveal herself to Darrow.



As the courtship progressed, and they grew more

confidential, her suitor surprised and delighted her by

little explosions of revolutionary sentiment.  He said:

"Shall you mind, I wonder, if I tell you that you live in a

dread-fully conventional atmosphere?" and, seeing that she

manifestly did not mind: "Of course I shall say things now

and then that will horrify your dear delightful parents--I

shall shock them awfully, I warn you."



In confirmation of this warning he permitted himself an

occasional playful fling at the regular church-going of Mr.

and Mrs. Summers, at the innocuous character of the

literature in their library, and at their guileless

appreciations in art.  He even ventured to banter Mrs.

Summers on her refusal to receive the irrepressible Kitty

Mayne who, after a rapid passage with George Darrow, was now

involved in another and more flagrant adventure.



"In Europe, you know, the husband is regarded as the only

judge in such matters.  As long as he accepts the situation

--" Mr. Leath explained to Anna, who took his view the more

emphatically in order to convince herself that, personally,

she had none but the most tolerant sentiments toward the

lady.



The subversiveness of Mr. Leath's opinions was enhanced by

the distinction of his appearance and the reserve of his

manners.  He was like the anarchist with a gardenia in his

buttonhole who figures in the higher melodrama.  Every word,

every allusion, every note of his agreeably-modulated voice,

gave Anna a glimpse of a society at once freer and finer,

which observed the traditional forms but had discarded the

underlying prejudices; whereas the world she knew had

discarded many of the forms and kept almost all the

prejudices.



In such an atmosphere as his an eager young woman, curious

as to all the manifestations of life, yet instinctively

desiring that they should come to her in terms of beauty and

fine feeling, must surely find the largest scope for self-

expression.  Study, travel, the contact of the world, the

comradeship of a polished and enlightened mind, would

combine to enrich her days and form her character; and it

was only in the rare moments when Mr. Leath's symmetrical

blond mask bent over hers, and his kiss dropped on her like

a cold smooth pebble, that she questioned the completeness

of the joys he offered.



There had been a time when the walls on which her gaze now

rested had shed a glare of irony on these early dreams.  In

the first years of her marriage the sober symmetry of Givre

had suggested only her husband's neatly-balanced mind.  It

was a mind, she soon learned, contentedly absorbed in

formulating the conventions of the unconventional.  West

Fifty-fifth Street was no more conscientiously concerned

than Givre with the momentous question of "what people did";

it was only the type of deed investigated that was

different.  Mr. Leath collected his social instances with

the same seriousness and patience as his snuff-boxes.  He

exacted a rigid conformity to his rules of non-conformity

and his scepticism had the absolute accent of a dogma.  He

even cherished certain exceptions to his rules as the book-

collector prizes a "defective" first edition.  The

Protestant church-going of Anna's parents had provoked his

gentle sarcasm; but he prided himself on his mother's

devoutness, because Madame de Chantelle, in embracing her

second husband's creed, had become part of a society which

still observes the outward rites of piety.



Anna, in fact, had discovered in her amiable and elegant

mother-in-law an unexpected embodiment of the West Fifty-

fifth Street ideal.  Mrs. Summers and Madame de Chantelle,

however strongly they would have disagreed as to the

authorized source of Christian dogma, would have found

themselves completely in accord on all the momentous

minutiae of drawing-room conduct; yet Mr. Leath treated his

mother's foibles with a respect which Anna's experience of

him forbade her to attribute wholly to filial affection.



In the early days, when she was still questioning the Sphinx

instead of trying to find an answer to it, she ventured to

tax her husband with his inconsistency.



"You say your mother won't like it if I call on that amusing

little woman who came here the other day, and was let in by

mistake; but Madame de Chantelle tells me she lives with her

husband, and when mother refused to visit Kitty Mayne you

said----"



Mr. Leath's smile arrested her.  "My dear child, I don't

pretend to apply the principles of logic to my poor mother's

prejudices."



"But if you admit that they ARE prejudices----?"



"There are prejudices and prejudices.  My mother, of course,

got hers from Monsieur de Chantelle, and they seem to me as

much in their place in this house as the pot-pourri in your

hawthorn jar.  They preserve a social tradition of which I

should be sorry to lose the least perfume.  Of course I

don't expect you, just at first, to feel the difference, to

see the nuance.  In the case of little Madame de

Vireville, for instance: you point out that she's still

under her husband's roof.  Very true; and if she were merely

a Paris acquaintance--especially if you had met her, as one

still might, in the RIGHT KIND of house in Paris--I

should be the last to object to your visiting her.  But in

the country it's different.  Even the best provincial

society is what you would call narrow: I don't deny it; and

if some of our friends met Madame de Vireville at Givre--

well, it would produce a bad impression.  You're inclined to

ridicule such considerations, but gradually you'll come to

see their importance; and meanwhile, do trust me when I ask

you to be guided by my mother.  It is always well for a

stranger in an old society to err a little on the side of

what you call its prejudices but I should rather describe as

its traditions."



After that she no longer tried to laugh or argue her husband

out of his convictions.  They WERE convictions, and

therefore unassailable.  Nor was any insincerity implied in

the fact that they sometimes seemed to coincide with hers.

There were occasions when he really did look at things as

she did; but for reasons so different as to make the

distance between them all the greater.  Life, to Mr. Leath,

was like a walk through a carefully classified museum,

where, in moments of doubt, one had only to look at the

number and refer to one's catalogue; to his wife it was like

groping about in a huge dark lumber-room where the exploring

ray of curiosity lit up now some shape of breathing beauty

and now a mummy's grin.



In the first bewilderment of her new state these discoveries

had had the effect of dropping another layer of gauze

between herself and reality.  She seemed farther than ever

removed from the strong joys and pangs for which she felt

herself made.  She did not adopt her husband's views, but

insensibly she began to live his life.  She tried to throw a

compensating ardour into the secret excursions of her

spirit, and thus the old vicious distinction between romance

and reality was re-established for her, and she resigned

herself again to the belief that "real life" was neither

real nor alive.



The birth of her little girl swept away this delusion. At

last she felt herself in contact with the actual business of

living: but even this impression was not enduring.



Everything but the irreducible crude fact of child-bearing

assumed, in the Leath household, the same ghostly tinge of

unreality.  Her husband, at the time, was all that his own

ideal of a husband required.  He was attentive, and even

suitably moved: but as he sat by her bedside, and

thoughtfully proffered to her the list of people who had

"called to enquire", she looked first at him, and then at

the child between them, and wondered at the blundering

alchemy of Nature...



With the exception of the little girl herself, everything

connected with that time had grown curiously remote and

unimportant.  The days that had moved so slowly as they

passed seemed now to have plunged down head-long steeps of

time; and as she sat in the autumn sun, with Darrow's letter

in her hand, the history of Anna Leath appeared to its

heroine like some grey shadowy tale that she might have read

in an old book, one night as she was falling asleep...

