




XIV





If Darrow, on entering the drawing-room before dinner,

examined its new occupant with unusual interest, it was more

on Owen Leath's account than his own.



Anna's hints had roused his interest in the lad's love

affair, and he wondered what manner of girl the heroine of

the coming conflict might be.  He had guessed that Owen's

rebellion symbolized for his step-mother her own long

struggle against the Leath conventions, and he understood

that if Anna so passionately abetted him it was partly

because, as she owned, she wanted his liberation to coincide

with hers.



The lady who was to represent, in the impending struggle,

the forces of order and tradition was seated by the fire

when Darrow entered.  Among the flowers and old furniture of

the large pale-panelled room, Madame de Chantelle had the

inanimate elegance of a figure introduced into a "still-

life" to give the scale.  And this, Darrow reflected, was

exactly what she doubtless regarded as her chief obligation:

he was sure she thought a great deal of "measure", and

approved of most things only up to a certain point.

She was a woman of sixty, with a figure at once young and

old-fashioned.  Her fair faded tints, her quaint corseting,

the passementerie on her tight-waisted dress, the velvet

band on her tapering arm, made her resemble a "carte de

visite" photograph of the middle sixties.  One saw her,

younger but no less invincibly lady-like, leaning on a chair

with a fringed back, a curl in her neck, a locket on her

tuckered bosom, toward the end of an embossed morocco album

beginning with The Beauties of the Second Empire.



She received her daughter-in-law's suitor with an affability

which implied her knowledge and approval of his suit.

Darrow had already guessed her to be a person who would

instinctively oppose any suggested changes, and then, after

one had exhausted one's main arguments, unexpectedly yield

to some small incidental reason, and adhere doggedly to her

new position.  She boasted of her old-fashioned prejudices,

talked a good deal of being a grandmother, and made a show

of reaching up to tap Owen's shoulder, though his height was

little more than hers.



She was full of a small pale prattle about the people she

had seen at Ouchy, as to whom she had the minute statistical

information of a gazetteer, without any apparent sense of

personal differences.  She said to Darrow: "They tell me

things are very much changed in America...Of course in my

youth there WAS a Society"...She had no desire to return

there she was sure the standards must be so different.

"There are charming people everywhere...and one must always

look on the best side...but when one has lived among

Traditions it's difficult to adapt one's self to the new

ideas...These dreadful views of marriage...it's so hard to

explain them to my French relations...I'm thankful to say I

don't pretend to understand them myself!  But YOU'RE an

Everard--I told Anna last spring in London that one sees

that instantly"...



She wandered off to the cooking and the service of the hotel

at Ouchy.  She attached great importance to gastronomic

details and to the manners of hotel servants. There, too,

there was a falling off, she said.  "I don t know, of

course; but people say it's owing to the Americans.

Certainly my waiter had a way of slapping down the

dishes...they tell me that many of them are

Anarchists...belong to Unions, you know."  She appealed to

Darrow's reported knowledge of economic conditions to

confirm this ominous rumour.



After dinner Owen Leath wandered into the next room, where

the piano stood, and began to play among the shadows.  His

step-mother presently joined him, and Darrow sat alone with

Madame de Chantelle.



She took up the thread of her mild chat and carried it on at

the same pace as her knitting.  Her conversation resembled

the large loose-stranded web between her fingers: now and

then she dropped a stitch, and went on regardless of the gap

in the pattern.



Darrow listened with a lazy sense of well-being.  In the

mental lull of the after-dinner hour, with harmonious

memories murmuring through his mind, and the soft tints and

shadowy spaces of the fine old room charming his eyes to

indolence, Madame de Chantelle's discourse seemed not out of

place.  He could understand that, in the long run, the

atmosphere of Givre might be suffocating; but in his present

mood its very limitations had a grace.



Presently he found the chance to say a word in his own

behalf; and thereupon measured the advantage, never before

particularly apparent to him, of being related to the

Everards of Albany.  Madame de Chantelle's conception of her

native country--to which she had not returned since her

twentieth year--reminded him of an ancient geographer's map

of the Hyperborean regions. It was all a foggy blank, from

which only one or two fixed outlines emerged; and one of

these belonged to the Everards of Albany.



The fact that they offered such firm footing--formed, so to

speak, a friendly territory on which the opposing powers

could meet and treat--helped him through the task of

explaining and justifying himself as the successor of Fraser

Leath.  Madame de Chantelle could not resist such

incontestable claims.  She seemed to feel her son's hovering

and discriminating presence, and she gave Darrow the sense

that he was being tested and approved as a last addition to

the Leath Collection.



She also made him aware of the immense advantage he

possessed in belonging to the diplomatic profession. She

spoke of this humdrum calling as a Career, and gave Darrow

to understand that she supposed him to have been seducing

Duchesses when he was not negotiating Treaties.  He heard

again quaint phrases which romantic old ladies had used in

his youth: "Brilliant diplomatic society...social

advantages...the entree everywhere...nothing else

FORMS a young man in the same way..."  and she sighingly

added that she could have wished her grandson had chosen the

same path to glory.



Darrow prudently suppressed his own view of the profession,

as well as the fact that he had adopted it provisionally,

and for reasons less social than sociological; and the talk

presently passed on to the subject of his future plans.



Here again, Madame de Chantelle's awe of the Career made her

admit the necessity of Anna's consenting to an early

marriage.  The fact that Darrow was "ordered" to South

America seemed to put him in the romantic light of a young

soldier charged to lead a forlorn hope: she sighed and said:

"At such moments a wife's duty is at her husband's side."



The problem of Effie's future might have disturbed her, she

added; but since Anna, for a time, consented to leave the

little girl with her, that problem was at any rate deferred.

She spoke plaintively of the responsibility of looking after

her granddaughter, but Darrow divined that she enjoyed the

flavour of the word more than she felt the weight of the

fact.



"Effie's a perfect child.  She's more like my son, perhaps,

than dear Owen.  She'll never intentionally give me the

least trouble.  But of course the responsibility will be

great...I'm not sure I should dare to undertake it if it

were not for her having such a treasure of a governess.  Has

Anna told you about our little governess?  After all the

worry we had last year, with one impossible creature after

another, it seems providential, just now, to have found her.

At first we were afraid she was too young; but now we've the

greatest confidence in her.  So clever and amusing--and

SUCH a lady!  I don't say her education's all it might

be...no drawing or singing...but one can't have everything;

and she speaks Italian..."



Madame de Chantelle's fond insistence on the likeness

between Effie Leath and her father, if not particularly

gratifying to Darrow, had at least increased his desire to

see the little girl.  It gave him an odd feeling of

discomfort to think that she should have any of the

characteristics of the late Fraser Leath: he had, somehow,

fantastically pictured her as the mystical offspring of the

early tenderness between himself and Anna Summers.



His encounter with Effie took place the next morning, on the

lawn below the terrace, where he found her, in the early

sunshine, knocking about golf balls with her brother.

Almost at once, and with infinite relief, he saw that the

resemblance of which Madame de Chantelle boasted was mainly

external.  Even that discovery was slightly distasteful,

though Darrow was forced to own that Fraser Leath's

straight-featured fairness had lent itself to the production

of a peculiarly finished image of childish purity.  But it

was evident that other elements had also gone to the making

of Effie, and that another spirit sat in her eyes.  Her

serious handshake, her "pretty" greeting, were worthy of the

Leath tradition, and he guessed her to be more malleable

than Owen, more subject to the influences of Givre; but the

shout with which she returned to her romp had in it the note

of her mother's emancipation.



He had begged a holiday for her, and when Mrs. Leath

appeared he and she and the little girl went off for a

ramble.  Anna wished her daughter to have time to make

friends with Darrow before learning in what relation he was

to stand to her; and the three roamed the woods and fields

till the distant chime of the stable-clock made them turn

back for luncheon.



Effie, who was attended by a shaggy terrier, had picked up

two or three subordinate dogs at the stable; and as she

trotted on ahead with her yapping escort, Anna hung back to

throw a look at Darrow.



"Yes," he answered it, "she's exquisite...Oh, I see what I'm

asking of you!  But she'll be quite happy here, won't she?

And you must remember it won't be for long..."



Anna sighed her acquiescence.  "Oh, she'll be happy here.

It's her nature to be happy.  She'll apply herself to it,

conscientiously, as she does to her lessons, and to what she

calls 'being good'...In a way, you see, that's just what

worries me.  Her idea of 'being good' is to please the

person she's with--she puts her whole dear little mind on

it!  And so, if ever she's with the wrong person----"



"But surely there's no danger of that just now?  Madame de

Chantelle tells me that you've at last put your hand on a

perfect governess----"



Anna, without answering, glanced away from him toward her

daughter.



"It's lucky, at any rate," Darrow continued, "that Madame de

Chantelle thinks her so."



"Oh, I think very highly of her too."



"Highly enough to feel quite satisfied to leave her with

Effie?"



"Yes.  She's just the person for Effie.  Only, of course,

one never knows...She's young, and she might take it into

her head to leave us..."  After a pause she added: "I'm

naturally anxious to know what you think of her."



When they entered the house the hands of the hall clock

stood within a few minutes of the luncheon hour.  Anna led

Effie off to have her hair smoothed and Darrow wandered into

the oak sitting-room, which he found untenanted.  The sun

lay pleasantly on its brown walls, on the scattered books

and the flowers in old porcelain vases.  In his eyes

lingered the vision of the dark-haired mother mounting the

stairs with her little fair daughter.  The contrast between

them seemed a last touch of grace in the complex harmony of

things.  He stood in the window, looking out at the park,

and brooding inwardly upon his happiness...



He was roused by Effie's voice and the scamper of her feet

down the long floors behind him.



"Here he is!  Here he is!" she cried, flying over the

threshold.



He turned and stooped to her with a smile, and as she caught

his hand he perceived that she was trying to draw him toward

some one who had paused behind her in the doorway, and whom

he supposed to be her mother.



"HERE he is!" Effie repeated, with her sweet impatience.



The figure in the doorway came forward and Darrow, looking

up, found himself face to face with Sophy Viner.  They stood

still, a yard or two apart, and looked at each other without

speaking.



As they paused there, a shadow fell across one of the

terrace windows, and Owen Leath stepped whistling into the

room.  In his rough shooting clothes, with the glow of

exercise under his fair skin, he looked extraordinarily

light-hearted and happy.  Darrow, with a quick side-glance,

noticed this, and perceived also that the glow on the

youth's cheek had deepened suddenly to red.  He too stopped

short, and the three stood there motionless for a barely

perceptible beat of time.  During its lapse, Darrow's eyes

had turned back from Owen's face to that of the girl between

them.  He had the sense that, whatever was done, it was he

who must do it, and that it must be done immediately.  He

went forward and held out his hand.



"How do you do, Miss Viner?"



She answered: "How do you do?" in a voice that sounded clear

and natural; and the next moment he again became aware of

steps behind him, and knew that Mrs. Leath was in the room.



To his strained senses there seemed to be another just

measurable pause before Anna said, looking gaily about the

little group: "Has Owen introduced you?  This is Effie's

friend, Miss Viner."



Effie, still hanging on her governess's arm, pressed herself

closer with a little gesture of appropriation; and Miss

Viner laid her hand on her pupil's hair.



Darrow felt that Anna's eyes had turned to him.



"I think Miss Viner and I have met already--several years

ago in London."



"I remember," said Sophy Viner, in the same clear voice.



"How charming!  Then we're all friends.  But luncheon must be

ready," said Mrs. Leath.



She turned back to the door, and the little procession moved

down the two long drawing-rooms, with Effie waltzing on

ahead.

