




XV





Madame de Chantelle and Anna had planned, for the afternoon,

a visit to a remotely situated acquaintance whom the

introduction of the motor had transformed into a neighbour.

Effie was to pay for her morning's holiday by an hour or two

in the school-room, and Owen suggested that he and Darrow

should betake themselves to a distant covert in the

desultory quest for pheasants.



Darrow was not an ardent sportsman, but any pretext for

physical activity would have been acceptable at the moment;

and he was glad both to get away from the house and not to

be left to himself.



When he came downstairs the motor was at the door, and Anna

stood before the hall mirror, swathing her hat in veils.

She turned at the sound of his step and smiled at him for a

long full moment.



"I'd no idea you knew Miss Viner," she said, as he helped

her into her long coat.



"It came back to me, luckily, that I'd seen her two or three

times in London, several years ago.  She was secretary, or

something of the sort, in the background of a house where I

used to dine."



He loathed the slighting indifference of the phrase, but he

had uttered it deliberately, had been secretly practising it

all through the interminable hour at the luncheon-table.

Now that it was spoken, he shivered at its note of

condescension.  In such cases one was almost sure to

overdo...But Anna seemed to notice nothing unusual.



"Was she really?  You must tell me all about it--tell me

exactly how she struck you.  I'm so glad it turns out that

you know her."



"'Know' is rather exaggerated: we used to pass each other on

the stairs."



Madame de Chantelle and Owen appeared together as he spoke,

and Anna, gathering up her wraps, said: "You'll tell me

about that, then.  Try and remember everything you can."



As he tramped through the woods at his young host's side,

Darrow felt the partial relief from thought produced by

exercise and the obligation to talk.  Little as he cared for

shooting, he had the habit of concentration which makes it

natural for a man to throw himself wholly into whatever

business he has in hand, and there were moments of the

afternoon when a sudden whirr in the undergrowth, a vivider

gleam against the hazy browns and greys of the woods, was

enough to fill the foreground of his attention.  But all the

while, behind these voluntarily emphasized sensations, his

secret consciousness continued to revolve on a loud wheel of

thought.  For a time it seemed to be sweeping him through

deep gulfs of darkness.  His sensations were too swift and

swarming to be disentangled.  He had an almost physical

sense of struggling for air, of battling helplessly with

material obstructions, as though the russet covert through

which he trudged were the heart of a maleficent jungle...



Snatches of his companion's talk drifted to him

intermittently through the confusion of his thoughts. He

caught eager self-revealing phrases, and understood that

Owen was saying things about himself, perhaps hinting

indirectly at the hopes for which Darrow had been prepared

by Anna's confidences.  He had already become aware that the

lad liked him, and had meant to take the first opportunity

of showing that he reciprocated the feeling.  But the effort

of fixing his attention on Owen's words was so great that it

left no power for more than the briefest and most

inexpressive replies.



Young Leath, it appeared, felt that he had reached a

turning-point in his career, a height from which he could

impartially survey his past progress and projected

endeavour.  At one time he had had musical and literary

yearnings, visions of desultory artistic indulgence; but

these had of late been superseded by the resolute

determination to plunge into practical life.



"I don't want, you see," Darrow heard him explaining, "to

drift into what my grandmother, poor dear, is trying to make

of me: an adjunct of Givre.  I don't want--hang it all!--to

slip into collecting sensations as my father collected

snuff-boxes.  I want Effie to have Givre--it's my

grandmother's, you know, to do as she likes with; and I've

understood lately that if it belonged to me it would

gradually gobble me up.  I want to get out of it, into a

life that's big and ugly and struggling.  If I can extract

beauty out of THAT, so much the better: that'll prove my

vocation.  But I want to MAKE beauty, not be drowned in

the ready-made, like a bee in a pot of honey."



Darrow knew that he was being appealed to for corroboration

of these views and for encouragement in the course to which

they pointed.  To his own ears his answers sounded now curt,

now irrelevant: at one moment he seemed chillingly

indifferent, at another he heard himself launching out on a

flood of hazy discursiveness.  He dared not look at Owen,

for fear of detecting the lad's surprise at these senseless

transitions.  And through the confusion of his inward

struggles and outward loquacity he heard the ceaseless trip-

hammer beat of the question: "What in God's name shall I

do?"...



To get back to the house before Anna's return seemed his

most pressing necessity.  He did not clearly know why: he

simply felt that he ought to be there.  At one moment it

occurred to him that Miss Viner might want to speak to him

alone--and again, in the same flash, that it would probably

be the last thing she would want...At any rate, he felt he

ought to try to speak to HER; or at least be prepared to

do so, if the chance should occur...



Finally, toward four, he told his companion that he had some

letters on his mind and must get back to the house and

despatch them before the ladies returned.  He left Owen with

the beater and walked on to the edge of the covert.  At the

park gates he struck obliquely through the trees, following

a grass avenue at the end of which he had caught a glimpse

of the roof of the chapel.  A grey haze had blotted out the

sun and the still air clung about him tepidly.  At length

the house-front raised before him its expanse of damp-

silvered brick, and he was struck afresh by the high decorum

of its calm lines and soberly massed surfaces.  It made him

feel, in the turbid coil of his fears and passions, like a

muddy tramp forcing his way into some pure sequestered

shrine...



By and bye, he knew, he should have to think the complex

horror out, slowly, systematically, bit by bit; but for the

moment it was whirling him about so fast that he could just

clutch at its sharp spikes and be tossed off again.  Only

one definite immediate fact stuck in his quivering grasp.

He must give the girl every chance--must hold himself

passive till she had taken them...



In the court Effie ran up to him with her leaping terrier.



"I was coming out to meet you--you and Owen.  Miss Viner was

coming, too, and then she couldn't because she's got such a

headache.  I'm afraid I gave it to her because I did my

division so disgracefully.  It's too bad, isn't it?  But

won't you walk back with me?  Nurse won't mind the least bit;

she'd so much rather go in to tea."



Darrow excused himself laughingly, on the plea that he had

letters to write, which was much worse than having a

headache, and not infrequently resulted in one.



"Oh, then you can go and write them in Owen's study. That's

where gentlemen always write their letters."



She flew on with her dog and Darrow pursued his way to the

house.  Effie's suggestion struck him as useful. He had

pictured himself as vaguely drifting about the drawing-

rooms, and had perceived the difficulty of Miss Viner's

having to seek him there; but the study, a small room on the

right of the hall, was in easy sight from the staircase, and

so situated that there would be nothing marked in his being

found there in talk with her.



He went in, leaving the door open, and sat down at the

writing-table.  The room was a friendly heterogeneous place,

the one repository, in the well-ordered and amply-servanted

house, of all its unclassified odds and ends: Effie's

croquet-box and fishing rods, Owen's guns and golf-sticks

and racquets, his step-mother's flower-baskets and gardening

implements, even Madame de Chantelle's embroidery frame, and

the back numbers of the Catholic Weekly.  The early twilight

had begun to fall, and presently a slanting ray across the

desk showed Darrow that a servant was coming across the hall

with a lamp.  He pulled out a sheet of note-paper and began

to write at random, while the man, entering, put the lamp at

his elbow and vaguely "straightened" the heap of newspapers

tossed on the divan.  Then his steps died away and Darrow

sat leaning his head on his locked hands.



Presently another step sounded on the stairs, wavered a

moment and then moved past the threshold of the study.

Darrow got up and walked into the hall, which was still

unlighted.  In the dimness he saw Sophy Viner standing by

the hall door in her hat and jacket.  She stopped at sight

of him, her hand on the door-bolt, and they stood for a

second without speaking.



"Have you seen Effie?" she suddenly asked.  "She went out to

meet you."



"She DID meet me, just now, in the court.  She's gone on

to join her brother."



Darrow spoke as naturally as he could, but his voice sounded

to his own ears like an amateur actor's in a "light" part.



Miss Viner, without answering, drew back the bolt.  He

watched her in silence as the door swung open; then he said:

"She has her

nurse with her.  She won't be long."



She stood irresolute, and he added: "I was writing in there

--won't you come and have a little talk?  Every one's out."



The last words struck him as not well-chosen, but there was

no time to choose.  She paused a second longer and then

crossed the threshold of the study.  At luncheon she had sat

with her back to the window, and beyond noting that she had

grown a little thinner, and had less colour and vivacity, he

had seen no change in her; but now, as the lamplight fell on

her face, its whiteness startled him.



"Poor thing...poor thing...what in heaven's name can she

suppose?" he wondered.



"Do sit down--I want to talk to you," he said and pushed a

chair toward her.



She did not seem to see it, or, if she did, she deliberately

chose another seat.  He came back to his own chair and

leaned his elbows on the blotter.  She faced him from the

farther side of the table.



"You promised to let me hear from you now and then," he

began awkwardly, and with a sharp sense of his awkwardness.



A faint smile made her face more tragic.  "Did I?  There was

nothing to tell.  I've had no history--like the happy

countries..."



He waited a moment before asking: "You ARE happy here?"



"I WAS," she said with a faint emphasis.



"Why do you say 'was'?  You're surely not thinking of going?

There can't be kinder people anywhere."  Darrow hardly knew

what he was saying; but her answer came to him with deadly

definiteness.



"I suppose it depends on you whether I go or stay."



"On me?" He stared at her across Owen's scattered papers.

"Good God!  What can you think of me, to say that?"



The mockery of the question flashed back at him from her

wretched face.  She stood up, wandered away, and leaned an

instant in the darkening window-frame.  From there she

turned to fling back at him: "Don't imagine I'm the least

bit sorry for anything!"



He steadied his elbows on the table and hid his face in his

hands.  It was harder, oh, damnably harder, than he had

expected!  Arguments, expedients, palliations, evasions, all

seemed to be slipping away from him: he was left face to

face with the mere graceless fact of his inferiority.  He

lifted his head to ask at random: "You've been here, then,

ever since?"



"Since June; yes.  It turned out that the Farlows were

hunting for me--all the while--for this."



She stood facing him, her back to the window, evidently

impatient to be gone, yet with something still to say, or

that she expected to hear him say.  The sense of her

expectancy benumbed him.  What in heaven's name could he say

to her that was not an offense or a mockery?



"Your idea of the theatre--you gave that up at once, then?"



"Oh, the theatre!" She gave a little laugh.  "I couldn't

wait for the theatre.  I had to take the first thing that

offered; I took this."



He pushed on haltingly: "I'm glad--extremely glad--you're

happy here...I'd counted on your letting me know if there

was anything I could do...The theatre, now--if you still

regret it--if you're not contented here...I know people in

that line in London--I'm certain I can manage it for you

when I get back----"



She moved up to the table and leaned over it to ask, in a

voice that was hardly above a whisper: "Then you DO want

me to leave?  Is that it?"



He dropped his arms with a groan.  "Good heavens!  How can

you think such things?  At the time, you know, I begged you

to let me do what I could, but you wouldn't hear of it...and

ever since I've been wanting to be of use--to do something,

anything, to help you..."



She heard him through, motionless, without a quiver of the

clasped hands she rested on the edge of the table.



"If you want to help me, then--you can help me to stay

here," she brought out with low-toned intensity.



Through the stillness of the pause which followed, the bray

of a motor-horn sounded far down the drive.  Instantly she

turned, with a last white look at him, and fled from the

room and up the stairs.  He stood motionless, benumbed by

the shock of her last words.  She was afraid, then--afraid

of him--sick with fear of him!  The discovery beat him down

to a lower depth...



The motor-horn sounded again, close at hand, and he turned

and went up to his room.  His letter-writing was a

sufficient pretext for not immediately joining the party

about the tea-table, and he wanted to be alone and try to

put a little order into his tumultuous thinking.



Upstairs, the room held out the intimate welcome of its lamp

and fire.  Everything in it exhaled the same sense of peace

and stability which, two evenings before, had lulled him to

complacent meditation.  His armchair again invited him from

the hearth, but he was too agitated to sit still, and with

sunk head and hands clasped behind his back he began to

wander up and down the room.



His five minutes with Sophy Viner had flashed strange lights

into the shadowy corners of his consciousness. The girl's

absolute candour, her hard ardent honesty, was for the

moment the vividest point in his thoughts. He wondered anew,

as he had wondered before, at the way in which the harsh

discipline of life had stripped her of false sentiment

without laying the least touch on her pride.  When they had

parted, five months before, she had quietly but decidedly

rejected all his offers of help, even to the suggestion of

his trying to further her theatrical aims: she had made it

clear that she wished their brief alliance to leave no trace

on their lives save that of its own smiling memory. But now

that they were unexpectedly confronted in a situation which

seemed, to her terrified fancy, to put her at his mercy, her

first impulse was to defend her right to the place she had

won, and to learn as quickly as possible if he meant to

dispute it.  While he had pictured her as shrinking away

from him in a tremor of self-effacement she had watched his

movements, made sure of her opportunity, and come straight

down to "have it out" with him.  He was so struck by the

frankness and energy of the proceeding that for a moment he

lost sight of the view of his own character implied in it.



"Poor thing...poor thing!" he could only go on saying; and

with the repetition of the words the picture of himself as

she must see him pitiably took shape again.



He understood then, for the first time, how vague, in

comparison with hers, had been his own vision of the part he

had played in the brief episode of their relation.  The

incident had left in him a sense of exasperation and self-

contempt, but that, as he now perceived, was chiefly, if not

altogether, as it bore on his preconceived ideal of his

attitude toward another woman.  He had fallen below his own

standard of sentimental loyalty, and if he thought of Sophy

Viner it was mainly as the chance instrument of his lapse.

These considerations were not agreeable to his pride, but

they were forced on him by the example of her valiant

common-sense.  If he had cut a sorry figure in the business,

he owed it to her not to close his eyes to the fact any

longer...



But when he opened them, what did he see?  The situation,

detestable at best, would yet have been relatively simple if

protecting Sophy Viner had been the only duty involved in

it.  The fact that that duty was paramount did not do away

with the contingent obligations.  It was Darrow's instinct,

in difficult moments, to go straight to the bottom of the

difficulty; but he had never before had to take so dark a

dive as this, and for the minute he shivered on the

brink...Well, his first duty, at any rate, was to the girl:

he must let her see that he meant to fulfill it to the last

jot, and then try to find out how to square the fulfillment

with the other problems already in his path...
