





XVI





In the oak room he found Mrs. Leath, her mother-in-law and

Effie.  The group, as he came toward it down the long

drawing-rooms, composed itself prettily about the tea-table.

The lamps and the fire crossed their gleams on silver and

porcelain, on the bright haze of Effie's hair and on the

whiteness of Anna's forehead, as she leaned back in her

chair behind the tea-urn.



She did not move at Darrow's approach, but lifted to him a

deep gaze of peace and confidence.  The look seemed to throw

about him the spell of a divine security: he felt the joy of

a convalescent suddenly waking to find the sunlight on his

face.



Madame de Chantelle, across her knitting, discoursed of

their afternoon's excursion, with occasional pauses induced

by the hypnotic effect of the fresh air; and Effie,

kneeling, on the hearth, softly but insistently sought to

implant in her terrier's mind some notion of the relation

between a vertical attitude and sugar.



Darrow took a chair behind the little girl, so that he might

look across at her mother.  It was almost a necessity for

him, at the moment, to let his eyes rest on Anna's face, and

to meet, now and then, the proud shyness of her gaze.



Madame de Chantelle presently enquired what had become of

Owen, and a moment later the window behind her opened, and

her grandson, gun in hand, came in from the terrace.  As he

stood there in the lamp-light, with dead leaves and bits of

bramble clinging to his mud-spattered clothes, the scent of

the night about him and its chill on his pale bright face,

he really had the look of a young faun strayed in from the

forest.



Effie abandoned the terrier to fly to him.  "Oh, Owen, where

in the world have you been?  I walked miles and miles with

Nurse and couldn't find you, and we met Jean and he said he

didn't know where you'd gone."



"Nobody knows where I go, or what I see when I get there--

that's the beauty of it!" he laughed back at her.  "But if

you're good," he added, "I'll tell you about it one of these

days."



"Oh, now, Owen, now!  I don't really believe I'll ever be

much better than I am now."



"Let Owen have his tea first," her mother suggested; but the

young man, declining the offer, propped his gun against the

wall, and, lighting a cigarette, began to pace up and down

the room in a way that reminded Darrow of his own caged

wanderings.  Effie pursued him with her blandishments, and

for a while he poured out to her a low-voiced stream of

nonsense; then he sat down beside his step-mother and leaned

over to help himself to tea.



"Where's Miss Viner?" he asked, as Effie climbed up on him.

"Why isn't she here to chain up this ungovernable infant?"



"Poor Miss Viner has a headache.  Effie says she went to her

room as soon as lessons were over, and sent word that she

wouldn't be down for tea."



"Ah," said Owen, abruptly setting down his cup.  He stood

up, lit another cigarette, and wandered away to the piano in

the room beyond.



From the twilight where he sat a lonely music, borne on

fantastic chords, floated to the group about the tea-table.

Under its influence Madame de Chantelle's meditative pauses

increased in length and frequency, and Effie stretched

herself on the hearth, her drowsy head against the dog.

Presently her nurse appeared, and Anna rose at the same

time.  "Stop a minute in my sitting-room on your way up,"

she paused to say to Darrow as she went.



A few hours earlier, her request would have brought him

instantly to his feet.  She had given him, on the day of his

arrival, an inviting glimpse of the spacious book-lined room

above stairs in which she had gathered together all the

tokens of her personal tastes: the retreat in which, as one

might fancy, Anna Leath had hidden the restless ghost of

Anna Summers; and the thought of a talk with her there had

been in his mind ever since.  But now he sat motionless, as

if spell-bound by the play of Madame de Chantelle's needles

and the pulsations of Owen's fitful music.



"She will want to ask me about the girl," he repeated to

himself, with a fresh sense of the insidious taint that

embittered all his thoughts; the hand of the slender-

columned clock on the mantel-piece had spanned a half-hour

before shame at his own indecision finally drew him to his

feet.



From her writing-table, where she sat over a pile of

letters, Anna lifted her happy smile.  The impulse to press

his lips to it made him come close and draw her upward.  She

threw her head back, as if surprised at the abruptness of

the gesture; then her face leaned to his with the slow droop

of a flower.  He felt again the sweep of the secret tides,

and all his fears went down in them.



She sat down in the sofa-corner by the fire and he drew an

armchair close to her.  His gaze roamed peacefully about the

quiet room.



"It's just like you--it is you," he said, as his eyes came

back to her.



"It's a good place to be alone in--I don't think I've ever

before cared to talk with any one here."



"Let's be quiet, then: it's the best way of talking."



"Yes; but we must save it up till later.  There are things I

want to say to you now."



He leaned back in his chair.  "Say them, then, and I'll

listen."



"Oh, no.  I want you to tell me about Miss Viner."



"About Miss Viner?" He summoned up a look of faint

interrogation.



He thought she seemed surprised at his surprise.  "It's

important, naturally," she explained, "that I should find

out all I can about her before I leave."



"Important on Effie's account?"



"On Effie's account--of course."



"Of course...But you've every reason to be satisfied,

haven't you?"



"Every apparent reason.  We all like her.  Effie's very fond

of her, and she seems to have a delightful influence on the

child.  But we know so little, after all--about her

antecedents, I mean, and her past history.  That's why I

want you to try and recall everything you heard about her

when you used to see her in London."



"Oh, on that score I'm afraid I sha'n't be of much use. As I

told you, she was a mere shadow in the background of the

house I saw her in--and that was four or five years ago..."



"When she was with a Mrs. Murrett?"



"Yes; an appalling woman who runs a roaring dinner-factory

that used now and then to catch me in its wheels.  I escaped

from them long ago; but in my time there used to be half a

dozen fagged 'hands' to tend the machine, and Miss Viner was

one of them.  I'm glad she's out of it, poor girl!"

"Then you never really saw anything of her there?"



"I never had the chance.  Mrs. Murrett discouraged any

competition on the part of her subordinates."



"Especially such pretty ones, I suppose?" Darrow made no

comment, and she continued: "And Mrs. Murrett's own opinion

--if she'd offered you one--probably wouldn't have been of

much value?"



"Only in so far as her disapproval would, on general

principles, have been a good mark for Miss Viner.  But

surely," he went on after a pause, "you could have found out

about her from the people through whom you first heard of

her?"



Anna smiled.  "Oh, we heard of her through Adelaide Painter

--;" and in reply to his glance of interrogation she

explained that the lady in question was a spinster of South

Braintree, Massachusetts, who, having come to Paris some

thirty years earlier, to nurse a brother through an illness,

had ever since protestingly and provisionally camped there

in a state of contemptuous protestation oddly manifested by

her never taking the slip-covers off her drawing-room

chairs.  Her long residence on Gallic soil had not mitigated

her hostility toward the creed and customs of the race, but

though she always referred to the Catholic Church as the

Scarlet Woman and took the darkest views of French private

life, Madame de Chantelle placed great reliance on her

judgment and experience, and in every domestic crisis the

irreducible Adelaide was immediately summoned to Givre.



"It's all the odder because my mother-in-law, since her

second marriage, has lived so much in the country that she's

practically lost sight of all her other American friends.

Besides which, you can see how completely she has identified

herself with Monsieur de Chantelle's nationality and adopted

French habits and prejudices. Yet when anything goes wrong

she always sends for Adelaide Painter, who's more American

than the Stars and Stripes, and might have left South

Braintree yesterday, if she hadn't, rather, brought it over

with her in her trunk."



Darrow laughed.  "Well, then, if South Braintree vouches for

Miss Viner----"



"Oh, but only indirectly.  When we had that odious adventure

with Mademoiselle Grumeau, who'd been so highly recommended

by Monsieur de Chantelle's aunt, the Chanoinesse, Adelaide

was of course sent for, and she said at once: 'I'm not the

least bit surprised.  I've always told you that what you

wanted for Effie was a sweet American girl, and not one of

these nasty foreigners.'  Unluckily she couldn't, at the

moment, put her hand on a sweet American; but she presently

heard of Miss Viner through the Farlows, an excellent couple

who live in the Quartier Latin and write about French life

for the American papers.  I was only too thankful to find

anyone who was vouched for by decent people; and so far I've

had no cause to regret my choice.  But I know, after all,

very little about Miss Viner; and there are all kinds of

reasons why I want, as soon as possible, to find out more--

to find out all I can."



"Since you've got to leave Effie I understand your feeling

in that way.  But is there, in such a case, any

recommendation worth half as much as your own direct

experience?"



"No; and it's been so favourable that I was ready to accept

it as conclusive.  Only, naturally, when I found you'd known

her in London I was in hopes you'd give me some more

specific reasons for liking her as much as I do."



"I'm afraid I can give you nothing more specific than my

general vague impression that she seems very plucky and

extremely nice."



"You don't, at any rate, know anything specific to the

contrary?"



"To the contrary?  How should I?  I'm not conscious of ever

having heard any one say two words about her.  I only infer

that she must have pluck and character to have stuck it out

so long at Mrs. Murrett's."



"Yes, poor thing!  She has pluck, certainly; and pride, too;

which must have made it all the harder."  Anna rose to her

feet.  "You don't know how glad I am that your impression's

on the whole so good.  I particularly wanted you to like

her."



He drew her to him with a smile.  "On that condition I'm

prepared to love even Adelaide Painter."



"I almost hope you wont have the chance to--poor Adelaide!

Her appearance here always coincides with a catastrophe."



"Oh, then I must manage to meet her elsewhere."  He held Anna

closer, saying to himself, as he smoothed back the hair from

her forehead: "What does anything matter but just THIS?

--Must I go now?" he added aloud.



She answered absently: "It must be time to dress"; then she

drew back a little and laid her hands on his shoulders.  "My

love--oh, my dear love!" she said.



It came to him that they were the first words of endearment

he had heard her speak, and their rareness gave them a magic

quality of reassurance, as though no danger could strike

through such a shield.



A knock on the door made them draw apart.  Anna lifted her

hand to her hair and Darrow stooped to examine a photograph

of Effie on the writing-table.



"Come in!" Anna said.



The door opened and Sophy Viner entered.  Seeing Darrow, she

drew back.



"Do come in, Miss Viner," Anna repeated, looking at her

kindly.



The girl, a quick red in her cheeks, still hesitated on the

threshold.



"I'm so sorry; but Effie has mislaid her Latin grammar, and

I thought she might have left it here.  I need it to prepare

for tomorrow's lesson."



"Is this it?" Darrow asked, picking up a book from the

table.



"Oh, thank you!"



He held it out to her and she took it and moved to the door.



"Wait a minute, please, Miss Viner," Anna said; and as the

girl turned back, she went on with her quiet smile: "Effie

told us you'd gone to your room with a headache. You mustn't

sit up over tomorrow's lessons if you don't feel well."



Sophy's blush deepened.  "But you see I have to. Latin's one

of my weak points, and there's generally only one page of

this book between me and Effie."  She threw the words off

with a half-ironic smile.  "Do excuse my disturbing you,"

she added.



"You didn't disturb me," Anna answered.  Darrow perceived

that she was looking intently at the girl, as though struck

by something tense and tremulous in her face, her voice, her

whole mien and attitude.  "You DO look tired.  You'd

much better go straight to bed. Effie won't be sorry to skip

her Latin."



"Thank you--but I'm really all right," murmured Sophy Viner.

Her glance, making a swift circuit of the room, dwelt for an

appreciable instant on the intimate propinquity of arm-chair

and sofa-corner; then she turned back to the door.
