




		CHAPTER THIRTY-FIFTH.

	------------------------Life, with you,
	Glows in the brain and dances in the arteries;
	'Tis like the wine some joyous guest hath quaffed,
	That glads the heart and elevates the fancy:
	Mine is the poor residuum of the cup,
	Vapid, and dull, and tasteless, only soiling,
	With its base dregs, the vessel that contains it.
						Old Play.

  ``Now, only think what a man my brother is, Mr. Blattergowl,
for a wise man and a learned man, to bring this Yerl into our
house without speaking a word to a body! And there's the
distress of thae Mucklebackits---we canna get a fin o' fish---and
we hae nae time to send ower to Fairport for beef, and the
mutton's but new killed---and that silly fliskmahoy, Jenny
Rintherout, has taen the exies, and done naething but laugh
and greet, the skirl at the tail o' the guffaw, for twa days successfully---
and now we maun ask that strange man, that's as grand
and as grave as the Yerl himsell, to stand at the sideboard!
and I canna gang into the kitchen to direct onything, for he's
hovering there, making some pousowdie<*> for my Lord, for he

* _Pousowdie,_---Miscellaneous mess.

doesna eat like ither folk neither---And how to sort the strange
servant man at dinner time---I am sure, Mr. Blattergowl, a'thegither,
it passes my judgment.''

  ``Truly, Miss Griselda,'' replied the divine, ``Monkbarns was
inconsiderate. He should have taen a day to see the invitation,
as they do wi' the titular's condescendence in the process of
valuation and sale. But the great man could not have come on
a sudden to ony house in this parish where he could have been
better served with _vivers_---that I must say---and also that the
steam from the kitchen is very gratifying to my nostrils;---and
if ye have ony household affairs to attend to, Mrs. Griselda,
never make a stranger of me---I can amuse mysell very weel
with the larger copy of Erskine's Institutes.''

  And taking down from the window-seat that amusing folio,
(the Scottish Coke upon Littleton), he opened it, as if instinctively,
at the tenth title of Book Second, ``of Teinds or Tythes,''
and was presently deeply wrapped up in an abstruse discussion
concerning the temporality of benefices.

  The entertainment, about which Miss Oldbuck expressed so
much anxiety, was at length placed upon the table; and the
Earl of Glenallan, for the first time since the date of his calamity,
sat at a stranger's board, surrounded by strangers. He
seemed to himself like a man in a dream, or one whose brain
was not fully recovered from the effects of an intoxicating
potion. Relieved, as he had that morning been, from the image
of guilt which had so long haunted his imagination, he felt his
sorrows as a lighter and more tolerable load, but was still
unable to take any share in the conversation that passed around
him. It was, indeed, of a cast very different from that which
he had been accustomed to. The bluntness of Oldbuck, the
tiresome apologetic harangues of his sister, the pedantry of the
divine, and the vivacity of the young soldier, which savoured
much more of the camp than of the court, were all new to a
nobleman who had lived in a retired and melancholy state for
so many years, that the manners of the world seemed to him
equally strange and unpleasing. Miss M`Intyre alone, from the
natural politeness and unpretending simplicity of her manners,
appeared to belong to that class of society to which he had
been accustomed in his earlier and better days.

  Nor did Lord Glenallan's deportment less surprise the company.
Though a plain but excellent family-dinner was provided
(for, as Mr. Blattergowl had justly said, it was impossible
to surprise Miss Griselda when her larder was empty), and
though the Antiquary boasted his best port, and assimilated
it to the Falernian of Horace, Lord Glenallan was proof to
the allurements of both. His servant placed before him a small
mess of vegetables, that very dish, the cooking of which had
alarmed Miss Griselda, arranged with the most minute and
scrupulous neatness. He ate sparingly of these provisions;
and a glass of pure water, sparkling from the fountain-head,
completed his repast. Such, his servant said, had been his
lordship's diet for very many years, unless upon the high festivals
of the Church, or when company of the first rank were entertained
at Glenallan House, when he relaxed a little in the
austerity of his diet, and permitted himself a glass or two of
wine. But at Monkbarns, no anchoret could have made a
more simple and scanty meal.

  The Antiquary was a gentleman, as we have seen, in feeling,
but blunt and careless in expression, from the habit of living
with those before whom he had nothing to suppress. He
attacked his noble guest without scruple on the severity of his
regimen.

  ``A few half-cold greens and potatoes---a glass of ice-cold
water to wash them down---antiquity gives no warrant for it,
my lord. This house used to be accounted a _hospitium,_ a place
of retreat for Christians; but your lordship's diet is that of a
heathen Pythagorean, or Indian Bramin---nay, more severe
than either, if you refuse these fine apples.''

  ``I am a Catholic, you are aware,'' said Lord Glenallan,
wishing to escape from the discussion, ``and you know that our
church''-----

  ``Lays down many rules of mortification,'' proceeded the
dauntless Antiquary; ``but I never heard that they were quite
so rigorously practised---Bear witness my predecessor, John of
the Girnel, or the jolly Abbot, who gave his name to this
apple, my lord.''

  And as he pared the fruit, in spite of his sister's ``O fie,
Monkbarns!'' and the prolonged cough of the minister, accompanied
by a shake of his huge wig, the Antiquary proceeded to
detail the intrigue which had given rise to the fame of the
abbot's apple with more slyness and circumstantiality than was
at all necessary. His jest (as may readily be conceived) missed
fire, for this anecdote of conventual gallantry failed to produce
the slightest smile on the visage of the Earl. Oldbuck then
took up the subject of Ossian, Macpherson, and Mac-Cribb;
but Lord Glenallan had never so much as heard of any of the
three, so little conversant had he been with modern literature. 
The conversation was now in some danger of flagging, or of
falling into the hands of Mr. Blattergowl, who had just pronounced
the formidable word, ``teind-free,'' when the subject
of the French Revolution was started---a political event on
which Lord Glenallan looked with all the prejudiced horror of
a bigoted Catholic and zealous aristocrat. Oldbuck was far
from carrying his detestation of its principles to such a
length.

  ``There were many men in the first Constituent Assembly,''
he said, ``who held sound Whiggish doctrines, and were for
settling the Constitution with a proper provision for the liberties
of the people. And if a set of furious madmen were now in
possession of the government, it was,'' he continued, ``what
often happened in great revolutions, where extreme measures
are adopted in the fury of the moment, and the State resembles
an agitated pendulum which swings from side to side for some
time ere it can acquire its due and perpendicular station. Or
it might be likened to a storm or hurricane, which, passing over
a region, does great damage in its passage, yet sweeps away
stagnant and unwholesome vapours, and repays, in future
health and fertility, its immediate desolation and ravage.''

  The Earl shook his head; but having neither spirit nor
inclination for debate, he suffered the argument to pass uncontested.

  This discussion served to introduce the young soldier's experiences;
and he spoke of the actions in which he, had been
engaged, with modesty, and at the same time with an air of
spirit and zeal which delighted the Earl, who had been bred
up, like others of his house, in the opinion that the trade of
arms was the first duty of man, and believed that to employ
them against the French was a sort of holy warfare.

  ``What would I give,'' said he apart to Oldbuck, as they rose
to join the ladies in the drawing-room, ``what would I give to
have a son of such spirit as that young gentleman!---He wants
something of address and manner, something of polish, which
mixing in good society would soon give him; but with what
zeal and animation he expresses himself---how fond of his profession
---how loud in the praise of others---how modest when
speaking of himself!''

  ``Hector is much obliged to you, my lord,'' replied his uncle,
gratified, yet not so much so as to suppress his consciousness of
his own mental superiority over the young soldier; ``I believe
in my heart nobody ever spoke half so much good of him
before, except perhaps the sergeant of his company, when
was wheedling a Highland recruit to enlist with him. He is a
good lad notwithstanding, although he be not quite the hero
your lordship supposes him, and although my commendations
rather attest the kindness than the vivacity of his character. 
In fact, his high spirit is a sort of constitutional vehemence,
which attends him in everything he sets about, and is often
very inconvenient to his friends. I saw him to-day engage in
an animated contest with a _phoca,_ or seal (_sealgh,_ our people
more properly call them, retaining the Gothic guttural _gh_),
with as much vehemence as if he had fought against Dumourier
---Marry, my lord, the _phoca_ had the better, as the said Dumourier
had of some other folks. And he'll talk with equal if
not superior rapture of the good behaviour of a pointer bitch, as
of the plan of a campaign.''

  ``He shall have full permission to sport over my grounds,''
said the Earl, ``if he is so fond of that exercise.''

  ``You will bind him to you, my lord,'' said Monkbarns, ``body
and soul: give him leave to crack off his birding-piece at a poor
covey of partridges or moor-fowl, and he's yours for ever---I
will enchant him by the intelligence. But O, my lord, that you
could have seen my phoenix Lovel!---the very prince and chieftain
of the youth of this age; and not destitute of spirit neither
---I promise you he gave my termagant kinsman a _quid pro quo_
---a Rowland for his Oliver, as the vulgar say, alluding to the
two celebrated Paladins of Charlemagne.''

  After coffee, Lord Glenallan requested a private interview
with the Antiquary, and was ushered to his library.

  ``I must withdraw you from your own amiable family,'' he
said, ``to involve you in the perplexities of an unhappy man. 
You are acquainted with the world, from which I have long been
banished; for Glenallan House has been to me rather a prison
than a dwelling, although a prison which I had neither fortitude
nor spirit to break from.''

  ``Let me first ask your lordship,'' said the Antiquary, ``what
are your own wishes and designs in this matter?''

  ``I wish most especially,'' answered Lord Glenallan, ``to
declare my luckless marriage, and to vindicate the reputation of
the unhappy Eveline---that is, if you see a possibility of doing
so without making public the conduct of my mother.''

  ``_Suum cuique tribuito,_'' said the Antiquary; ``do right to
everyone. The memory of that unhappy young lady has too
long suffered, and I think it might be cleared without further
impeaching that of your mother, than by letting it be understood
in general that she greatly disapproved and bitterly
opposed the match. All---forgive me, my lord---all who ever
heard of the late Countess of Glenallan, will learn that without
much surprise.''

  ``But you forget one horrible circumstance, Mr. Oldbuck,''
said the Earl, in an agitated voice.

  ``I am not aware of it,'' replied the Antiquary.

  ``The fate of the infant---its disappearance with the confidential
attendant of my mother, and the dreadful surmises
which may be drawn from my conversation with Elspeth.''

  ``If you would have my free opinion, my lord,'' answered
Mr. Oldbuck, ``and will not catch too rapidly at it as matter
of hope, I would say that it is very possible the child yet lives. 
For thus much I ascertained, by my former inquiries concerning
the event of that deplorable evening, that a child and woman
were carried that night from the cottage at the Craigburnfoot
in a carriage and four by your brother Edward Geraldin Neville,
whose journey towards England with these companions I traced
for several stages. I believed then it was a part of the family
compact to carry a child whom you meant to stigmatize with
illegitimacy, out of that country where chance might have raised
protectors and proofs of its rights. But I now think that your
brother, having reason, like yourself, to believe the child stained
with shame yet more indelible, had nevertheless withdrawn it,
partly from regard to the honour of his house, partly from the
risk to which it might have been exposed in the neighbourhood
of the Lady Glenallan.''

  As he spoke, the Earl of Glenallan grew extremely pale, and
had nearly fallen from his chair.---The alarmed Antiquary ran
hither and thither looking for remedies; but his museum, though
sufficiently well filled with a vast variety of useless matters,
contained nothing that could be serviceable on the present or
any other occasion. As he posted out of the room to borrow
his sister's salts, he could not help giving a constitutional growl
of chagrin and wonder at the various incidents which had converted
his mansion, first into an hospital for a wounded duellist,
and now into the sick chamber of a dying nobleman. ``And
yet,'' said he, ``I have always kept aloof from the soldiery and
the peerage. My _c<oe>nobitium_ has only next to be made a lying-in
hospital, and then, I trow, the transformation will be complete.''

  When he returned with the remedy, Lord Glenallan was
much better. The new and unexpected light which Mr. Oldbuck
had thrown upon the melancholy history of his family had
almost overpowered him. ``You think, then, Mr. Oldbuck---
for you are capable of thinking, which I am not---you think,
then, that it is possible---that is, not impossible---my child may
yet live?''

  ``I think,'' said the Antiquary, ``it is impossible that it could
come to any violent harm through your brother's means. He
was known to be a gay and dissipated man, but not cruel nor
dishonourable; nor is it possible, that, if he had intended any
foul play, he would have placed himself so forward in the charge
of the infant, as I will prove to your lordship he did.''

  So saying, Mr. Oldbuck opened a drawer of the cabinet of
his ancestor Aldobrand, and produced a bundle of papers tied
with a black ribband, and labelled,---Examinations, etc., taken
by Jonathan Oldbuck, J. P., upon the 18th of February, 17---;
a little under was written, in a small hand, _Eheu Evelina_! The
tears dropped fast from the Earl's eyes, as he endeavoured, in
vain, to unfasten the knot which secured these documents.

  ``Your lordship,'' said Mr. Oldbuck, ``had better not read
these at present. Agitated as you are, and having much
business before you, you must not exhaust your strength. Your
brother's succession is now, I presume, your own, and it will be
easy for you to make inquiry among his servants and retainers,
so as to hear where the child is, if, fortunately, it shall be still
alive.''

  ``I dare hardly hope it,'' said the Earl, with a deep sigh. 
``Why should my brother have been silent to me?''

  ``Nay, my lord, why should he have communicated to your
lordship the existence of a being whom you must have supposed
the offspring of''------

  ``Most true---there is an obvious and a kind reason for his
being silent. If anything, indeed, could have added to the
horror of the ghastly dream that has poisoned my whole existence,
it must have been the knowledge that such a child of
misery existed.''

  ``Then,'' continued the Antiquary, ``although it would be
rash to conclude, at the distance of more than twenty years,
that your son must needs be still alive because he was not
destroyed in infancy, I own I think you should instantly set on
foot inquiries.''

  ``It shall be done,'' replied Lord Glenallan, catching eagerly
at the hope held out to him, the first he had nourished for
many years;---``I will write to a faithful steward of my father,
who acted in the same capacity under my brother Neville---But,
Mr. Oldbuck, I am not my brother's heir.''

  ``Indeed!---I am sorry for that, my lord---it is a noble estate,
and the ruins of the old castle of Neville's-Burgh alone, which
are the most superb relics of Anglo-Norman architecture in that
part of the country, are a possession much to be coveted. I
thought your father had no other son or near relative.''

  ``He had not, Mr. Oldbuck,'' replied Lord Glenallan; ``but
my brother adopted views in politics, and a form of religion,
alien from those which had been always held by our house. 
Our tempers had long differed, nor did my unhappy mother
always think him sufficiently observant to her. In short, there
was a family quarrel, and my brother, whose property was at
his own free disposal, availed himself of the power vested in him
to choose a stranger for his heir. It is a matter which never
struck me as being of the least consequence---for if worldly
possessions could alleviate misery, I have enough and to spare. 
But now I shall regret it, if it throws any difficulty in the way
of our inquiries---and I bethink me that it may; for in case of
my having a lawful son of my body, and my brother dying
without issue, my father's possessions stood entailed upon my
son. It is not therefore likely that this heir, be he who he may,
will afford us assistance in making a discovery which may turn
out so much to his own prejudice.''

  ``And in all probability the steward your lordship mentions
is also in his service,'' said the Antiquary.

  ``It is most likely; and the man being a Protestant---how far
it is safe to entrust him''------

  ``I should hope, my lord,'' said Oldbuck gravely, ``that a
Protestant may be as trustworthy as a Catholic. I am doubly
interested in the Protestant faith, my lord. My ancestor, Aldobrand
Oldenbuck, printed the celebrated Confession of Augsburg,
as I can show by the original edition now in this house.''

  ``I have not the least doubt of what you say, Mr. Oldbuck,''
replied the Earl, ``nor do I speak out of bigotry or intolerance;
but probably the Protestant steward will favour the Protestant
heir rather than the Catholic---if, indeed, my son has been bred
in his father's faith---or, alas! if indeed he yet lives.''

  ``We must look close into this,'' said Oldbuck, ``before committing
ourselves. I have a literary friend at York, with whom
I have long corresponded on the subject of the Saxon horn that
is preserved in the Minster there; we interchanged letters for
six years, and have only as yet been able to settle the first line
of the inscription. I will write forthwith to this gentleman,
Dr. Dryasdust, and be particular in my inquiries concerning
the character, etc., of your brother's heir, of the gentleman
employed in his affairs, and what else may be likely to further
your lordship's inquiries. In the meantime your lordship will
collect the evidence of the marriage, which I hope can still be
recovered?''

  ``Unquestionably,'' replied the Earl: ``the witnesses, who
were formerly withdrawn from your research, are still living. 
My tutor, who solemnized the marriage, was provided for by
a living in France, and has lately returned to this country as
an emigrant, a victim of his zeal for loyalty, legitimacy, and
religion.''

  ``That's one lucky consequence of the French, revolution, my
lord---you must allow that, at least,'' said Oldbuck: ``but no
offence; I will act as warmly in your affairs as if I were of your
own faith in politics and religion. And take my advice---If
you want an affair of consequence properly managed, put it into
the hands of an antiquary; for as they are eternally exercising
their genius and research upon trifles, it is impossible they can
be baffled in affairs of importance;---use makes perfect---and
the corps that is most frequently drilled upon the parade, will
be most prompt in its exercise upon the day of battle. And,
talking upon that subject, I would willingly read to your lordship,
in order to pass away the time betwixt and supper''------

  ``I beg I may not interfere with family arrangements,'' said
Lord Glenallan, ``but I never taste anything after sunset.''

  ``Nor I either, my lord,'' answered his host, ``notwithstanding
it is said to have been the custom of the ancients. But then I
dine differently from your lordship, and therefore am better
enabled to dispense with those elaborate entertainments which
my womankind (that is, my sister and niece, my lord) are apt
to place on the table, for the display rather of their own house-wifery
than the accommodation of our wants. However, a broiled
bone, or a smoked haddock, or an oyster, or a slice of bacon of
our own curing, with a toast and a tankard---or something or
other of that sort, to close the orifice of the stomach before going
to bed, does not fall under my restriction, nor, I hope, under
your lordship's.''

  ``My no-supper is literal, Mr. Oldbuck; but I will attend
you at your meal with pleasure.''

  ``Well, my lord,'' replied the Antiquary, ``I will endeavour
to entertain your ears at least, since I cannot banquet your
palate. What I am about to read to your lordship relates to
the upland glens.''

  Lord Glenallan, though he would rather have recurred to the
subject of his own uncertainties, was compelled to make a sign
of rueful civility and acquiescence.

  The Antiquary, therefore, took out his portfolio of loose
sheets, and after premising that the topographical details here
laid down were designed to illustrate a slight essay upon castrametation,
which had been read with indulgence at several
societies of Antiquaries, he commenced as follows: ``The subject,
my lord, is the hill-fort of Quickens-bog, with the site of
which your lordship is doubtless familiar---it is upon your store-farm
of Mantanner, in the barony of Clochnaben.''

  ``I think I have heard the names of these places,'' said the
Earl, in answer to the Antiquary's appeal.

  ``Heard the name? and the farm brings him six hundred
a-year---O Lord!''

  Such was the scarce-subdued ejaculation of the Antiquary. 
But his hospitality got the better of his surprise, and he proceeded
to read his essay with an audible voice, in great glee
at having secured a patient, and, as he fondly hoped, an interested
hearer.

  ``Quickens-bog may at first seem to derive its name from the
plant _Quicken,_ by which, _Scottic<e`>,_ we understand couch-grass,
dog-grass, or the _Triticum repens_ of Linn<ae>us, and the common
English monosyllable _Bog,_ by which we mean, in popular
language, a marsh or morass---in Latin, _Palus._ But it may
confound the rash adopters of the more obvious etymological
derivations, to learn that the couch-grass or dog-grass, or, to
speak scientifically, the _Triticum repens_ of Linn<ae>us, does not
grow within a quarter of a mile of this castrum or hill-fort,
whose ramparts are uniformly clothed with short verdant turf;
and that we must seek a bog or _palus_ at a still greater distance,
the nearest being that of Gird-the-mear, a full half-mile distant. 
The last syllable, _bog,_ is obviously, therefore, a mere corruption
of the Saxon _Burgh,_ which we find in the various transmutations
of _Burgh, Burrow, Brough, Bruff, Buff,_ and _Boff,_ which last
approaches very near the sound in question---since, supposing
the word to have been originally _borgh,_ which is the genuine
Saxon spelling, a slight change, such as modern organs too
often make upon ancient sounds, will produce first _Bogh,_ and
then, _elisa H,_ or compromising and sinking the guttural, agreeable
to the common vernacular practice, you have either _Boff_ or
_Bog_ as it happens. The word _Quickens_ requires in like manner
to be altered,---decomposed, as it were,---and reduced to its
original and genuine sound, ere we can discern its real meaning. 
By the ordinary exchange of the _Qu_ into _Wh,_ familiar to the
rudest tyro who has opened a book of old Scottish poetry, we
gain either Whilkens, or Whichensborgh---put we may suppose,
by way of question, as if those who imposed the name, struck
with the extreme antiquity of the place, had expressed in it an
interrogation, `To whom did this fortress belong?'---Or, it might
be _Whackens-burgh,_ from the Saxon _Whacken,_ to strike with
the hand, as doubtless the skirmishes near a place of such apparent
consequence must have legitimated such a derivation,'' etc.
etc. etc.

  I will be more merciful to my readers than Oldbuck was to
his guest; for, considering his opportunities of gaining patient
attention from a person of such consequence as Lord Glenallan
were not many, he used, or rather abused, the present to the
uttermost.
