




		CHAPTER THIRTY-SIXTH.

	Crabbed age and youth
	    Cannot live together:---
	Youth is full of pleasance,
	    Age is full of care;
	Youth like summer morn,
	    Age like winter weather;
	Youth like summer brave,
	    Age like winter bare.
			Shakspeare.

  In the morning of the following day, the Antiquary, who was
something of a sluggard, was summoned from his bed a full hour
earlier than his custom by Caxon. ``What's the matter now?''
he exclaimed, yawning and stretching forth his hand to the huge
gold repeater, which, bedded upon his India silk handkerchief,
was laid safe by his pillow---``what's the matter now, Caxon?---
it can't be eight o'clock yet.''

  ``Na, sir,---but my lord's man sought me out, for he fancies
me your honour's valley-de-sham,---and sae I am, there's nae
doubt o't, baith your honour's and the minister's---at least ye
hae nae other that I ken o'---and I gie a help to Sir Arthur too,
but that's mair in the way o' my profession.''

  ``Well, well---never mind that,'' said the Antiquary---``happy
is he that is his own valley-de-sham, as you call it---But why
disturb my morning's rest?''

  ``Ou, sir, the great man's been up since peep o' day, and he's
steered the town to get awa an express to fetch his carriage,
and it will be here briefly, and he wad like to see your honour
afore he gaes awa.''

  ``Gadso!'' ejaculated Oldbuck, ``these great men use one's
house and time as if they were their own property. Well, it's
once and away. Has Jenny come to her senses yet, Caxon?''

  ``Troth, sir, but just middling,'' replied the barber; ``she's
been in a swither about the jocolate this morning, and was like
to hae toomed it a' out into the slap-bason, and drank it hersell
in her ecstacies---but she's won ower wi't, wi' the help o' Miss
M`Intyre.''

  ``Then all my womankind are on foot and scrambling, and I
must enjoy my quiet bed no longer, if I would have a well-regulated
house---Lend me my gown. And what are the news
at Fairport?''

  ``Ou, sir, what can they be about but this grand news o' my
lord,'' answered the old man, ``that hasna been ower the door-stane,
they threep to me, for this twenty years---this grand
news of his coming to visit your honour?''

  ``Aha!'' said Monkbarns; ``and what do they say of that,
Caxon?''

  ``'Deed, sir, they hae various opinions. Thae fallows, that
are the democraws, as they ca' them, that are again' the king
and the law, and hairpowder and dressing o' gentlemen's wigs
---a wheen blackguards---they say he's come doun to speak wi'
your honour about bringing doun his hill lads and Highland
tenantry to break up the meetings of the Friends o' the People;
---and when I said your honour never meddled wi' the like o'
sic things where there was like to be straiks and bloodshed, they
said, if ye didna, your nevoy did, and that he was weel ken'd to
be a kingsman that wad fight knee-deep, and that ye were the
head and he was the hand, and that the Yerl was to bring out
the men and the siller.''

  ``Come,'' said the Antiquary, laughing---``I am glad the war
is to cost me nothing but counsel.''

  ``Na, na,'' said Caxon---``naebody thinks your honour wad
either fight yoursell, or gie ony feck o' siller to ony side o' the
question.''

  ``Umph! well, that's the opinion of the democraws, as you
call them---What say the rest o' Fairport?''

  ``In troth,'' said the candid reporter, ``I canna say it's muckle
better. Captain Coquet, of the volunteers---that's him that's
to be the new collector,---and some of the other gentlemen of
the Blue and a' Blue Club, are just saying it's no right to let
popists, that hae sae mony French friends as the Yerl of Glenallan,
gang through the country, and---but your honour will
maybe be angry?''

  ``Not I, Caxon,'' said Oldbuck; ``fire away as if you were
Captain Coquet's whole platoon---I can stand it.''

  ``Weel then, they say, sir, that as ye didna encourage the
petition about the peace, and wadna petition in favour of the
new tax, and as you were again' bringing in the yeomanry at
the meal mob, but just for settling the folk wi' the constables
---they say ye're no a gude friend to government; and that thae
sort o' meetings between sic a powerfu' man as the Yerl, and
sic a wise man as you,---Od they think they suld be lookit
after; and some say ye should baith be shankit aff till Edinburgh
Castle.''

  ``On my word,'' said the Antiquary, ``I am infinitely obliged
to my neighbours for their good opinion of me! And so I, that
have never interfered with their bickerings, but to recommend
quiet and moderate measures, am given up on both sides as a
man very likely to commit high treason, either against King or
People?---Give me my coat, Caxon---give me my coat;---it's
lucky I live not in their report. Have you heard anything of
Taffril and his vessel?''

  Caxon's countenance fell.---``Na, sir, and the winds hae been
high, and this is a fearfu' coast to cruise on in thae eastern
gales,---the headlands rin sae far out, that a veshel's embayed
afore I could sharp a razor; and then there's nae harbour or city
of refuge on our coast---a' craigs and breakers;---a veshel that
rins ashore wi' us flees asunder like the powther when I shake
the pluff---and it's as ill to gather ony o't again. I aye tell my
daughter thae things when she grows wearied for a letter frae
Lieutenant Taffril---It's aye an apology for him. Ye sudna
blame him, says I, hinny, for ye little ken what may hae
happened.''

  ``Ay, ay, Caxon, thou art as good a comforter as a valet-de-chambre.
---Give me a white stock, man,---dye think I can go
down with a handkerchief about my neck when I have company?''

  ``Dear sir, the Captain says a three-nookit hankercher is the
maist fashionable overlay, and that stocks belang to your honour
and me that are auld warld folk. I beg pardon for mentioning
us twa thegither, but it was what he said.''

  ``The Captain's a puppy, and you are a goose, Caxon.''

  ``It's very like it may be sae,'' replied the acquiescent barber:
``I am sure your honour kens best.''

  Before breakfast, Lord Glenallan, who appeared in better
spirits than he had evinced in the former evening, went particularly
through the various circumstances of evidence which the
exertions of Oldbuck had formerly collected; and pointing out
the means which he possessed of completing the proof of his
marriage, expressed his resolution instantly to go through the
painful task of collecting and restoring the evidence concerning
the birth of Eveline Neville, which Elspeth had stated to be in
his mother's possession.

  ``And yet, Mr. Oldbuck,'' he said, ``I feel like a man who
receives important tidings ere he is yet fully awake, and doubt
whether they refer to actual life, or are not rather a continuation
of his dream. This woman---this Elspeth,---she is in the
extremity of age, and approaching in many respects to dotage. 
Have I not---it is a hideous question---have I not been hasty in
the admission of her present evidence, against that which she
formerly gave me to a very---very different purpose?''

  Mr. Oldbuck paused a moment, and then answered with
firmness---``No, my lord; I cannot think you have any reason
to suspect the truth of what she has told you last, from no
apparent impulse but the urgency of conscience. Her confession
was voluntary, disinterested, distinct, consistent with itself, and
with all the other known circumstances of the case. I would
lose no time, however, in examining and arranging the other
documents to which she has referred; and I also think her own
statement should be taken down, if possible in a formal manner. 
We thought of setting about this together. But it will be a
relief to your lordship, and moreover have a more impartial
appearance, were I to attempt the investigation alone in the
capacity of a magistrate. I will do this---at least I will attempt
it, so soon as I shall see her in a favourable state of mind to
undergo an examination.''

  Lord Glenallan wrung the Antiquary's hand in token of
grateful acquiescence. ``I cannot express to you,'' he said,
``Mr. Oldbuck, how much your countenance and cooperation in
this dark and most melancholy business gives me relief and
confidence. I cannot enough applaud myself for yielding to the
sudden impulse which impelled me, as it were, to drag you into
my confidence, and which arose from the experience I had formerly
of your firmness in discharge of your duty as a magistrate,
and as a friend to the memory of the unfortunate. Whatever
the issue of these matters may prove,---and I would fain hope
there is a dawn breaking on the fortunes of my house, though I
shall not live to enjoy its light,---but whatsoever be the issue,
you have laid my family and me under the most lasting obligation.''

  ``My lord,'' answered the Antiquary, ``I must necessarily
have the greatest respect for your lordship's family, which I am
well aware is one of the most ancient in Scotland, being certainly
derived from Aymer de Geraldin, who sat in parliament
at Perth, in the reign of Alexander II., and who by the less
vouched, yet plausible tradition of the country, is said to have
been descended from the Marmor of Clochnaben. Yet, with all
my veneration for your ancient descent, I must acknowledge
that I find myself still more bound to give your lordship what
assistance is in my limited power, from sincere sympathy with
your sorrows, and detestation at the frauds which have so long
been practised upon you.---But, my lord, the matin meal is, I
see, now prepared---Permit me to show your lordship the way
through the intricacies of my _cenobitium,_ which is rather a combination
of cells, jostled oddly together, and piled one upon the
top of the other, than a regular house. I trust you will make
yourself some amends for the spare diet of yesterday.''

  But this was no part of Lord Glenallan's system. Having
saluted the company with the grave and melancholy politeness
which distinguished his manners, his servant placed before him
a slice of toasted bread, with a glass of fair water, being the fare
on which he usually broke his fast. While the morning's meal
of the young soldier and the old Antiquary was despatched in
much more substantial manner, the noise of wheels was heard.

  ``Your lordship's carriage, I believe,'' said Oldbuck, stepping
to the window. ``On my word, a handsome _quadriga,_---for
such, according to the best _scholium,_ was the _vox signata_ of the
Romans for a chariot which, like that of your lordship, was
drawn by four horses.''

  ``And I will venture to say,'' cried Hector, eagerly gazing
from the window, ``that four handsomer or better-matched bays
never were put in harness---What fine forehands!---what
capital chargers they would make!---Might I ask if they are of
your lordship's own breeding?''

  ``I---I---rather believe so,'' said Lord Glenallan; ``but I have
been so negligent of my domestic matters, that I am ashamed
to say I must apply to Calvert'' (looking at the domestic).

  ``They are of your lordship's own breeding,'' said Calvert,
``got by Mad Tom out of Jemina and Yarico, your lordship's
brood mares.''

  ``Are there more of the set?'' said Lord Glenallan.

  ``Two, my lord,---one rising four, the other five off this grass,
both very handsome.''

  ``Then let Dawkins bring them down to Monkbarns to-morrow,''
said the Earl---``I hope Captain M`Intyre will accept them, if
they are at all fit for service.''

  Captain M`Intyre's eyes sparkled, and he was profuse in grateful
acknowledgments; while Oldbuck, on the other hand, seizing
the Earl's sleeve, endeavoured to intercept a present which boded
no good to his corn-chest and hay-loft.

  ``My lord---my lord---much obliged---much obliged---But
Hector is a pedestrian, and never mounts on horseback in battle
---he is a Highland soldier, moreover, and his dress ill adapted
for cavalry service. Even Macpherson never mounted his ancestors
on horseback, though he has the impudence to talk of their
being car-borne---and that, my lord, is what is running in Hector's
head---it is the vehicular, not the equestrian exercise, which he
envies---

	Sunt quos curriculo pulverem Olympicum
	Collegisse juvat.

His noddle is running on a curricle, which he has neither money
to buy, nor skill to drive if he had it; and I assure your lordship,
that the possession of two such quadrupeds would prove a
greater scrape than any of his duels, whether with human foe or
with my friend the _phoca._''

  ``You must command us all at present, Mr. Oldbuck,'' said
the Earl politely; ``but I trust you will not ultimately prevent
my gratifying my young friend in some way that may afford him
pleasure.''

  ``Anything useful, my lord,'' said Oldbuck, ``but no _curriculum_
---I protest he might as rationally propose to keep a _quadriga_
at once---And now I think of it, what is that old post-chaise
from Fairport come jingling here for?---I did not send for it.''

  ``_I_ did, sir,'' said Hector, rather sulkily, for he was not much
gratified by his uncle's interference to prevent the Earl's intended
generosity, nor particularly inclined to relish either the disparagement
which he cast upon his skill as a charioteer, or the
mortifying allusion to his bad success in the adventures of the
duel and the seal.

  ``You did, sir?'' echoed the Antiquary, in answer to his
concise information. ``And pray, what may be your business
with a post-chaise? Is this splendid equipage---this _biga,_ as I
may call it---to serve for an introduction to a _quadriga_ or a
_curriculum_?''

  ``Really, sir,'' replied the young soldier, ``if it be necessary
to give you such a specific explanation, I am going to Fairport
on a little business.''

  ``Will you permit me to inquire into the nature of that
business, Hector?'' answered his uncle, who loved the exercise
of a little brief authority over his relative. ``I should suppose
any regimental affairs might be transacted by your worthy
deputy the sergeant---an honest gentleman, who is so good as
to make Monkbarns his home since his arrival among us---I
should, I say, suppose that he may transact any business of
yours, without your spending a day's pay on two dog-horses,
and such a combination of rotten wood, cracked glass, and
leather---such a skeleton of a post-chaise, as that before the
door.''

  ``It is not regimental business, sir, that calls me; and, since
you insist upon knowing, I must inform you Caxon has brought
word this morning that old Ochiltree, the beggar, is to be brought
up for examination to-day, previous to his being committed for
trial; and I'm going to see that the poor old fellow gets fair
play---that's all.''

  ``Ay?---I heard something of this, but could not think it
serious. And pray, Captain Hector, who are so ready to be
every man's second on all occasions of strife, civil or military,
by land, by water, or on the sea-beach, what is your especial
concern with old Edie Ochiltree?''

  ``He was a soldier in my father's company, sir,'' replied
Hector; ``and besides, when I was about to do a very foolish
thing one day, he interfered to prevent me, and gave me
almost as much good advice, sir, as you could have done yourself.''

  ``And with the same good effect, I dare be sworn for it---eh,
Hector?---Come, confess it was thrown away.''

  ``Indeed it was, sir; but I see no reason that my folly should
make me less grateful for his intended kindness.''

  ``Bravo, Hector! that's the most sensible thing I ever heard
you say. But always tell me your plans without reserve,--
why, I will go with you myself, man. I am sure the old fellow
is not guilty, and I will assist him in such a scrape much more
effectually than you can do. Besides, it will save thee half-a-guinea,
my lad---a consideration which I heartily pray you to
have more frequently before your eyes.''

  Lord Glenallan's politeness had induced him to turn away
and talk with the ladies, when the dispute between the uncle
and nephew appeared to grow rather too animated to be fit for
the ear of a stranger, but the Earl mingled again in the conversation
when the placable tone of the Antiquary expressed
amity. Having received a brief account of the mendicant, and
of the accusation brought against him, which Oldbuck did not
hesitate to ascribe to the malice of Dousterswivel, Lord Glenallan
asked, whether the individual in question had not been a
soldier formerly?---He was answered in the affirmative.

  ``Had he not,'' continued his Lordship, ``a coarse blue coat,
or gown, with a badge?---was he not a tall, striking-looking
old man, with grey beard and hair, who kept his body remarkably
erect, and talked with an air of ease and independence,
which formed a strong contrast to his profession?''

  ``All this is an exact picture of the man,'' refumed Oldbuck.

  ``Why, then,'' continued Lord Glenallan, ``although I fear
I can be of no use to him in his present condition, yet I owe
him a debt of gratitude for being the first person who brought
me some tidings of the utmost importance. I would willingly
offer him a place of comfortable retirement, when he is extricated
from his present situation.''

  ``I fear, my lord,'' said Oldbuck, ``he would have difficulty
in reconciling his vagrant habits to the acceptance of your
bounty, at least I know the experiment has been tried without
effect. To beg from the public at large he considers as independence,
in comparison to drawing his whole support from
the bounty of an individual. He is so far a true philosopher,
as to be a contemner of all ordinary rules of hours and times. 
When he is hungry he eats; when thirsty he drinks; when
weary he sleeps; and with such indifference with respect to
the means and appliances about which we make a fuss, that I
suppose he was never ill dined or ill lodged in his life. Then
he is, to a certain extent, the oracle of the district through
which he travels---their genealogist, their newsman, their master
of the revels, their doctor at a pinch, or their divine;---I promise
you he has too many duties, and is too zealous in performing
them, to be easily bribed to abandon his calling. But I should
be truly sorry if they sent the poor light-hearted old man to lie
for weeks in a jail. I am convinced the confinement would
break his heart.''

  Thus finished the conference. Lord Glenallan, having taken
leave of the ladies, renewed his offer to Captain M`Intyre of the
freedom of his manors for sporting, which was joyously accepted,

  ``I can only add,'' he said, ``that if your spirits are not liable
to be damped by dull company, Glenallan House is at all times
open to you. On two days of the week, Friday and Saturday,
l keep my apartment, which will be rather a relief to you, as
you will be left to enjoy the society of my almoner, Mr. Gladsmoor,
who is a scholar and a man of the world.''

  Hector, his heart exulting at the thoughts of ranging through
the preserves of Glenallan House, and over the well-protected
moors of Clochnaben---nay, joy of joys! the deer-forest of
Strath-Bonnel---made many acknowledgements of the honour
and gratitude he felt. Mr. Oldbuck was sensible of the Earl's
attention to his nephew; Miss M`Intyre was pleased because
her brother was gratified; and Miss Griselda Oldbuck looked
forward with glee to the potting of whole bags of moorfowl and
black-game, of which Mr. Blattergowl was a professed admirer. 
Thus,---which is always the case when a man of rank leaves
a private family where he has studied to appear obliging,---all
were ready to open in praise of the Earl as soon as he had taken
his leave, and was wheeled off in his chariot by the four admired
bays. But the panegyric was cut short, for Oldbuck and his
nephew deposited themselves in the Fairport hack, which, with
one horse trotting, and the other urged to a canter, creaked,
jingled, and hobbled towards that celebrated seaport, in a manner
that formed a strong contrast to the rapidity and smoothness
with which Lord Glenallan's equipage had seemed to vanish
from their eyes.
