




		CHAPTER TWENTY-NINTH.

	For he was one in all their idle sport,
	And like a monarch, ruled their little court
	The pliant bow he formed, the flying ball,
	The bat, the wicket, were his labours all.
					Crabbe's Village.


  Francis Macraw, agreeably to the commands of his master,
attended the mendicant, in order to see him fairly out of the
estate, without permitting him to have conversation, or intercourse,
with any of the Earl's dependents or domestics. But,
judiciously considering that the restriction did not extend to
himself, who was the person entrusted with the convoy, he used
every measure in his power to extort from Edie the nature of
his confidential and secret interview with Lord Glenallan. But
Edie had been in his time accustomed to cross-examination,
and easily evaded those of his quondam comrade. ``The secrets
of grit folk,'' said Ochiltree within himself, ``are just like the
wild beasts that are shut up in cages. Keep them hard and fast
sneaked up, and it's a' very weel or better---but ance let them
out, they will turn and rend you. I mind how ill Dugald Gunn
cam aff for letting loose his tongue about the Major's leddy and
Captain Bandilier.''

  Francis was therefore foiled in his assaults upon the fidelity
of the mendicant, and, like an indifferent chess-player, became,
at every unsuccessful movement, more liable to the counter-checks
of his opponent.

  ``Sae ye uphauld ye had nae particulars to say to my lord
but about yer ain matters?''

  ``Ay, and about the wee bits o' things I had brought frae
abroad,'' said Edie. ``I ken'd you popist folk are unco set on
the relics that are fetched frae far-kirks and sae forth.''

  ``Troth, my Lord maun be turned feel outright,'' said the
domestic, ``an he puts himsell into sic a carfuffle, for onything
ye could bring him, Edie.''

  ``I doubtna ye may say true in the main, neighbour,''
replied the beggar; ``but maybe he's had some hard play in
his younger days, Francis, and that whiles unsettles folk sair.''

  ``Troth, Edie, and ye may say that---and since it's like yell
neer come back to the estate, or, if ye dee, that ye'll no find
me there, I'se e'en tell you he had a heart in his young time
sae wrecked and rent, that it's a wonder it hasna broken outright
lang afore this day.''

  ``Ay, say ye sae?'' said Ochiltree; ``that maun hae been
about a woman, I reckon?''

  ``Troth, and ye hae guessed it,'' said Francie---``jeest a cusin
o' his nain---Miss Eveline Neville, as they suld hae ca'd her;---
there was a sough in the country about it, but it was hushed
up, as the grandees were concerned;---it's mair than twenty
years syne---ay, it will be three-and-twenty.''

  ``Ay, I was in America then,'' said the mendicant, ``and no
in the way to hear the country clashes.''

  ``There was little clash about it, man,'' replied Macraw;
``he liked this young leddy, ana suld hae married her, but his
mother fand it out, and then the deil gaed o'er Jock Webster. 
At last, the peer lass clodded hersell o'er the scaur at the
Craigburnfoot into the sea, and there was an end o't.''

  ``An end o`t wi' the puir leddy,'' said the mendicant, ``but,
as I reckon, nae end o't wi' the yerl.''

  ``Nae end o't till his life makes an end,'' answered the Aberdonian.

  ``But what for did the auld Countess forbid the marriage?''
continued the persevering querist.

  ``Fat for!---she maybe didna weel ken for fat hersell, for
she gar'd a' bow to her bidding, right or wrang---But it was
ken'd the young leddy was inclined to some o' the heresies of
the country---mair by token, she was sib to him nearer than
our Church's rule admits of. Sae the leddy was driven to the
desperate act, and the yerl has never since held his head up
like a man.''

  ``Weel away!'' replied Ochiltree:---``it's e'en queer I neer
heard this tale afore.''

  ``It's e'en queer that ye heard it now, for deil ane o' the
servants durst hae spoken o't had the auld Countess been
living. Eh, man, Edie! but she was a trimmer---it wad hae
taen a skeely man to hae squared wi' her!---But she's in her
grave, and we may loose our tongues a bit fan we meet a
friend.---But fare ye weel, Edie---I maun be back to the evening-service.
An' ye come to Inverurie maybe sax months awa,
dinna forget to ask after Francie Macraw.''

  What one kindly pressed, the other as firmly promised; and
the friends having thus parted, with every testimony of mutual
regard, the domestic of Lord Glenallan took his road back to
the seat of his master, leaving Ochiltree to trace onward his
habitual pilgrimage.

  It was a fine summer evening, and the world---that is, the
little circle which was all in all to the individual by whom it
was trodden, lay before Edie Ochiltree, for the choosing of his
night's quarters. When he had passed the less hospitable
domains of Glenallan, he had in his option so many places of
refuge for the evening, that he was nice, and even fastidious in
the choice. Ailie Sim's public was on the road-side about a
mile before him, but there would be a parcel of young fellows
there on the Saturday night, and that was a bar to civil conversation.
Other ``gudemen and gudewives,'' as the farmers
and their dames are termed in Scotland, successively presented
themselves to his imagination. But one was deaf, and could
not hear him; another toothless, and could not make him hear;
a third had a cross temper; and a fourth an ill-natured house-dog.
At Monkbarns or Knockwinnock he was sure of a favourable
and hospitable reception; but they lay too distant to be
conveniently reached that night.

  ``I dinna ken how it is,'' said the old man, ``but I am nicer
about my quarters this night than ever I mind having been in
my life. I think, having seen a' the braws yonder, and finding
out ane may be happier without them, has made me proud o'
my ain lot---But I wuss it bode me gude, for pride goeth before
destruction. At ony rate, the warst barn e'er man lay in wad
be a pleasanter abode than Glenallan House, wi' a' the pictures
and black velvet, and silver bonny-wawlies belonging to it---
Sae I'll e'en settle at ance, and put in for Ailie Sims.''

  As the old man descended the hill above the little hamlet to
which he was bending his course, the setting sun had relieved
its inmates from their labour, and the young men, availing
themselves of the fine evening, were engaged in the sport of
long-bowls on a patch of common, while the women and elders
looked on. The shout, the laugh, the exclamations of winners
and losers, came in blended chorus up the path which Ochiltree
was descending, and awakened in his recollection the days when
he himself had been a keen competitor, and frequently victor, in
games of strength and agility. These remembrances seldom fail
to excite a sigh, even when the evening of life is cheered by
brighter prospects than those of our poor mendicant. ``At that
time of day,'' was his natural reflection, ``I would have thought
as little about ony auld palmering body that was coming down
the edge of Kinblythemont, as ony o' thae stalwart young chiels
does e'enow about auld Edie Ochiltree.''

  He was, however, presently cheered, by finding that more
importance was attached to his arrival than his modesty had
anticipated. A disputed cast had occurred between the bands
of players, and as the gauger favoured the one party, and the
schoolmaster the other, the matter might be said to be taken
up by the higher powers. The miller and smith, also, had
espoused different sides, and, considering the vivacity of two
such disputants, there was reason to doubt whether the strife
might be amicably terminated. But the first person who caught
a sight of the mendicant exclaimed, ``Ah! here comes auld Edie,
that kens the rules of a' country games better than ony man
that ever drave a bowl, or threw an axle-tree, or putted a stane
either;---let's hae nae quarrelling, callants---we'll stand by auld
Edie's judgment.''

  Edie was accordingly welcomed, and installed as umpire, with
a general shout of gratulation. With all the modesty of a
Bishop to whom the mitre is proffered, or of a new Speaker
called to the chair, the old man declined the high trust and
responsibility with which it was proposed to invest him, and,
in requital for his self-denial and humility, had the pleasure of
receiving the reiterated assurances of young, old, and middle-aged,
that be was simply the best qualified person for the office
of arbiter ``in the haill country-side.'' Thus encouraged, he
proceeded gravely to the execution of his duty, and, strictly
forbidding all aggravating expressions on either side, he heard
the smith and gauger on one side, the miller and schoolmaster
on the other, as junior and senior counsel. Edie's mind, however,
was fully made up on the subject before the pleading
began; like that of many a judge, who must nevertheless go
through all the forms, and endure in its full extent the eloquence
and argumentation of the Bar. For when all had been said on
both sides, and much of it said over oftener than once, our senior,
being well and ripely advised, pronounced the moderate and healing
judgment, that the disputed cast was a drawn one, and
should therefore count to neither party. This judicious decision
restored concord to the field of players; they began anew to
arrange their match and their bets, with the clamorous mirth
usual on such occasions of village sport, and the more eager
were already stripping their jackets, and committing them, with
their coloured handkerchiefs, to the care of wives, sisters, and
mistresses. But their mirth was singularly interrupted.

  On the outside of the group of players began to arise sounds
of a description very different from those of sport---that sort of
suppressed sigh and exclamation, with which the first news of
calamity is received by the hearers, began to be heard indistinctly.
A buzz went about among the women of ``Eh, sirs!
sae young and sae suddenly summoned!''---It then extended
itself among the men, and silenced the sounds of sportive mirth.

  All understood at once that some disaster had happened in the
country, and each inquired the cause at his neighbour, who
knew as little as the querist. At length the rumour reached, in
a distinct shape, the ears of Edie Ochiltree, who was in the very
centre of the assembly. The boat of Mucklebackit, the fisherman
whom we have so often mentioned, had been swamped at
sea, and four men had perished, it was affirmed, including
Mucklebackit and his son. Rumour had in this, however, as
in other cases, gone beyond the truth. The boat had indeed
been overset; but Stephen, or, as he was called, Steenie Mucklebackit,
was the only man who had been drowned. Although
the place of his residence and his mode of life removed the young
man from the society of the country folks, yet they failed not to
pause in their rustic mirth to pay that tribute to sudden calamity
which it seldom fails to receive in cases of infrequent occurrence.
To Ochiltree, in particular, the news came like a knell,
the rather that he had so lately engaged this young man's assistance
in an affair of sportive mischief; and though neither loss
nor injury was designed to the German adept, yet the work was
not precisely one in which the latter hours of life ought to be
occupied.

  Misfortunes never come alone. While Ochiltree, pensively
leaning upon his staff, added his regrets to those of the hamlet
which bewailed the young man's sudden death, and internally
blamed himself for the transaction in which he had so lately
engaged him, the old man's collar was seized by a peace-officer,
who displayed his baton in his right hand, and exclaimed, ``In
the king's name.''

  The gauger and schoolmaster united their rhetoric, to prove
to the constable and his assistant that he had no right to arrest
the king's bedesman as a vagrant; and the mute eloquence of
the miller and smith, which was vested in their clenched fists,
was prepared to give Highland bail for their arbiter; his blue
gown, they said, was his warrant for travelling the country.

  ``But his blue gown,'' answered the officer, ``is nae protection
for assault, robbery, and murder; and my warrant is against
him for these crimes.''

  ``Murder!'' said Edie, ``murder! wha did I e'er murder?''

  ``Mr. German Doustercivil, the agent at Glen-Withershins
mining-works.''

  ``Murder Doustersnivel?---hout, he's living, and life-like,
man.''

  ``Nae thanks to you if he be; he had a sair struggle for his
life, if a' be true he tells, and ye maun answer for't at the bidding
of the law.''

  The defenders of the mendicant shrunk back at hearing the
atrocity of the charges against him, but more than one kind
hand thrust meat and bread and pence upon Edie, to maintain
him in the prison, to which the officers were about to conduct
him.

  ``Thanks to ye! God bless ye a', bairns!---I've gotten out o'
mony a snare when I was waur deserving o' deliverance---I shall
escape like a bird from the fowler. Play out your play, and
never mind me---I am mair grieved for the puir lad that's gane,
than for aught they can do to me.''

  Accordingly, the unresisting prisoner was led off, while he
mechanically accepted and stored in his wallets the alms which
poured in on every hand, and ere he left the hamlet, was as
deep-laden as a government victualler. The labour of bearing
this accumulating burden was, however, abridged, by the officer
procuring a cart and horse to convey the old man to a magistrate,
in order to his examination and committal.

  The disaster of Steenie, and the arrest of Edie, put a stop to
the sports of the village, the pensive inhabitants of which
began to speculate upon the vicissitudes of human affairs, which
had so suddenly consigned one of their comrades to the grave,
and placed their master of the revels in some danger of being
hanged. The character of Dousterswivel being pretty generally
known, which was in his case equivalent to being pretty generally
detested, there were many speculations upon the probability
of the accusation being malicious. But all agreed, that if Edie
Ochiltree behaved in all events to suffer upon this occasion, it
was a great pity he had not better merited his fate by killing
Dousterswivel outright.
