




		CHAPTER FOURTH.

	The pawkie auld carle cam ower the lea,
	Wi' mony good-e'ens and good-morrows to me,
	Saying, Kind Sir, for your courtesy,
	Will ye lodge a silly puir man?
				The Gaberlunzie Man.

  Our two friends moved through a little orchard, where the
aged apple-trees, well loaded with fruit, showed, as is usual in
the neighbourhood of monastic buildings, that the days of the
monks had not always been spent in indolence, but often
dedicated to horticulture and gardening. Mr. Oldbuck failed
not to make Lovel remark, that the planters of those days were
possessed of the modern secret of preventing the roots of the
fruit-trees from penetrating the till, and compelling them to
spread in a lateral direction, by placing paving-stones beneath
the trees when first planted, so as to interpose between their
fibres and the subsoil. ``This old fellow,'' he said, ``which was
blown down last summer, and still, though half reclined on the
ground, is covered with fruit, has been, as you may see, accommodated
with such a barrier between his roots and the unkindly
till. That other tree has a story:---the fruit is called the
Abbot's Apple; the lady of a neighbouring baron was so fond
of it, that she would often pay a visit to Monkbarns, to have the
pleasure of gathering it from the tree. The husband, a jealous
man, belike, suspected that a taste so nearly resembling that of
Mother Eve prognosticated a similar fall. As the honour of a
noble family is concerned, I will say no more on the subject,
only that the lands of Lochard and Cringlecut still pay a fine
of six bolls of barley annually, to atone the guilt of their
audacious owner, who intruded himself and his worldly suspicions
upon the seclusion of the Abbot and his penitent.---
Admire the little belfry rising above the ivy-mantled porch---
there was here a _hospitium, hospitals,_ or _hospitamentum_ (for
it is written all these various ways in the old writings and
evidents), in which the monks received pilgrims. I know our
minister has said, in the Statistical Account, that the _hospitium_
was situated either in the lands of Haltweary or upon those of
Half-starvet; but he is incorrect, Mr. Lovel---that is the gate
called still the Palmer's Port, and my gardener found many
hewn stones, when he was trenching the ground for winter
celery, several of which I have sent as specimens to my learned
friends, and to the various antiquarian societies of which I am
an unworthy member. But I will say no more at present; I
reserve something for another visit, and we have an object of
real curiosity before us.''

  While he was thus speaking, he led the way briskly through
one or two rich pasture-meadows, to an open heath or common,
and so to the top of a gentle eminence. ``Here,'' he said,
``Mr. Lovel, is a truly remarkable spot.''

  ``It commands a fine view,'' said his companion, looking
around him.

  ``True: but it is not for the prospect I brought you hither;
do you see nothing else remarkable?---nothing on the surface of
the ground?''

  ``Why, yes; I do see something like a ditch, indistinctly
marked.''

  ``Indistinctly!---pardon me, sir, but the indistinctness must
be in your powers of vision. Nothing can be more plainly
traced---a proper _agger_ or _vallum,_ with its corresponding ditch
or _fossa._ Indistinctly! why, Heaven help you, the lassie, my
niece, as light-headed a goose as womankind affords, saw the
traces of the ditch at once. Indistinct!---why, the great station
at Ardoch, or that at Burnswark in Annandale, may be clearer,
doubtless, because they are stative forts, whereas this was only
an occasional encampment. Indistinct!---why, you must suppose
that fools, boors, and idiots, have ploughed up the land,
and, like beasts and ignorant savages, have thereby obliterated
two sides of the square, and greatly injured the third; but you
see, yourself, the fourth side is quite entire!''

  Lovel endeavoured to apologize, and to explain away his
ill-timed phrase, and pleaded his inexperience. But he was not
at once quite successful. His first expression had come too
frankly and naturally not to alarm the Antiquary, and he could
not easily get over the shock it had given him.

  ``My dear sir,'' continued the senior, ``your eyes are not
inexperienced: you know a ditch from level ground, I presume,
when you see them? Indistinct! why, the very common people,
the very least boy that can herd a cow, calls it the Kaim of
Kinprunes; and if that does not imply an ancient camp, I am
ignorant what does.''

  Lovel having again acquiesced, and at length lulled to sleep
the irritated and suspicious vanity of the Antiquary, he proceeded
in his task of cicerone. ``You must know,'' he said, ``our
Scottish antiquaries have been greatly divided about the local
situation of the final conflict between Agricola and the Caledonians;
some contend for Ardoch in Strathallan, some for
Innerpeffry, some for the Raedykes in the Mearns, and some
are for carrying the scene of action as far north as Blair in
Athole. Now, after all this discussion,'' continued the old
gentleman, with one of his slyest and most complacent looks,
``what would you think, Mr. Lovel,---I say, what would you
think,---if the memorable scene of conflict should happen to be
on the very spot called the Kaim of Kinprunes, the property
of the obscure and humble individual who now speaks to you?''
Then, having paused a little, to suffer his guest to digest a
communication so important, he resumed his disquisition in a
higher tone. ``Yes, my good friend, I am indeed greatly
deceived if this place does not correspond with all the marks of
that celebrated place of action. It was near to the Grampian
mountains---lo! yonder they are, mixing and contending with
the sky on the skirts of the horizon! It was _in conspectu classis_
---in sight of the Roman fleet; and would any admiral, Roman
or British, wish a fairer bay to ride in than that on your right
hand? It is astonishing how blind we professed antiquaries
sometimes are! Sir Robert Sibbald, Saunders Gordon, General
Roy, Dr. Stokely,---why, it escaped all of them. I was unwilling
to say a word about it till I had secured the ground, for it
belonged to auld Johnnie Howie, a bonnet-laird* hard by, and

* A bonnet-laird signifies a petty proprietor, wearing the dress, along
* with the habits of a yeoman.

many a communing we had before he and I could agree. At
length---I am almost ashamed to say it---but I even brought
my mind to give acre for acre of my good corn-land for this
barren spot. But then it was a national concern; and when
the scene of so celebrated an event became my own, I was
overpaid.---Whose patriotism would not grow warmer, as old
Johnson says, on the plains of Marathon? I began to trench
the ground, to see what might be discovered; and the third
day, sir, we found a stone, which I have transported to Monkbarns,
in order to have the sculpture taken off with plaster of
Paris; it bears a sacrificing vessel, and the letters A.D.L.L.
which may stand, without much violence, for _Agricola Dicavit
Libens Lubens._''

  ``Certainly, sir; for the Dutch Antiquaries claim Caligula
as the founder of a light-house, on the sole authority of the
letters C.C.P.F., which they interpret _Caius Caligula Pharum
Fecit._''

  ``True, and it has ever been recorded as a sound exposition. 
I see we shall make something of you even before you wear
spectacles, notwithstanding you thought the traces of this
beautiful camp indistinct when you first observed them.''

  ``In time, sir, and by good instruction''------

  ``---You will become more apt---I doubt it not. You shall
peruse, upon your next visit to Monkbarns, my trivial Essay
upon Castrametation, with some particular Remarks upon the
Vestiges of Ancient Fortifications lately discovered by the
Author at the Kaim of Kinprunes. I think I have pointed out
the infallible touchstone of supposed antiquity. I premise a
few general rules on that point, on the nature, namely, of the
evidence to be received in such cases. Meanwhile be pleased
to observe, for example, that I could press into my service
Claudian's famous line,

	Ille Caledoniis posuit qui castra pruinis.

For _pruinis,_ though interpreted to mean _hoar frosts,_ to which I
own we are somewhat subject in this north-eastern sea-coast,
may also signify a locality, namely, _Prunes;_ the _Castra Pruinis
posita_ would therefore be the Kaim of Kinprunes. But I waive
this, for I am sensible it might be laid hold of by cavillers as
carrying down my Castra to the time of Theodosius, sent by
Valentinian into Britain as late as the year 367, or thereabout. 
No, my good friend, I appeal to people's eye-sight. Is not here
the Decuman gate? and there, but for the ravage of the horrid
plough, as a learned friend calls it, would be the Pr<ae>torian gate. 
On the left hand you may see some slight vestiges of the _porta
sinistra,_ and on the right, one side of the _porta dextra_ wellnigh
entire. Here, then, let us take our stand, on this tumulus,
exhibiting the foundation of ruined buildings,---the central
point---the _pr<ae>torium,_ doubtless, of the camp. From this
place, now scarce to be distinguished but by its slight elevation
and its greener turf from the rest of the fortification, we may
suppose Agricola to have looked forth on the immense army of
Caledonians, occupying the declivities of yon opposite hill,---
the infantry rising rank over rank, as the form of ground
displayed their array to its utmost advantage,---the cavalry and
_covinarii,_ by which I understand the charioteers---another guise
of folks from your Bond-street four-in-hand men, I trow---
scouring the more level space below---

	---------See, then, Lovel---See------
	See that huge battle moving from the mountains!
	Their gilt coats shine like dragon scales;---their march
	Like a rough tumbling storm.---See them, and view them,
	And then see Rome no more!------

Yes, my dear friend, from this stance it is probable---nay,
it is nearly certain, that Julius Agricola beheld what our
Beaumont has so admirably described!---From this very Pr<ae>torium''------

  A voice from behind interrupted his ecstatic description---
``Pr<ae>torian here, Pr<ae>torian there, I mind the bigging o't.''

  Both at once turned round, Lovel with surprise, and Oldbuck
with mingled surprise and indignation, at so uncivil an interruption.
An auditor had stolen upon them, unseen and unheard,
amid the energy of the Antiquary's enthusiastic declamation,
and the attentive civility of Lovel. He had the exterior
appearance of a mendicant. A slouched hat of huge dimensions;
a long white beard which mingled with his grizzled hair; an
aged but strongly marked and expressive countenance, hardened,
by climate and exposure, to a right brick-dust complexion; a
long blue gown, with a pewter badge on the right arm; two or
three wallets, or bags, slung across his shoulder, for holding the
different kinds of meal, when he received his charity in kind
from those who were but a degree richer than himself:---all
these marked at once a beggar by profession, and one of that
privileged class which are called in Scotland the King's Bedesmen,
or, vulgarly, Blue-Gowns.

  ``What is that you say, Edie?'' said Oldbuck, hoping, perhaps,
that his ears had betrayed their duty---``what were you speaking
about!''

  ``About this bit bourock, your honour,'' answered the
undaunted Edie; ``I mind the bigging o't.''

  ``The devil you do! Why, you old fool, it was here before you
were born, and will be after you are hanged, man!''

  ``Hanged or drowned, here or awa, dead or alive, I mind the
bigging o't.''

  ``You---you---you---,'' said the Antiquary, stammering between
confusion and anger, ``you strolling old vagabond, what the devil
do you know about it?''

  ``Ou, I ken this about it, Monkbarns---and what profit have
I for telling ye a lie?---l just ken this about it, that about
twenty years syne, I, and a wheen hallenshakers like mysell, and
the mason-lads that built the lang dike that gaes down the
loaning, and twa or three herds maybe, just set to wark, and
built this bit thing here that ye ca' the---the---Pr<ae>torian, and
a' just for a bield at auld Aiken Drum's bridal, and a bit blithe
gae-down wi' had in't, some sair rainy weather. Mair by token,
Monkbarns, if ye howk up the bourock, as ye seem to have began,
yell find, if ye hae not fund it already, a stane that ane o' the
mason-callants cut a ladle on to have a bourd at the bridegroom,
and he put four letters on't, that's A.D.L.L.---Aiken Drum's Lang
Ladle---for Aiken was ane o' the kale-suppers o' Fife.''

  ``This,'' thought Lovel to himself, ``is a famous counterpart
to the story of _Keip on this syde._'' He then ventured to steal
a glance at our Antiquary, but quickly withdrew it in sheer
compassion. For, gentle reader, if thou hast ever beheld the
visage of a damsel of sixteen, whose romance of true love has
been blown up by an untimely discovery, or of a child of ten
years, whose castle of cards has been blown down by a malicious
companion, I can safely aver to you, that Jonathan Oldbuck of
Monkbarns looked neither more wise nor less disconcerted.

  ``There is some mistake about this,'' he said, abruptly turning
away from the mendicant.

  ``Deil a bit on my side o' the wa','' answered the sturdy
beggar; ``I never deal in mistakes, they aye bring mischances.
---Now, Monkbarns, that young gentleman, that's wi' your
honour, thinks little of a carle like me; and yet, I'll wager I'll
tell him whar he was yestreen at the gloamin, only he maybe
wadna like to hae't spoken o' in company.''

  Lovel's soul rushed to his cheeks, with the vivid blush of
two-and-twenty.

  ``Never mind the old rogue,'' said Mr. Oldbuck; ``don't
suppose I think the worse of you for your profession; they are
only prejudiced fools and coxcombs that do so. You remember
what old Tully says in his oration, _pro Archia poeta,_ concerning
one of your confraternity---_quis nostrum tam anino agresti ac
duro fuit---ut---ut_---I forget the Latin---the meaning is, which
of us was so rude and barbarous as to remain unmoved at the
death of the great Roscius, whose advanced age was so far from
preparing us for his death, that we rather hoped one so graceful,
so excellent in his art, ought to be exempted from the common
lot of mortality? So the Prince of Orators spoke of the stage
and its professor.''

  The words of the old man fell upon Lovel's ears, but without
conveying any precise idea to his mind, which was then
occupied in thinking by what means the old beggar, who still
continued to regard him with a countenance provokingly sly
and intelligent, had contrived to thrust himself into any knowledge
of his affairs. He put his hand in his pocket as the
readiest mode of intimating his desire of secrecy, and securing
the concurrence of the person whom he addressed; and while
he bestowed on him an alms, the amount of which rather bore
proportion to his fears than to his charity, looked at him
with a marked expression, which the mendicant, a physiognomist
by profession, seemed perfectly to understand.---``Never
mind me, sir---I am no tale-pyet; but there are mair een in
the warld than mine,'' answered he as he pocketed Lovel's
bounty, but in a tone to be heard by him alone, and with an
expression which amply filled up what was left unspoken. 
Then turning to Oldbuck---``I am awa' to the manse, your
honour. Has your honour ony word there, or to Sir Arthur,
for I'll come in by Knockwinnock Castle again e'en?''

  Oldbuck started as from a dream; and, in a hurried tone,
where vexation strove with a wish to conceal it, paying, at the
same time, a tribute to Edie's smooth, greasy, unlined hat, he
said, ``Go down, go down to Monkbarns---let them give you
some dinner---Or stay; if you do go to the manse, or to Knockwinnock,
ye need say nothing about that foolish story of yours.''

  ``Who, I?'' said the mendicant---``Lord bless your honour,
naebody sall ken a word about it frae me, mair than if the bit
bourock had been there since Noah's flood. But, Lord, they
tell me your honour has gien Johnnie Howie acre for acre of the
laigh crofts for this heathery knowe! Now, if he has really
imposed the bourock on ye for an ancient wark, it's my real
opinion the bargain will never haud gude, if you would just
bring down your heart to try it at the law, and say that he
beguiled ye.''

  ``Provoking scoundrel!'' muttered the indignant Antiquary
between his teeths---``I'll have the hangman's lash and his back
acquainted for this.'' And then, in a louder tone,---``Never
mind, Edie---it is all a mistake.''

  ``Troth, I am thinking sae,'' continued his tormentor, who
seemed to have pleasure in rubbing the galled wound, ``troth,
I aye thought sae; and it's no sae lang since I said to Luckie
Gemmers, `Never think you, luckie' said I, `that his honour
Monkbarns would hae done sic a daft-like thing as to gie
grund weel worth fifty shillings an acre, for a mailing that
would be dear o'a pund Scots. Na, na,' quo' I, `depend upon't
the lard's been imposed upon wi that wily do-little deevil,
Johnnie Howie.' `But Lord haud a care o' us, sirs, how can
that be,' quo' she again, `when the laird's sae book-learned,
there's no the like o' him in the country side, and Johnnie
Howie has hardly sense eneugh to ca' the cows out o' his kale-yard?'
`Aweel, aweel,' quo' I, `but ye'll hear he's circumvented
him with some of his auld-warld stories,'---for ye ken, laird,
yon other time about the bodle that ye thought was an auld
coin''------

  ``Go to the devil!'' said Oldbuck; and then in a more mild tone,
as one that was conscious his reputation lay at the mercy of his
antagonist, he added---``Away with you down to Monkbarns, and
when I come back, I'll send ye a bottle of ale to the kitchen.''

  ``Heaven reward your honour!'' This was uttered with the
true mendicant whine, as, setting his pike-staff before him, he
began to move in the direction of Monkbarns.---``But did your
honour,'' turning round, ``ever get back the siller ye gae to the
travelling packman for the bodle?''

  ``Curse thee, go about thy business!''

  ``Aweel, aweel, sir, God bless your honour! I hope ye'll ding
Johnnie Howie yet, and that I'll live to see it.'' And so saying,
the old beggar moved off, relieving Mr. Oldbuck of recollections
which were anything rather than agreeable.

  ``Who is this familiar old gentleman?'' said Lovel, when the
mendicant was out of hearing.

  ``O, one of the plagues of the country---I have been always
against poor's-rates and a work-house---I think I'll vote for
them now, to have that scoundrel shut up. O, your old-remembered
guest of a beggar becomes as well acquainted with
you as he is with his dish---as intimate as one of the beasts
familiar to man which signify love, and with which his own
trade is especially conversant. Who is he?---why, he has gone
the vole---has been soldier, ballad-singer, travelling tinker, and
is now a beggar. He is spoiled by our foolish gentry, who
laugh at his jokes, and rehearse Edie Ochiltree's good thing's as
regularly as Joe Miller's.''

  ``Why, he uses freedom apparently, which is the, soul of wit,''
answered Lovel.

  ``O ay, freedom enough,'' said the Antiquary; ``he generally
invents some damned improbable lie or another to provoke you,
like that nonsense he talked just now---not that I'll publish my
tract till I have examined the thing to the bottom.''

  ``In England,'' said Lovel, ``such a mendicant would get a
speedy cheek.''

  ``Yes, your churchwardens and dog-whips would make
slender allowance for his vein of humour! But here, curse
him! he is a sort of privileged nuisance---one of the last
specimens of the old fashioned Scottish mendicant, who kept
his rounds within a particular space, and was the news-carrier,
the minstrel, and sometimes the historian of the district. 
That rascal, now, knows more old ballads and traditions
than any other man in this and the four next parishes. And
after all,'' continued he, softening as he went on describing
Edie's good gifts, ``the dog has some good humour. He has
borne his hard fate with unbroken spirits, and it's cruel to deny
him the comfort of a laugh at his betters. The pleasure of
having quizzed me, as you gay folk would call it, will be meat
and drink to him for a day or two. But I must go back and
look after him, or he will spread his d---d nonsensical story over
half the country.''*

* Note C. Pr<ae>torium.

  So saying our heroes parted, Mr. Oldbuck to return to his
_hospitium_ at Monkbarns, and Lovel to pursue his way to
Fairport, where he arrived without farther adventure.
