




		CHAPTER THIRTY-FOURTH.

	Still in his dead hand clenched remain the strings
	That thrill his father's heart---e'en as the limb,
	Lopped off and laid in grave, retains, they tell us,
	Strange commerce with the mutilated stump,
	Whose nerves are twinging still in maimed existence.
							Old Play.

  The Antiquary, as we informed the reader in the end of the
thirty-first chapter, had shaken off the company of worthy Mr.
Blattergowl, although he offered to entertain him with an abstract
of the ablest speech he had ever known in the teind court, delivered
by the procurator for the church in the remarkable case
of the parish of Gatherem. Resisting this temptation, our senior
preferred a solitary path, which again conducted him to the cottage
of Mucklebackit. When he came in front of the fisherman's
hut, he observed a man working intently, as if to repair a shattered
boat which lay upon the beach, and going up to him was
surprised to find it was Mucklebackit himself. ``I am glad,'' he
said in a tone of sympathy---``I am glad, Saunders, that you
feel yourself able to make this exertion.''

  ``And what would ye have me to do,'' answered the fisher
gruffly, ``unless I wanted to see four children starve, because
ane is drowned? It's weel wi' you gentles, that can sit in the
house wi' handkerchers at your een when ye lose a friend; but
the like o' us maun to our wark again, if our hearts were beating
as hard as my hammer.''

  Without taking more notice of Oldbuck, he proceeded in his
labour; and the Antiquary, to whom the display of human
nature under the influence of agitating passions was never
indifferent, stood beside him, in silent attention, as if watching
the progress of the work. He observed more than once the
man's hard features, as if by the force of association, prepare
to accompany the sound of the saw and hammer with his
usual symphony of a rude tune, hummed or whistled,---and as
often a slight twitch of convulsive expression showed, that ere
the sound was uttered, a cause for suppressing it rushed upon
his mind. At length, when he had patched a considerable
rent, and was beginning to mend another, his feelings appeared
altogether to derange the power of attention necessary for his
work. The piece of wood which he was about to nail on was
at first too long; then he sawed it off too short, then chose
another equally ill adapted for the purpose. At length, throwing
it down in anger, after wiping his dim eye with his
quivering hand, he exclaimed, ``There is a curse either on me
or on this auld black bitch of a boat, that I have hauled up
high and dry, and patched and clouted sae mony years, that
she might drown my poor Steenie at the end of them, an' be
d---d to her!'' and he flung his hammer against the boat, as if
she had been the intentional cause of his misfortune. Then
recollecting himself, he added, ``Yet what needs ane be angry
at her, that has neither soul nor sense?---though I am no that
muckle better mysell. She's but a rickle o' auld rotten deals
nailed thegither, and warped wi' the wind and the sea---and I
am a dour carle, battered by foul weather at sea and land till I
am maist as senseless as hersell. She maun be mended though
again the morning tide---that's a thing o' necessity.''

  Thus speaking, he went to gather together his instruments,
and attempt to resume his labour,---but Oldbuck took him
kindly by the arm. ``Come, come,'' he said, ``Saunders, there
is no work for you this day---I'll send down Shavings the
carpenter to mend the boat, and he may put the day's work
into my account---and you had better not come out to-morrow,
but stay to comfort your family under this dispensation, and
the gardener will bring you some vegetables and meal from
Monkbarns.''

  ``I thank ye, Monkbarns,'' answered the poor fisher; ``I am
a plain-spoken man, and hae little to say for mysell; I might
hae learned fairer fashions frae my mither lang syne, but I
never saw muckle gude they did her; however, I thank ye. 
Ye were aye kind and neighbourly, whatever folk says o' your
being near and close; and I hae often said, in thae times when
they were ganging to raise up the puir folk against the gentles
---I hae often said, neer a man should steer a hair touching to
Monkbarns while Steenie and I could wag a finger---and so
said Steenie too. And, Monkbarns, when ye laid his head in
the grave (and mony thanks for the respect), ye, saw the mouls
laid on an honest lad that likit you weel, though he made little
phrase about it.''

  Oldbuck, beaten from the pride of his affected cynicism,
would not willingly have had any one by on that occasion to
quote to him his favourite maxims of the Stoic philosophy. 
The large drops fell fast from his own eyes, as he begged the
father, who was now melted at recollecting the bravery and
generous sentiments of his son, to forbear useless sorrow, and
led him by the arm towards his own home, where another scene
awaited our Antiquary.

  As he entered, the first person whom he beheld was Lord
Glenallan. Mutual surprise was in their countenances as they
saluted each other---with haughty reserve on the part of Mr.
Oldbuck, and embarrassment on that of the Earl.

  ``My Lord Glenallan, I think?'' said Mr. Oldbuck.

  ``Yes---much changed from what he was when he knew Mr.
Oldbuck.''

  ``I do not mean,'' said the Antiquary, ``to intrude upon your
lordship---I only came to see this distressed family.''

  ``And you have found one, sir, who has still greater claims
on your compassion.''

  ``My compassion? Lord Glenallan cannot need my compassion. 
If Lord Glenallan could need it, I think he would hardly ask it.''

  ``Our former acquaintance,'' said the Earl------

  ``Is of such ancient date, my lord---was of such short duration,
and was connected with circumstances so exquisitely painful,
that I think we may dispense with renewing it.''

  So saying, the Antiquary turned away, and left the hut; but
Lord Glenallan followed him into the open air, and, in spite of
a hasty ``Good morning, my lord,'' requested a few minutes' conversation,
and the favour of his advice in an important matter.

  ``Your lordship will find many more capable to advise you,
my lord, and by whom your intercourse will be deemed an
honour. For me, I am a man retired from business and the
world, and not very fond of raking up the past events of my
useless life;---and forgive me if I say, I have particular pain in
reverting to that period of it when I acted like a fool, and your
lordship like''------ He stopped short.

  ``Like a villain, you would say,'' said Lord Glenallan---``for
such I must have appeared to you.''

  ``My lord---my lord, I have no desire to hear your shrift,''
said the Antiquary.

  ``But, sir, if I can show you that I am more sinned against
than sinning---that I have been a man miserable beyond the
power of description, and who looks forward at this moment
to an untimely grave as to a haven of rest, you will not refuse
the confidence which, accepting your appearance at this critical
moment as a hint from Heaven, I venture thus to press on
you.''

  ``Assuredly, my lord, I shall shun no longer the continuation
of this extraordinary interview.''

  ``I must then recall to you our occasional meetings upwards
of twenty years since at Knockwinnock Castle,---and I need not
remind you of a lady who was then a member of that family.''

  ``The unfortunate Miss Eveline Neville, my lord; I remember
it well.''

  ``Towards whom you entertained sentiments''------

  ``Very different from those with which I before and since
have regarded her sex. Her gentleness, her docility, her pleasure
in the studies which I pointed out to her, attached my
affections more than became my age though that was not then
much advanced---or the solidity of my character. But I need
not remind your lordship of the various modes in which you
indulged your gaiety at the expense of an awkward and retired
student, embarrassed by the expression of feelings so new to
him, and I have no doubt that the young lady joined you in
the well-deserved ridicule---it is the way of womankind. I have
spoken at once to the painful circumstances of my addresses
and their rejection, that your lordship may be satisfied everything
is full in my memory, and may, so far as I am concerned, tell
your story without scruple or needless delicacy.''

  ``I will,'' said Lord Glenallan. ``But first let me say, you
do injustice to the memory of the gentlest and kindest, as well
as to the most unhappy of women, to suppose she could make a
jest of the honest affection of a man like you. Frequently did
she blame me, Mr. Oldbuck, for indulging my levity at your
expense---may I now presume you will excuse the gay freedoms
which then offended you?---my state of mind has never since
laid me under the necessity of apologizing for the inadvertencies
of a light and happy temper.''

  ``My lord, you are fully pardoned,'' said Mr. Oldbuck. ``You
should be aware, that, like all others, I was ignorant at the time
that I placed myself in competition with your lordship, and
understood that Miss Neville was in a state of dependence which
might make her prefer a competent independence and the hand
of an honest man---But I am wasting time---I would I could
believe that the views entertained towards her by others were
as fair and honest as mine!''

  ``Mr. Oldbuck, you judge harshly.''

  ``Not without cause, my lord. When I only, of all the magistrates
of this county---having neither, like some of them, the
honour to be connected with your powerful family---nor, like
others, the meanness to fear it,---when I made some inquiry into
the manner of Miss Neville's death---I shake you, my lord, but
I must be plain---I do own I had every reason to believe that
she had met most unfair dealing, and had either been imposed
upon by a counterfeit marriage, or that very strong measures had
been adopted to stifle and destroy the evidence of a real union. 
And I cannot doubt in my own mind, that this cruelty on your
lordship's part, whether coming of your own free will, or proceeding
from the influence of the late Countess, hurried the unfortunate
young lady to the desperate act by which her life was
terminated.''

  ``You are deceived, Mr. Oldbuck, into conclusions which are
not just, however naturally they flow from the circumstances. 
Believe me, I respected you even when I was most embarrassed
by your active attempts to investigate our family misfortunes. 
You showed yourself more worthy of Miss Neville than I, by
the spirit with which you persisted in vindicating her reputation
even after her death. But the firm belief that your well-meant
efforts could only serve to bring to light a story too horrible to
be detailed, induced me to join my unhappy mother in schemes
to remove or destroy all evidence of the legal union which had
taken place between Eveline and myself. And now let us sit
down on this bank,---for I feel unable to remain longer standing,
---and have the goodness to listen to the extraordinary discovery
which I have this day made.''

  They sate down accordingly; and Lord Glenallan briefly narrated
his unhappy family history---his concealed marriage---the
horrible invention by which his mother had designed to render
impossible that union which had already taken place. He detailed
the arts by which the Countess, having all the documents
relative to Miss Neville's birth in her hands, had produced those
only relating to a period during which, for family reasons, his
father had consented to own that young lady as his natural
daughter, and showed how impossible it was that he could
either suspect or detect the fraud put upon him by his mother,
and vouched by the oaths of her attendants, Teresa and Elspeth. 
``I left my paternal mansion,'' he concluded, ``as if the furies
of hell had driven me forth, and travelled with frantic velocity
I knew not whither. Nor have I the slightest recollection of
what I did or whither I went, until I was discovered by my
brother. I will not trouble you with an account of my sick-bed
and recovery, or how, long afterwards, I ventured to inquire
after the sharer of my misfortunes, and heard that her despair
had found a dreadful remedy for all the ills of life. The first
thing that roused me to thought was hearing of your inquiries
into this cruel business; and you will hardly wonder, that, believing
what I did believe, I should join in those expedients to
stop your investigation, which my brother and mother had actively
commenced. The information which I gave them concerning
the circumstances and witnesses of our private marriage
enabled them to baffle your zeal. The clergyman, therefore, and
witnesses, as persons who had acted in the matter only to please
the powerful heir of Glenallan, were accessible to his promises
and threats, and were so provided for, that they had no objections
to leave this country for another. For myself, Mr. Oldbuck,''
pursued this unhappy man, ``from that moment I considered
myself as blotted out of the book of the living, and as having nothing
left to do with this world. My mother tried to reconcile
me to life by every art---even by intimations which I can now
interpret as calculated to produce a doubt of the horrible tale
she herself had fabricated. But I construed all she said as the
fictions of maternal affection. I will forbear all reproach. She
is no more---and, as her wretched associate said, she knew not
how the dart was poisoned, or how deep it must sink, when she
threw it from her hand. But, Mr. Oldbuck, if ever, during these
twenty years, there crawled upon earth a living being deserving
of your pity, I have been that man. My food has not nourished
me---my sleep has not refreshed me---my devotions have not
comforted me---all that is cheering and necessary to man has
been to me converted into poison. The rare and limited intercourse
which I have held with others has been most odious to
me. I felt as if I were bringing the contamination of unnatural
and inexpressible guilt among the gay and the innocent. There
have been moments when I had thoughts of another description
---to plunge into the adventures of war, or to brave the dangers
of the traveller in foreign and barbarous climates---to mingle in
political intrigue, or to retire to the stern seclusion of the anchorites
of our religion;---all these are thoughts which have alternately
passed through my mind, but each required an energy,
which was mine no longer, after the withering stroke I had
received. I vegetated on as I could in the same spot---fancy,
feeling, judgment, and health, gradually decaying, like a tree
whose bark has been destroyed,---when first the blossoms fade,
then the boughs, until its state resembles the decayed and dying
trunk that is now before you. Do you now pity and forgive
me?''

  ``My lord,'' answered the Antiquary, much affected, ``my
pity---my forgiveness, you have not to ask, for your dismal story
is of itself not only an ample excuse for whatever appeared
mysterious in your conduct, but a narrative that might move
your worst enemies (and I, my lord, was never of the number)
to tears and to sympathy. But permit me to ask what you
now mean to do, and why you have honoured me, whose opinion
can be of little consequence, with your confidence on this occasion?''

  ``Mr. Oldbuck,'' answered the Earl, ``as I could never have
foreseen the nature of that confession which I have heard this
day, I need not say that I had no formed plan of consulting you,
or any one, upon affairs the tendency of which I could not even
have suspected. But I am without friends, unused to business,
and, by long retirement, unacquainted alike with the laws of the
land and the habits of the living generation; and when, most
unexpectedly, I find myself immersed in the matters of which I
know least, I catch, like a drowning man, at the first support
that offers. You are that support, Mr. Oldbuck. I have always
heard you mentioned as a man of wisdom and intelligence---I
have known you myself as a man of a resolute and independent
spirit;---and there is one circumstance,'' said he, ``which ought
to combine us in some degree---our having paid tribute to the
same excellence of character in poor Eveline. You offered yourself
to me in my need, and you were already acquainted with the
beginning of my misfortunes. To you, therefore, I have recourse
for advice, for sympathy, for support.''

  ``You shall seek none of them in vain, my lord,'' said Oldbuck,
``so far as my slender ability extends;---and I am honoured by
the preference, whether it arises from choice, or is prompted by
chance. But this is a matter to be ripely considered. May I
ask what are your principal views at present?''

  ``To ascertain the fate of my child,'' said the Earl, ``be the
consequences what they may, and to do justice to the honour of
Eveline, which I have only permitted to be suspected to avoid
discovery of the yet more horrible taint to which I was made to
believe it liable.''

  ``And the memory of your mother?''

  ``Must bear its own burden,'' answered the Earl with a sigh:
``better that she were justly convicted of deceit, should that be
found necessary, than that others should be unjustly accused of
crimes so much more dreadful.''

  ``Then, my lord,'' said Oldbuck, ``our first business must be
to put the information of the old woman, Elspeth, into a regular
and authenticated form.''

  ``That,'' said Lord Glenallan, ``will be at present, I fear,
impossible. She is exhausted herself, and surrounded by her
distressed family. To-morrow, perhaps, when she is alone---
and yet I doubt, from her imperfect sense of right and wrong,
whether she would speak out in any one's presence but my own. 
I am too sorely fatigued.''

  ``Then, my lord,'' said the Antiquary, whom the interest of
the moment elevated above points of expense and convenience,
which had generally more than enough of weight with him,
``I would propose to your lordship, instead of returning, fatigued
as you are, so far as to Glenallan House, or taking the more uncomfortable
alternative of going to a bad inn at Fairport, to
alarm all the busybodies of the town---I would propose, I say,
that you should be my guest at Monkbarns for this night. By
to-morrow these poor people will have renewed their out-of-doors
vocation---for sorrow with them affords no respite from labour,
---and we will visit the old woman Elspeth alone, and take
down her examination.''

  After a formal apology for the encroachment, Lord Glenallan
agreed to go with him, and underwent with patience in their
return home the whole history of John of the Girnel, a legend
which Mr. Oldbuck was never known to spare any one who
crossed his threshold.

  The arrival of a stranger of such note, with two saddle-horses
and a servant in black, which servant had holsters on his saddle-bow,
and a coronet upon the holsters, created a general commotion
in the house of Monkbarns. Jenny Rintherout, scarce recovered
from the hysterics which she had taken on hearing of
poor Steenie's misfortune, chased about the turkeys and poultry,
cackled and screamed louder than they did, and ended by killing
one-half too many. Miss Griselda made many wise reflections
on the hot-headed wilfulness of her brother, who had occasioned
such devastation, by suddenly bringing in upon them a papist
nobleman. And she ventured to transmit to Mr. Blattergowl
some hint of the unusual slaughter which had taken place in
the _basse-cour,_ which brought the honest clergyman to inquire
how his friend Monkbarns had got home, and whether he was
not the worse of being at the funeral, at a period so near the
ringing of the bell for dinner, that the Antiquary had no choice
left but to invite him to stay and bless the meat. Miss M`Intyre
had on her part some curiosity to see this mighty peer, of whom
all had heard, as an eastern caliph or sultan is heard of by his
subjects, and felt some degree of timidity at the idea of encountering
a person, of whose unsocial habits and stern manners so many
stories were told, that her fear kept at least pace with her
curiosity. The aged housekeeper was no less flustered and
hurried in obeying the numerous and contradictory commands of
her mistress, concerning preserves, pastry and fruit, the mode of
marshalling and dishing the dinner, the necessity of not permitting
the melted butter to run to oil, and the danger of allowing
Juno---who, though formally banished from the parlour, failed
not to maraud about the out-settlements of the family---to enter
the kitchen.

  The only inmate of Monkbarns who remained entirely indifferent
on this momentous occasion was Hector M`Intyre, who
cared no more for an Earl than he did for a commoner, and who
was only interested in the unexpected visit, as it might afford
some protection against his uncle's displeasure, if he harboured
any, for his not attending the funeral, and still more against his
satire upon the subject of his gallant but unsuccessful single
combat with the _phoca,_ or seal.

  To these, the inmates of his household, Oldbuck presented
the Earl of Glenallan, who underwent, with meek and subdued
civility, the prosing speeches of the honest divine, and the
lengthened apologies of Miss Griselda Oldbuck, which her brother
in vain endeavoured to abridge. Before the dinner hour, Lord
Glenallan requested permission to retire a while to his chamber.
Mr. Oldbuck accompanied his guest to the Green Room, which
had been hastily prepared for his reception. He looked around
with an air of painful recollection.

  ``I think,'' at length he observed, ``I think, Mr. Oldbuck,
that I have been in this apartment before.''

  ``Yes, my lord,'' answered Oldbuck, ``upon occasion of an
excursion hither from Knockwinnock---and since we are upon
a subject so melancholy, you may perhaps remember whose
taste supplied these lines from Chaucer, which now form the
motto of the tapestry.''

  ``I guess'', said the Earl, ``though I cannot recollect. She
excelled me, indeed, in literary taste and information, as in
everything else; and it is one of the mysterious dispensations
of Providence, Mr. Oldbuck, that a creature so excellent in
mind and body should have been cut off in so miserable a
manner, merely from her having formed a fatal attachment to
such a wretch as I am.''

  Mr. Oldbuck did not attempt an answer to this burst of the
grief which lay ever nearest to the heart of his guest, but,
pressing Lord Glenallan's hand with one of his own, and
drawing the other across his shaggy eyelashes, as if to brush
away a mist that intercepted his sight, he left the Earl at
liberty to arrange himself previous to dinner.

