




		CHAPTER THIRD.

	He had a routh o' auld nick-nackets,
	Rusty airn caps, and jinglin-jackets,
	Would held the Loudons three in tackets,
		A towmond gude;
	And parritch-pats, and auld sayt-backets,
		Afore the flude.
					Burns.

  After he had settled himself in his new apartments at Fairport,
Mr. Lovel bethought him of paying the requested visit to his
fellow-traveller. He did not make it earlier, because, with all
the old gentleman's good-humour and information, there had
sometimes glanced forth in his language and manner towards
him an air of superiority, which his companion considered as
being fully beyond what the difference of age warranted. He
therefore waited the arrival of his baggage from Edinburgh,
that he might arrange his dress according to the fashion of the
day, and make his exterior corresponding to the rank in society
which he supposed or felt himself entitled to hold.

  It was the fifth day after his arrival, that, having made the
necessary inquiries concerning the road, he went forth to pay
his respects at Monkbarns. A footpath leading over a heathy
hill, and through two or three meadows, conducted him to
this mansion, which stood on the opposite side of the hill aforesaid,
and commanded a fine prospect of the bay and shipping. 
Secluded from the town by the rising ground, which also
screened it from the north-west wind, the house had a solitary,
and sheltered appearance. The exterior had little to recommend
it. It was an irregular old-fashioned building, some part of
which had belonged to a grange, or solitary farm-house, inhabited
by the bailiff, or steward, of the monastery, when the place was
in possession of the monks. It was here that the community
stored up the grain, which they received as ground-rent from
their vassals; for, with the prudence belonging to their order,
all their conventional revenues were made payable in kind, and
hence, as the present proprietor loved to tell, came the name of
Monkbarns. To the remains of the bailiff's house, the succeeding
lay inhabitants had made various additions in proportion to
the accommodation required by their families; and, as this was
done with an equal contempt of convenience within and architectural
regularity without, the whole bore the appearance of a
hamlet which had suddenly stood still when in the act of
leading down one of Amphion's, or Orpheus's, country dances. 
It was surrounded by tall clipped hedges of yew and holly,
some of which still exhibited the skill of the _topiarian_ artist, *

* _Ars Topiaria,_ the art of clipping yew-hedges into fantastic figures. 
* A Latin poem, entitled _Ars Topiaria,_ contains a curious account of the
* process.

and presented curious arm-chairs, towers, and the figures of
Saint George and the Dragon. The taste of Mr. Oldbuck did
not disturb these monuments of an art now unknown, and he
was the less tempted so to do, as it must necessarily have
broken the heart of the old gardener. One tall embowering
holly was, however, sacred from the shears; and, on a garden
seat beneath its shade, Lovel beheld his old friend with spectacles
on nose, and pouch on side, busily employed in perusing the
London Chronicle, soothed by the summer breeze through the
rustling leaves, and the distant dash of the waves as they
rippled upon the sand.

  Mr. Oldbuck immediately rose, and advanced to greet his
travelling acquaintance with a hearty shake of the hand. ``By
my faith,'' said he, ``I began to think you had changed your
mind, and found the stupid people of Fairport so tiresome, that
you judged them unworthy of your talents, and had taken
French leave, as my old friend and brother-antiquary Mac-Cribb
did, when he went off with one of my Syrian medals.''

  ``I hope, my good sir, I should have fallen under no such
imputation.''

  ``Quite as bad, let me tell you, if you had stolen yourself
away without giving me the pleasure of seeing you again. I
had rather you had taken my copper Otho himself.---But come,
let me show you the way into my _sanctum sanctorum_---my cell
I may call it, for, except two idle hussies of womankind,'' (by
this contemptuous phrase, borrowed from his brother-antiquary,
the cynic Anthony a-Wood, Mr. Oldbuck was used to denote
the fair sex in general, and his sister and niece in particular),
``that, on some idle pretext of relationship, have established
themselves in my premises, I live here as much a C<oe>nobite as
my predecessor, John o' the Girnell, whose grave I will show
you by and by.''

  Thus speaking the old gentleman led the way through a
low door; but before entrance, suddenly stopped short to point
out some vestiges of what he called an inscription, and, shaking
his head as he pronounced it totally illegible, ``Ah! if you but
knew, Mr. Lovel, the time and trouble that these mouldering
traces of letters have cost me! No mother ever travailed so for
a child---and all to no purpose---although I am almost positive
that these two last marks imply the figures, or letters, LV, and
may give us a good guess at the real date of the building, since
we know, _aliunde,_ that it was founded by Abbot Waldimir
about the middle of the fourteenth century---and, I profess, I
think that centre ornament might be made out by better eyes
than mine.''

  ``I think,'' answered Lovel, willing to humour the old man,
``it has something the appearance of a mitre.''

  ``I protest you are right! you are right! it never struck me
before---see what it is to have younger eyes---A mitre---a mitre
---it corresponds in every respect.''

  The resemblance was not much nearer than that of Polonius's
cloud to a whale, or an owzel; it was sufficient, however, to set
the Antiquary's brains to work. ``A mitre, my dear sir,'' continued
he, as he led the way through a labyrinth of inconvenient
and dark passages, and accompanied his disquisition with certain
necessary cautions to his guest---``A mitre, my dear sir, will
suit our abbot as well as a bishop---he was a mitred abbot, and
at the very top of the roll---take care of these three steps---I
know Mac-Cribb denies this, but it is as certain as that he took
away my Antigonus, no leave asked---you'll see the name of the
Abbot of Trotcosey, _Abbas Trottocosiensis,_ at the head of the
rolls of parliament in the fourteenth and fifteenth centuries---
there is very little light here, and these cursed womankind
always leave their tubs in the passage---now take, care of the
corner---ascend twelve steps, and ye are safe!''

  Mr. Oldbuck had by this time attained the top of the winding
stair which led to his own apartment, and opening a door, and
pushing aside a piece of tapestry with which it was covered, his
first exclamation was, ``What are you about here, you sluts?''
A dirty barefooted chambermaid threw down her duster, detected
in the heinous fact of arranging the _sanctum sanctorum,_
and fled out of an opposite door from the face of her incensed
master. A genteel-looking young woman, who was superintending
the operation, stood her ground, but with some timidity.

  ``Indeed, uncle, your room was not fit to be seen, and I just
came to see that Jenny laid everything down where she took
it up.''

  ``And how dare you, or Jenny either, presume to meddle
with my private matters?'' (Mr. Oldbuck hated _puttting to
rights_ as much as Dr. Orkborne, or any other professed student.)
``Go, sew your sampler, you monkey, and do not let me find
you here again, as you value your ears.---I assure you, Mr.
Lovel, that the last inroad of these pretended friends to cleanliness
was almost as fatal to my collection as Hudibras's visit to
that of Sidrophel; and I have ever since missed

	My copperplate, with almanacks
	Engraved upon't and other knacks
	My moon-dial, with Napier's bones,
	And several constellation Stones;
	My flea, my morpeon, and punaise,
	I purchased for my proper ease.

And so forth, as old Butler has it.''

 The young lady, after courtesying to Lovel, had taken the
opportunity to make her escape during this enumeration of
losses. ``You'll be poisoned here with the volumes of dust they
have raised,'' continued the Antiquary; ``but I assure you the
dust was very ancient, peaceful, quiet dust, about an hour ago,
and would have remained so for a hundred years, had not these
gipsies disturbed it, as they do everything else in the world.''

  It was indeed some time before Lovel could, through the
thick atmosphere, perceive in what sort of den his friend had
constructed his retreat. It was a lofty room of middling size,
obscurely lighted by high narrow latticed windows. One end
was entirely occupied by book-shelves, greatly too limited in
space for the number of volumes placed upon them, which were,
therefore, drawn up in ranks of two or three files deep, while
numberless others littered the floor and the tables, amid a chaos
of maps, engraving, scraps of parchment, bundles of papers,
pieces of old armour, swords, dirks, helmets, and Highland
targets. Behind Mr. Oldbuck's seat (which was an ancient
leathern-covered easy-chair, worn smooth by constant use) was
a huge oaken cabinet, decorated at each corner with Dutch
cherubs, having their little duck-wings displayed, and great
jolter-headed visages placed between them. The top of this
cabinet was covered with busts, and Roman lamps and pater<ae>,
intermingled with one or two bronze figures. The walls of the
apartment were partly clothed with grim old tapestry, representing
the memorable story of Sir Gawaine's wedding, in which
full justice was done to the ugliness of the Lothely Lady;
although, to judge from his own looks, the gentle knight had
less reason to be disgusted with the match on account of
disparity of outward favour, than the romancer has given us to
understand. The rest of the room was panelled, or wainscotted,
with black oak, against which hung two or three portraits in
armour, being characters in Scottish history, favourites of Mr.
Oldbuck, and as many in tie-wigs and laced coats, staring
representatives of his own ancestors. A large old-fashioned
oaken table was covered with a profusion of papers, parchments,
books, and nondescript trinkets and gewgaws, which seemed to
have little to recommend them, besides rust and the antiquity
which it indicates. In the midst of this wreck of ancient books
and utensils, with a gravity equal to Marius among the ruins
of Carthage, sat a large black cat, which, to a superstitious eye,
might have presented the _genius loci,_ the tutelar demon of the
apartment. The floor, as well as the table and chairs, was overflowed
by the same _mare magnum_ of miscellaneous trumpery,
where it would have been as impossible to find any individual
article wanted, as to put it to any use when discovered.

  Amid this medley, it was no easy matter to find one's way to
a chair, without stumbling over a prostrate folio, or the still
more awkward mischance of overturning some piece of Roman
or ancient British pottery. And, when the chair was attained,
it had to be disencumbered, with a careful hand, of engravings
which might have received damage, and of antique spurs and
buckles, which would certainly have occasioned it to any sudden
occupant. Of this the Antiquary made Lovel particularly aware,
adding, that his friend, the Rev. Doctor Heavysterne from the Low
Countries, had sustained much injury by sitting down suddenly
and incautiously on three ancient calthrops, or _craw-taes,_ which
had been lately dug up in the bog near Bannockburn, and
which, dispersed by Robert Bruce to lacerate the feet of the
English chargers, came thus in process of time to endamage the
sitting part of a learned professor of Utrecht.

  Having at length fairly settled himself, and being nothing
loath to make inquiry concerning the strange objects around
him, which his host was equally ready, as far as possible, to
explain, Lovel was introduced to a large club, or bludgeon,
with an iron spike at the end of it, which, it seems, had been
lately found in a field on the Monkbarns property, adjacent to
an old burying-ground. It had mightily the air of such a stick
as the Highland reapers use to walk with on their annual
peregrinations from their mountains; but Mr. Oldbuck was
strongly tempted to believe, that, as its shape was singular, it
might have been one of the clubs with which the monks armed
their peasants in lieu of more martial weapons,---whence, he
observed, the villains were called _Colve-carles,_ or _Kolb-kerls,_
that is, _Clavigeri,_ or club-bearers. For the truth of this custom,
he quoted the chronicle of Antwerp and that of St. Martin;
against which authorities Lovel had nothing to oppose, having
never heard of them till that moment.

  Mr. Oldbuck next exhibited thumb-screws, which had given
the Covenanters of former days the cramp in their joints, and
a collar with the name of a fellow convicted of theft, whose
services, as the inscription bore, had been adjudged to a neighbouring
baron, in lieu of the modern Scottish punishment,
which, as Oldbuck said, sends such culprits to enrich England
by their labour, and themselves by their dexterity. Many and
various were the other curiosities which he showed;---but it
was chiefly upon his books that he prided himself, repeating,
with a complacent air, as he led the way to the crowded and
dusty shelves, the verses of old Chaucer---

	For he would rather have, at his bed-head,
	A twenty books, clothed in black or red,
	Of Aristotle, or his philosophy,
	Than robes rich, rebeck, or saltery.

This pithy motto he delivered, shaking his head, and giving
each guttural the true Anglo-Saxon enunciation, which is now
forgotten in the southern parts of this realm.

  The collection was indeed a curious one, and might well be
envied by an amateur. Yet it was not collected at the enormous
prices of modern times, which are sufficient to have appalled
the most determined as well as earliest bibliomaniac upon
record, whom we take to have been none else than the renowned
Don Quixote de la Mancha, as, among other slight indications
of an infirm understanding, he is stated, by his veracious
historian, Cid Hamet Benengeli, to have exchanged fields and
farms for folios and quartos of chivalry. In this species of
exploit, the good knight-errant has been imitated by lords,
knights, and squires of our own day, though we have not yet
heard of any that has mistaken an inn for a castle, or laid his
lance in rest against a windmill. Mr. Oldbuck did not follow
these collectors in such excess of expenditure; but, taking a
pleasure in the personal labour of forming his library, saved
his purse at the expense of his time and toil, He was no
encourager of that ingenious race of peripatetic middle-men,
who, trafficking between the obscure keeper of a stall and the
eager amateur, make their profit at once of the ignorance of
the former, and the dear-bought skill and taste of the latter. 
When such were mentioned in his hearing, he seldom failed to
point out how necessary it was to arrest the object of your
curiosity in its first transit, and to tell his favourite story of
Snuffy Davie and Caxton's Game at Chess.---``Davy Wilson,''
he said, ``commonly called Snuffy Davy, from his inveterate
addiction to black rappee, was the very prince of scouts for
searching blind alleys, cellars, and stalls for rare volumes. He
had the scent of a slow-hound, sir, and the snap of a bull-dog.
He would detect you an old black-letter ballad among the
leaves of a law-paper, and find an _editio princeps_ under the
mask of a school Corderius. Snuffy Davy bought the `Game
of Chess, 1474,' the first book ever printed in England, from a
stall in Holland, for about two groschen, or twopence of our
money. He sold it to Osborne for twenty pounds, and as many
books as came to twenty pounds more. Osborne resold this
inimitable windfall to Dr. Askew for sixty guineas. At Dr.
Askew's sale,'' continued the old gentleman, kindling as he
spoke, ``this inestimable treasure blazed forth in its full value,
and was purchased by Royalty itself for one hundred and
seventy pounds!---Could a copy now occur, Lord only knows,''
he ejaculated, with a deep sigh and lifted-up hands---``Lord
only knows what would be its ransom; and yet it was originally
secured, by skill and research, for the easy equivalent of two-pence
sterling.* Happy, thrice happy, Snuffy Davie!---and

* This bibliomaniacal anecdote is literally true; and David Wilson, the
* author need not tell his brethren of the Roxburghe and Bannatyne Clubs,
* was a real personage.

blessed were the times when thy industry could be so rewarded!

  ``Even I, sir,'' he went on, ``though far inferior in industry
and discernment and presence of mind, to that great man, can
show you a few---a very few things, which I have collected, not
by force of money, as any wealthy man might,---although, as
my friend Lucian says, he might chance to throw away his
coin only to illustrate his ignorance,---but gained in a manner
that shows I know something of the matter. See this bundle
of ballads, not one of them later than 1700, and some of them
an hundred years older. I wheedled an old woman out of these,
who loved them better than her psalm-book. Tobacco, sir,
snuff, and the Complete Syren, were the equivalent! For that,
mutilated copy of the Complaynt of Scotland, I sat out the
drinking of two dozen bottles of strong ale with the late learned
proprietor, who, in gratitude, bequeathed it to me by his last
will. These little Elzevirs are the memoranda and trophies of
many a walk by night and morning through the Cowgate, the
Canongate, the Bow, St. Mary's Wynd,---wherever, in fine,
there were to be found brokers and trokers, those miscellaneous
dealers in things rare and curious. How often have I stood
haggling on a halfpenny, lest, by a too ready acquiescence in
the dealer's first price, he should be led to suspect the value I
set upon the article!---how have I trembled, lest some passing
stranger should chop in between me and the prize, and regarded
each poor student of divinity that stopped to turn over the
books at the stall, as a rival amateur, or prowling bookseller in
disguise!---And then, Mr. Lovel, the sly satisfaction with which
one pays the consideration, and pockets the article, affecting a
cold indifference, while the hand is trembling with pleasure!---
Then to dazzle the eyes of our wealthier and emulous rivals by
showing them such a treasure as this'' (displaying a little black
smoked book about the size of a primer); ``to enjoy their surprise
and envy, shrouding meanwhile, under a veil of mysterious
consciousness, our own superior knowledge and dexterity
these, my young friend, these are the white moments of life,
that repay the toil, and pains, and sedulous attention, which
our profession, above all others, so peculiarly demands!''

  Lovel was not a little amused at hearing the old gentleman
run on in this manner, and, however incapable of entering into
the full merits of what he beheld, he admired, as much as
could have been expected, the various treasures which Oldbuck
exhibited. Here were editions esteemed as being the first, and
there stood those scarcely less regarded as being the last and
best; here was a book valued because it had the author's final
improvements, and there another which (strange to tell!) was
in request because it had them not. One was precious because
it was a folio, another because it was a duodecimo; some
because they were tall, some because they were short; the
merit of this lay in the title-page---of that in the arrangement
of the letters in the word Finis. There was, it seemed, no
peculiar distinction, however trifling or minute, which might
not give value to a volume, providing the indispensable quality
of scarcity, or rare occurrence, was attached to it.

  Not the least fascinating was the original broadside,---the
Dying Speech, Bloody Murder, or Wonderful Wonder of
Wonders,---in its primary tattered guise, as it was hawked
through the streets, and sold for the cheap and easy price of
one penny, though now worth the weight of that penny in gold. 
On these the Antiquary dilated with transport, and read, with
a rapturous voice, the elaborate titles, which bore the same
proportion to the contents that the painted signs without a
showman's booth do to the animals within. Mr. Oldbuck, for
example, piqued himself especially in possessing an _unique_ broadside,
entitled and called ``Strange and Wonderful News from
Chipping-Norton, in the County of Oxon, of certain dreadful
Apparitions which were seen in the Air on the 26th of July
1610, at Half an Hour after Nine o'Clock at Noon, and
continued till Eleven, in which Time was seen Appearances of
several flaming Swords, strange Motions of the superior Orbs;
with the unusual Sparkling of the Stars, with their dreadful
Continuations; With the Account of the Opening of the Heavens,
and strange Appearances therein disclosing themselves, with
several other prodigious Circumstances not heard of in any Age,
to the great Amazement of the Beholders, as it was communicated
in a Letter to one Mr. Colley, living in West Smithfield,
and attested by Thomas Brown, Elizabeth Greenaway, and
Anne Gutheridge, who were Spectators of the dreadful Apparitions:
And if any one would be further satisfied of the Truth
of this Relation, let them repair to Mr. Nightingale's at the
Bear Inn, in West Smithfield, and they may be satisfied.''*

* Of this thrice and four times rare broadside, the author possesses an
* exemplar.


  ``You laugh at this,'' said the proprietor of the collection,
``and I forgive you. I do acknowledge that the charms on
which we doat are not so obvious to the eyes of youth as those
of a fair lady; but you will grow wiser, and see more justly,
when you come to wear spectacles.---Yet stay, I have one piece
of antiquity, which you, perhaps, will prize more highly.''

  So saying, Mr. Oldbuck unlocked a drawer, and took out a
bundle of keys, then pulled aside a piece of the tapestry which
concealed the door of a small closet, into which he descended
by four stone steps, and, after some tinkling among bottles and
cans, produced two long-stalked wine-glasses with bell mouths,
such as are seen in Teniers' pieces, and a small bottle of what be
called rich racy canary, with a little bit of diet cake, on a small
silver server of exquisite old workmanship. ``I will say nothing
of the server,'' he remarked, ``though it is said to have been
wrought by the old mad Florentine, Benvenuto Cellini. But,
Mr. Lovel, our ancestors drank sack---you, who admire the
drama, know where that's to be found.---Here's success to your
exertions at Fairport, sir!''

  ``And to you, sir, and an ample increase to your treasure,
with no more trouble on your part than is just necessary to
make the acquisitions valuable.''

  After a libation so suitable to the amusement in which they
had been engaged, Lovel rose to take his leave, and Mr. Oldbuck
prepared to give him his company a part of the way, and
show him something worthy of his curiosity on his return to
Fairport.
