





		CHAPTER NINTH.

	``Be brave,'' she cried, ``you yet may be our guest,
	Our haunted room was ever held the best.
	If, then, your valour can the sight sustain
	Of rustling curtains and the clinking chain
	If your courageous tongue have powers to talk,
	When round your bed the horrid ghost shall walk
	If you dare ask it why it leaves its tomb,
	I'll see your sheets well air'd, and show the Room.''
						True Story.

  The reached the room in which they had dined, and were
clamorously welcomed by Miss Oldbuck.

  ``Where's the younger womankind?'' said the Antiquary.

  ``Indeed, brother, amang a' the steery, Maria wadna be
guided by me she set away to the Halket-craig-head---I wonder
ye didna see her.''

  ``Eh!---what---what's that you say, sister?---did the girl go
out in a night like this to the Halket-head?---Good God! the
misery of the night is not ended yet!''

  ``But ye winna wait, Monkbarns---ye are so imperative and
impatient''------

  ``Tittle-tattle, woman,'' said the impatient and agitated
Antiquary, ``where is my dear Mary?''

  ``Just where ye suld be yoursell, Monkbarns---up-stairs, and
in her warm bed.''

  ``I could have sworn it,'' said Oldbuck laughing, but obviously
much relieved---``I could have sworn it;---the lazy monkey did
not care if we were all drowned together. Why did you say
she went out?''

  ``But ye wadna wait to hear out my tale, Monkbarns---she
gaed out, and she came in again with the gardener sae sune as
she saw that nane o' ye were clodded ower the Craig, and that
Miss Wardour was safe in the chariot; she was hame a quarter
of an hour syne, for it's now ganging ten---sair droukit
was she, puir thing, sae I e'en put a glass o' sherry in her water-gruel.''

  ``Right, Grizel, right---let womankind alone for coddling
each other. But hear me, my venerable sister---start not at the
word venerable; it implies many praiseworthy qualities besides
age; though that too is honourable, albeit it is the last quality
for which womankind would wish to be honoured---But perpend
my words: let Lovel and me have forthwith the relics of the
chicken-pie, and the reversion of the port.''

  ``The chicken-pie! the port!---ou dear! brother---there was
but a wheen banes, and scarce a drap o' the wine.''

  The Antiquary's countenance became clouded, though he was
too well bred to give way, in the presence of a stranger, to his
displeased surprise at the, disappearance of the viands on which
he had reckoned with absolute certainty. But his sister understood
these looks of ire. ``Ou dear! Monkbarns, what's the
use of making a wark?''

  ``I make no wark, as ye call it, woman.''

  ``But what's the use o' looking sae glum and glunch about a
pickle banes?---an ye will hae the truth, ye maun ken the
minister came in, worthy man---sair distressed he was, nae
doubt, about your precarious situation, as he ca'd it (for ye
ken how weel he's gifted wi' words), and here he wad bide till
he could hear wi' certainty how the matter was likely to gang
wi' ye a'---He said fine things on the duty of resignation to
Providence's will, worthy man! that did he.''

  Oldbuck replied, catching the same tone, ``Worthy man!---
he cared not how soon Monkbarns had devolved on an heir-female,
I've a notion;---and while he was occupied in this
Christian office of consolation against impending evil, I reckon
that the chicken-pie and my good port disappeared?''

  ``Dear brother, how can you speak of sic frivolities, when
you have had sic an escape from the craig?''

  ``Better than my supper has had from the minister's _craig,_
Grizzle---it's all discussed, I suppose?''

  ``Hout, Monkbarns, ye speak as if there was nae mair meat
in the house---wad ye not have had me offer the honest man
some slight refreshment after his walk frae the manse?''

  Oldbuck half-whistled, half-hummed, the end of the old
Scottish ditty,

	O, first they eated the white puddings,
	    And then they eated the black, O,
	And thought the gudeman unto himsell,
	    The deil clink down wi' that, O!

  His sister hastened to silence his murmurs, by proposing some
of the relies of the dinner. He spoke of another bottle of wine,
but recommended in preference a glass of brandy which was
really excellent. As no entreaties could prevail on Lovel to
indue the velvet night-cap and branched morning-gown of his
host, Oldbuck, who pretended to a little knowledge of the
medical art, insisted on his going to bed as soon as possible,
and proposed to despatch a messenger (the indefatigable Caxon)
to Fairport early in the morning, to procure him a change of
clothes.

  This was the first intimation Miss Oldbuck had received that
the young stranger was to be their guest for the night; and
such was the surprise with which she was struck by a proposal
so uncommon, that, had the superincumbent weight of her
bead-dress, such as we before described, been less preponderant,
her grey locks must have started up on end, and hurled it from
its position.

  ``Lord haud a care o' us!'' exclaimed the astounded maiden.

  ``What's the matter now, Grizel?''

  ``Wad ye but just speak a moment, Monkbarns?''

  ``Speak!---what should I speak about? I want to get to
my bed---and this poor young fellow---let a bed be made ready
for him instantly.''

  ``A bed?---The Lord preserve us!'' again ejaculated Grizel.

  ``Why, what's the matter now?---are there not beds and
rooms enough in the house?---was it not an ancient _hospitium,_
in which, I am warranted to say, beds were nightly made down
for a score of pilgrims?''

  ``O dear, Monkbarns! wha kens what they might do lang
syne?---but in our time---beds---ay, troth, there's beds enow sic
as they are---and rooms enow too---but ye ken yoursell the beds
haena been sleepit in, Lord kens the time, nor the rooms aired.
---If I had kenn'd, Mary and me might hae gaen down to the
manse--Miss Beckie is aye fond to see us---(and sae is the
minister, brother)---But now, gude save us!''------

  ``Is there not the Green Room, Grizel?''

  ``Troth is there, and it is in decent order too, though naebody
has sleepit there since Dr. Heavysterne, and''------

  ``And what?''

  ``And what! I am sure ye ken yoursell what a night he had
---ye wadna expose the young gentleman to the like o' that, wad
ye?''

  Lovel interfered upon hearing this altercation, and protested
he would far rather walk home than put them to the least
inconvenience---that the exercise would be of service to him---
that he knew the road perfectly, by night or day, to Fairport
---that the storm was abating, and so forth---adding all that
civility could suggest as an excuse for escaping from a hospitality
which seemed more inconvenient to his host than he could
possibly have anticipated. But the howling of the wind, and
the pattering of the rain against the windows, with his knowledge
of the preceding fatigues of the evening, must have
prohibited Oldbuck, even had he entertained less regard for his
young friend than he really felt, from permitting him to depart. 
Besides, be was piqued in honour to show that he himself was
not governed by womankind---``Sit ye down, sit ye down, sit ye
down, man,'' he reiterated;---``an ye part so, I would I might
never draw a cork again, and here comes out one from a prime
bottle of---strong ale---right _anno domini_---none of your Wassia
Quassia decoctions, but brewed of Monkbarns barley---John of
the Girnel never drew a better flagon to entertain a wandering
minstrel, or palmer, with the freshest news from Palestine.---
And to remove from your mind the slightest wish to depart,
know, that if you do so, your character as a gallant knight is
gone for ever. Why, 'tis an adventure, man, to sleep in the
Green Room at Monkbarns.---Sister, pray see it got ready---
And, although the bold adventurer, Heavysterne, dree'd pain
and dolour in that charmed apartment, it is no reason why a
gallant knight like you, nearly twice as tall, and not half so
heavy, should not encounter and break the spell.''

  ``What! a haunted apartment, I suppose?''

  ``To be sure, to be sure---every mansion in this country of
the slightest antiquity has its ghosts and its haunted chamber,
and you must not suppose us worse off than our neighbours. 
They are going, indeed, somewhat out of fashion. I have seen
the day, when if you had doubted the reality of a ghost in an
old manor-house you ran the risk of being made a ghost yourself,
as Hamlet says.---Yes, if you had challenged the existence
of Redcowl in the Castle of Glenstirym, old Sir Peter Pepperbrand
would have had ye out to his court-yard, made you betake
yourself to your weapon, and if your trick of fence were not the
better, would have sticked you like a paddock, on his own
baronial midden-stead. I once narrowly escaped such an affray
---but I humbled myself, and apologised to Redcowl; for, even
in my younger days, I was no friend to the _monomachia,_ or duel,
and would rather walk with Sir Priest than with Sir Knight---I
care not who knows so much of my valour. Thank God, I am
old now, and can indulge my irritabilities without the necessity
of supporting them by cold steel.''

  Here Miss Oldbuck re-entered, with a singularly sage expression
of countenance.---`Mr. Lovel's bed's ready, brother---clean
sheets---weel aired---a spunk of fire in the chimney---I am sure,
Mr. Lovel,'' (addressing him), ``it's no for the trouble---and I
hope you will have a good night's rest---But''------

  ``You are resolved,'' said the Antiquary, ``to do what you
can to prevent it.''

  ``Me?---I am sure I have said naething, Monkbarns.''

  ``My dear madam,'' said Lovel, ``allow me to ask you the
meaning of your obliging anxiety on my account.''

 ``Ou, Monkbarns does not like to hear of it---but he kens
himsell that the room has an ill name. It's weel minded that
it was there auld Rab Tull the town-clerk was sleeping when
he had that marvellous communication about the grand law-plea
between us and the feuars at the Mussel-craig.---It had cost a
hantle siller, Mr. Lovel; for law-pleas were no carried on without
siller lang syne mair than they are now---and the Monkbarns
of that day---our gudesire, Mr. Lovel, as I said before---
was like to be waured afore the Session for want of a paper---
Monkbarns there kens weel what paper it was, but I'se warrant
he'll no help me out wi' my tale---but it was a paper of great
significance to the plea, and we were to be waured for want o't.
Aweel, the cause was to come on before the fifteen---in presence,
as they ca't---and auld Rab Tull, the town-clerk, he cam ower to
make a last search for the paper that was wanting, before our
gudesire gaed into Edinburgh to look after his plea---so there
was little time to come and gang on. He was but a doited
snuffy body, Rab, as I've heard---but then he was the town-clerk
of Fairport, and the Monkbarns heritors aye employed him
on account of their connection wi' the burgh, ye ken.''

  ``Sister Grizel, this is abominable,'' interrupted Oldbuck; ``I
vow to Heaven ye might have raised the ghosts of every abbot
of Trotcosey, since the days of Waldimir, in the time you have been
detailing the introduction to this single spectre.---Learn to be
succinct in your narrative.---Imitate the concise style of old
Aubrey, an experienced ghost-seer, who entered his memoranda
on these subjects in a terse business-like manner; _exempli gratia_
---`At Cirencester, 5th March, 1670, was an apparition.---Being
demanded whether good spirit or bad, made no answer, but
instantly disappeared with a curious perfume, and a melodious
twang'---_Vide_ his Miscellanies, p. eighteen, as well as I can remember,
and near the middle of the page."

  ``O, Monkbarns, man! do ye think everybody is as book-learned
as yoursell?---But ye like to gar folk look like fools---
ye can do that to Sir Arthur, and the minister his very sell.''

  ``Nature has been beforehand with me, Grizel, in both these instances,
and in another which shall be nameless---but take a glass
of ale, Grizel, and proceed with your story, for it waxes late.''

  ``Jenny's just warming your bed, Monkbarns, and ye maun
e'en wait till she's done.---Weel, I was at the search that our
gudesire, Monkbarns that then was, made wi' auld Rab Tull's
assistance;---but ne'er-be-licket could they find that was to
their purpose. Aud sae, after they bad touzled out mony a
leather poke-full o' papers, the town-clerk had his drap punch
at e'en to wash the dust out of his throat---we never were glass-breakers
in this house, Mr. Lovel, but the body bad got sic a trick
of sippling and tippling wi' the bailies and deacons when they
met (which was amaist ilka night) concerning the common gude
o' the burgh, that he couldna weel sleep without it---But his
punch he gat, and to bed he gaed; and in the middle of the
night he got a fearfu' wakening!---he was never just himsell
after it, and he was strucken wi' the dead palsy that very day
four years. He thought, Mr. Lovel, that he heard the curtains
o' his bed fissil, and out he lookit, fancying, puir man, it might hae
been the cat---But he saw---God hae a care o' us! it gars my
flesh aye creep, though I hae tauld the story twenty times---he
saw a weel-fa'ard auld gentleman standing by his bedside, in the
moonlight, in a queer-fashioned dress, wi' mony a button and
band-string about it, and that part o' his garments which it does
not become a leddy to particulareeze, was baith side and wide, and
as mony plies o't as of ony Hamburgh skipper's---He had a
beard too, and whiskers turned upwards on his upper-lip, as lang
as baudrons'---and mony mair particulars there were that Rab
Tull tauld o', but they are forgotten now---it's an auld story. 
Aweel, Rab was a just-living man for a country writer---and he
was less feared than maybe might just hae been expected; and
he asked in the name o' goodness what the apparition wanted---
and the spirit answered in an unknown tongue. Then Rab said
he tried him wi' Erse, for he cam in his youth frae the braes of
Glenlivat---but it wadna do. Aweel, in this strait, he bethought
him of the twa or three words o' Latin that he used in making
out the town's deeds, and be had nae sooner tried the spirit wi'
that, than out cam sic a blatter o' Latin about his lugs,
that poor Rab Tull, wha was nae great scholar, was clean overwhelmed.
 Od, but he was a bauld body, and he minded the
Latin name for the deed that he was wanting. It was something
about a cart, I fancy, for the ghaist cried aye, _Carter,
carter_------''

  ``_Carta,_ you transformer of languages!'' cried Oldbuck;---``if
my ancestor had learned no other language in the other world,
at least he would not forget the Latinity for which he was
so famous while in this.''

  ``Weel, weel, _carta_ be it then, but they ca'd it _carter_ that
tell'd me the story. It cried aye _carta,_ if sae be that it was
_carta,_ and made a sign to Rab to follow it. Rab Tull keepit a
Highland heart, and banged out o' bed, and till some of his
readiest claes---and he did follow the thing up stairs and down
stairs to the place we ca' the high dow-cot---(a sort of a little
tower in the corner of the auld house, where there was a Tickle
o' useless boxes and trunks)---and there the ghaist gae Rab a kick
wi' the tae foot, and a kick wi' the tother, to that very auld
east-country tabernacle of a cabinet that my brother has standing
beside his library table, and then disappeared like a fuff o'
tobacco, leaving Rab in a very pitiful condition.''

  ``_Tenues secessit in auras,_'' quoth Oldbuck. ``Marry, sir,
_mansit odor_---But, sure enough, the deed was there found in a
drawer of this forgotten repository, which contained many other
curious old papers, now properly labelled and arranged, and
which seemed to have belonged to my ancestor, the first possessor
of Monkbarns. The deed, thus strangely recovered, was the
original Charter of Erection of the Abbey, Abbey Lands, and so
forth, of Trotcosey, comprehending Monkbarns and others, into
a Lordship of Regality in favour of the first Earl of Glengibber,
a favourite of James the Sixth. It is subscribed by the King
at Westminster, the seventeenth day of January, A.D. one thousand
six hundred and twelve---thirteen. It's not worth while
to repeat the witnesses' names.''

  ``I would rather,'' said Lovel with awakened curiosity, ``I
would rather hear your opinion of the way in which the deed
was discovered.''

  ``Why, if I wanted a patron for my legend, I could find no
less a one than Saint Augustine, who tells the story of a deceased
person appearing to his son, when sued for a debt which had
been paid, and directing him where, to find the discharge.*

*  Note D. Mr. Rutherford's dream.

But I rather opine with Lord Bacon, who says that imagination
is much akin to miracle-working faith. There was always some
idle story of the room being haunted by the spirit of Aldobrand
Oldenbuck, my great-great-great-grandfather---it's a shame to
the English language that, we have not a less clumsy way of
expressing a relationship of which we have occasion to think
and speak so frequently. He was a foreigner, and wore his
national dress, of which tradition had preserved an accurate
description; and indeed there is a print of him, supposed to be
by Reginald Elstracke, pulling the press with his own hand, as
it works off the sheets of his scarce edition of the Augsburg
Confession. He was a chemist as well as a good mechanic, and
either of these qualities in this country was at that time sufficient
to constitute a white witch at least. This superstitious
old writer had heard all this, and probably believed it, and in
his sleep the image and idea of my ancestor recalled that of his
cabinet, which, with the grateful attention to antiquities and
the memory of our ancestors not unusually met with, had been
pushed into the pigeon-house to be out of the way---Add a
_quantum sufficit_ of exaggeration, and you have a key to the whole
mystery. ''

  ``O brother! brother! but Dr. Heavysterne, brother---whose
sleep was so sore broken, that he declared he wadna pass another
night in the Green Room to get all Monkbarns, so that Mary
and I were forced to yield our''------

  ``Why, Grizel, the doctor is a good, honest, pudding-headed
German, of much merit in his own way, but fond of the mystical,
like many of his countrymen. You and he had a traffic the
whole evening in which you received tales of Mesmer, Shropfer,
Cagliostro, and other modern pretenders to the mystery of
raising spirits, discovering hidden treasure, and so forth, in
exchange for your legends of the green bedchamber;---and
considering that the _Illustrissimus_ ate a pound and a half of
Scotch collops to supper, smoked six pipes, and drank ale and
brandy in proportion, I am not surprised at his having a fit of
the night-mare. But everything is now ready. Permit me to
light you to your apartment, Mr. Lovel---I am sure you have
need of rest---and I trust my ancestor is too sensible of the
duties of hospitality to interfere with the repose which you have
so well merited by your manly and gallant behaviour.''

  So saying, the Antiquary took up a bedroom candlestick of
massive silver and antique form, which, he observed, was
wrought out of the silver found in the mines of the Harz
mountains, and had been the property of the very personage
who had supplied them with a subject for conversation. And
having so said, he led the way through many a dusky and
winding passage, now ascending, and anon descending again,
until he came to the apartment destined for his young guest.
