




		CHAPTER FIFTH.

	_Launcelot Gobbo._ Mark me now: Now will I raise the waters.
						Merchant of Venice.

  The theatre at Fairport had opened, but no Mr. Lovel
appeared on the boards, nor was there anything in the habits
or deportment of the young gentleman so named, which authorised
Mr. Oldbuck's conjecture that his fellow-traveller was a candidate
for the public favour. Regular were the Antiquary's
inquiries at an old-fashioned barber who dressed the only three
wigs in the parish which, in defiance of taxes and times, were
still subjected to the operation of powdering and frizzling, and
who for that purpose divided his time among the three employers
whom fashion had yet left him; regular, I say, were Mr. Oldbuck's
inquiries at this personage concerning the news of the
little theatre at Fairport, expecting every day to hear of Mr.
Lovel's appearance; on which occasion the old gentleman had
determined to put himself to charges in honour of his young
friend, and not only to go to the play himself, but to carry his
womankind along with him. But old Jacob Caxon conveyed
no information which warranted his taking so decisive a step as
that of securing a box.

  He brought information, on the contrary, that there was a
young man residing at Fairport, of whom the _town_ (by which
he meant all the gossips, who, having no business of their own,
fill up their leisure moments by attending to that of other
people) could make nothing. He sought no society, but rather
avoided that which the apparent gentleness of his manners, and
some degree of curiosity, induced many to offer him. Nothing
could be more regular, or less resembling an adventurer, than
his mode of living, which was simple, but so completely well
arranged, that all who had any transactions with him were loud
in their approbation.

  ``These are not the virtues of a stage-struck hero,'' thought
Oldbuck to himself; and, however habitually pertinacious in
his opinions, he must have been compelled to abandon that
which he had formed in the present instance, but for a part of
Caxon's communication. ``The young gentleman,'' he said,
``was sometimes heard speaking to himsell, and rampauging
about in his room, just as if he was ane o' the player folk.''

  Nothing, however, excepting this single circumstance, occurred
to confirm Mr. Oldbuck's supposition; and it remained a high
and doubtful question, what a well-informed young man, without
friends, connections, or employment of any kind, could have to
do as a resident at Fairport. Neither port wine nor whist had
apparently any charms for him. He declined dining with the
mess of the volunteer cohort which had been lately embodied,
and shunned joining the convivialities of either of the two
parties which then divided Fairport, as they did more important
places. He was too little of an aristocrat to join the club of
Royal True Blues, and too little of a democrat to fraternise with
an affiliated society of the _soi-disant_ Friends of the People,
which the borough had also the happiness of possessing. A
coffee-room was his detestation; and, I grieve to say it, he
had as few sympathies with the tea-table.---In short, since the
name was fashionable in novel-writing, and that is a great
while agone, there was never a Master Lovel of whom so little
positive was known, and who was so universally described by
negatives.

  One negative, however, was important---nobody knew any
harm of Lovel. Indeed, had such existed, it would have been
speedily made public; for the natural desire of speaking evil of
our neighbour could in his case have been checked by no feelings
of sympathy for a being so unsocial. On one account alone he
fell somewhat under suspicion. As he made free use of his
pencil in his solitary walks, and had drawn several views of the
harbour, in which the signal tower, and even the four-gun
battery, were introduced, some zealous friends of the public sent
abroad a whisper, that this mysterious stranger must certainly
be a French spy. The Sheriff paid his respects to Mr. Lovel
accordingly; but in the interview which followed, it would seem
that he had entirely removed that magistrate's suspicions, since
he not only suffered him to remain undisturbed in his retirement,
but it was credibly reported, sent him two invitations to dinner-parties,
both which were civilly declined. But what the nature of
the explanation was, the magistrate kept a profound secret, not
only from the public at large, but from his substitute, his clerk,
his wife and his two daughters, who formed his privy council
on all questions of official duty.

  All these particulars being faithfully reported by Mr. Caxon
to his patron at Monkbarns, tended much to raise Lovel in the
opinion of his former fellow-traveller. ``A decent sensible lad,''
said he to himself, ``who scorns to enter into the fooleries and
nonsense of these idiot people at Fairport---I must do something
for him---I must give him a dinner;---and I will write Sir
Arthur to come to Monkbarns to meet him. I must consult my
womankind.''

  Accordingly, such consultation having been previously held,
a special messenger, being no other than Caxon himself, was
ordered to prepare for a walk to Knockwinnock Castle with a
letter, ``For the honoured Sir Arthur Wardour, of Knockwinnock,
Bart.'' The contents ran thus:

  ``Dear Sir Arthur,

  ``On Tuesday the 17th curt. _stilo novo,_ I hold a c<oe>nobitical
symposion at Monkbarns, and pray you to assist thereat, at
four o'clock precisely. If my fair enemy, Miss Isabel, can and
will honour us by accompanying you, my womankind will be
but too proud to have the aid of such an auxiliary in the cause
of resistance to awful rule and right supremacy. If not, I will
send the womankind to the manse for the day. I have a young
acquaintance to make known to you, who is touched with some
strain of a better spirit than belongs to these giddy-paced times
---reveres his elders, and has a pretty notion of the classics---
and, as such a youth must have a natural contempt for the
people about Fairport, I wish to show him some rational
as well as worshipful society.---I am, Dear Sir Arthur, etc.
etc. etc.''

  ``Fly with this letter, Caxon,'' said the senior, holding out
his missive, _signatum atque sigillatum,_ ``fly to Knockwinnock,
and bring me back an answer. Go as fast as if the town-council
were met and waiting for the provost, and the provost
was waiting for his new-powdered wig.''

  ``Ah sir,'' answered the messenger, with a deep sigh, ``thae
days hae lang gane by. Deil a wig has a provost of Fairport
worn sin' auld Provost Jervie's time---and he had a quean of a
servant-lass that dressed it herself, wi' the doup o' a candle and
a drudging-box. But I hae seen the day, Monkbarns, when
the town-council of Fairport wad hae as soon wanted their town-clerk,
or their gill of brandy ower-head after the haddies, as they
wad hae wanted ilk ane a weel-favoured, sonsy, decent periwig
on his pow. Hegh, sirs! nae wonder the commons will be
discontent and rise against the law, when they see magistrates
and bailies, and deacons, and the provost himsell, wi' heads as
bald and as bare as ane o' my blocks!''

  ``And as well furnished within, Caxon. But away with you!
---you have an excellent view of public affairs, and, I dare say,
have touched the cause of our popular discontent as closely as
the provost could have done himself. But away with you,
Caxon!''

  And off went Caxon upon his walk of three miles---

	He hobbled---but his heart was good!
	Could he go faster than he could?---

  While he is engaged in his journey and return, it may not
be impertinent to inform the reader to whose mansion he was
bearing his embassy.

  We have said that Mr. Oldbuck kept little company with the
surrounding gentlemen, excepting with one person only. This
was Sir Arthur Wardour, a baronet of ancient descent, and of a
large but embarrassed fortune. His father, Sir Anthony, had
been a Jacobite, and had displayed all the enthusiasm of that
party, while it could be served with words only. No man
squeezed the orange with more significant gesture; no one
could more dexterously intimate a dangerous health without
coming under the penal statutes; and, above all, none drank
success to the cause more deeply and devoutly. But, on the
approach of the Highland army in 1745, it would appear that
the worthy baronet's zeal became a little more moderate just
when its warmth was of most consequence. He talked much,
indeed, of taking the field for the rights of Scotland and Charles
Stuart; but his demi-pique saddle would suit only one of his
horses; and that horse could by no means be brought to stand
fire. Perhaps the worshipful owner sympathized in the scruples
of this sagacious quadruped, and began to think, that what was
so much dreaded by the horse could not be very wholesome for
the rider. At any rate, while Sir Anthony Wardour talked,
and drank, and hesitated, the Sturdy provost of Fairport (who,
as we before noticed, was the father of our Antiquary) sallied
from his ancient burgh, heading a body of whig-burghers, and
seized at once, in the name of George II., upon the Castle of
Knockwinnock, and on the four carriage-horses, and person of
the proprietor. Sir Anthony was shortly after sent off to the
Tower of London by a secretary of state's warrant, and with
him went his son, Arthur, then a youth. But as nothing
appeared like an overt act of treason, both father and son were
soon set at liberty, and returned to their own mansion of
Knockwinnock, to drink healths five fathoms deep, and talk of
their sufferings in the royal cause. This became so much a
matter of habit with Sir Arthur, that, even after his father's
death, the non-juring chaplain used to pray regularly for the
restoration of the rightful sovereign, for the downfall of the
usurper, and for deliverance from their cruel and bloodthirsty
enemies; although all idea of serious opposition to the House
of Hanover had long mouldered away, and this treasonable
liturgy was kept up rather as a matter of form than as conveying
any distinct meaning. So much was this the case,
that, about the year 1770, upon a disputed election occurring
in the county, the worthy knight fairly gulped down the oaths
of abjuration and allegiance, in order to serve a candidate in
whom he was interested;---thus renouncing the heir for whose
restoration he weekly petitioned Heaven, and acknowledging
the usurper whose dethronement he had never ceased to pray
for. And to add to this melancholy instance of human inconsistency,
Sir Arthur continued to pray for the House of Stuart
even after the family had been extinct, and when, in truth,
though in his theoretical loyalty he was pleased to regard them
as alive, yet, in all actual service and practical exertion, he was
a most zealous and devoted subject of George III.

  In other respects, Sir Arthur Wardour lived like most country
gentlemen in Scotland, hunted and fished---gave and received
dinners---attended races and county meetings---was a deputy-lieutenant
and trustee upon turnpike acts. But, in his more
advanced years, as he became too lazy or unwieldy for field-sports,
he supplied them by now and then reading Scottish
history; and, having gradually acquired a taste for antiquities,
though neither very deep nor very correct, he became a crony
of his neighbour, Mr. Oldbuck of Monkbarns, and a joint-labourer
with him in his antiquarian pursuits.

  There were, however, points of difference between these two
humourists, which sometimes occasioned discord. The faith of
Sir Arthur, as an antiquary, was boundless, and Mr. Oldbuck
(notwithstanding the affair of the Pr<ae>torium at the Kaim of
Kinprunes) was much more scrupulous in receiving legends as
current and authentic coin. Sir Arthur would have deemed
himself guilty of the crime of leze-majesty had he doubted the
existence of any single individual of that formidable head-roll
of one hundred and four kings of Scotland, received by Boethius,
and rendered classical by Buchanan, in virtue of whom James
VI. claimed to rule his ancient kingdom, and whose portraits
still frown grimly upon the walls of the gallery of Holyrood.
Now Oldbuck, a shrewd and suspicious man, and no respecter
of divine hereditary right, was apt to cavil at this sacred list,
and to affirm, that the procession of the posterity of Fergus
through the pages of Scottish history, was as vain and unsubstantial
as the gleamy pageant of the descendants of Banquo
through the cavern of Hecate.

  Another tender topic was the good fame of Queen Mary, of
which the knight was a most chivalrous assertor, while the
esquire impugned it, in spite both of her beauty and misfortunes.
When, unhappily, their conversation turned on yet later times,
motives of discord occurred in almost every page of history. 
Oldbuck was, upon principle, a staunch Presbyterian, a ruling
elder of the kirk, and a friend to revolution principles and
Protestant succession, while Sir Arthur was the very reverse of
all this. They agreed, it is true, in dutiful love and allegiance
to the sovereign who now fills* the throne; but this was their

* The reader will understand that this refers to the reign of our late
* gracious Sovereign, George the Third.

only point of union, It therefore often happened, that bickerings
hot broke out between them, in which Oldbuck was not
always able to suppress his caustic humour, while it would
sometimes occur to the Baronet that the descendant of a German
printer, whose sires had ``sought the base fellowship of
paltry burghers,'' forgot himself, and took an unlicensed freedom
of debate, considering the rank and ancient descent of his antagonist.
This, with the old feud of the coach-horses, and the
seizure of his manor-place and tower of strength by Mr. Oldbuck's
father, would at times rush upon his mind, and inflame
at once his cheeks and his arguments. And, lastly, as Mr.
Oldbuck thought his worthy friend and compeer was in some
respects little better than a fool, he was apt to come more near
communicating to him that unfavourable opinion, than the
rules of modern politeness warrant. In such cases they often
parted in deep dudgeon, and with something like a resolution
to forbear each other's company in future:

	But with the morning calm reflection came;

and as each was sensible that the society of the other had
become, through habit, essential to his comfort, the breach was
speedily made up between them. On such occasions, Oldbuck,
considering that the Baronet's pettishness resembled that of a
child, usually showed his superior sense by compassionately
making the first advances to reconciliation. But it once or
twice happened that the aristocratic pride of the far-descended
knight took a flight too offensive to the feelings of the representative
of the typographer. In these cases, the breach between
these two originals might have been immortal, but for the kind
exertion and interposition of the Baronet's daughter, Miss
Isabella Wardour, who, with a son, now absent upon foreign
and military service, formed his whole surviving family. She
was well aware how necessary Mr. Oldbuck was to her father's
amusement and comfort, and seldom failed to interpose with
effect, when the office of a mediator between them was rendered
necessary by the satirical shrewdness of the one, or the assumed
superiority of the other. Under Isabella's mild influence, the
wrongs of Queen Mary were forgotten by her father, and Mr.
Oldbuck forgave the blasphemy which reviled the memory of
King William. However, as she used in general to take her
father's part playfully in these disputes, Oldbuck was wont to
call Isabella his fair enemy, though in fact he made more account
of her than any other of her sex, of whom, as we have seen, he,
was no admirer.

  There existed another connection betwixt these worthies,
which had alternately a repelling and attractive influence upon
their intimacy. Sir Arthur always wished to borrow; Mr.
Oldbuck was not always willing to lend. Mr. Oldbuck, per
contra, always wished to be repaid with regularity; Sir Arthur
was not always, nor indeed often, prepared to gratify this
reasonable desire; and, in accomplishing an arrangement
between tendencies so opposite, little _miffs_ would occasionally
take place. Still there was a spirit of mutual accommodation
upon the whole, and they dragged on like dogs in couples, with
some difficulty and occasional snarling, but without absolutely
coming to a stand-still or throttling each other.

  Some little disagreement, such as we have mentioned, arising
out of business, or politics, had divided the houses of Knockwinnock
and Monkbarns, when the emissary of the latter arrived
to discharge his errand. In his ancient Gothic parlour, whose
windows on one side looked out upon the restless ocean, and,
on the other, upon the long straight avenue, was the Baronet
seated, now turning over the leaves of a folio, now casting a
weary glance where the sun quivered on the dark-green foliage
and smooth trunks of the large and branching limes with which
the avenue was planted. At length, sight of joy! a moving
object is seen, and it gives rise to the usual inquiries, Who is
it? and what can be his errand? The old whitish-grey coat,
the hobbling gait, the hat half-slouched, half-cocked, announced
the forlorn maker of periwigs, and left for investigation only the
second query. This was soon solved by a servant entering the
parlour,---``A letter from Monkbarns, Sir Arthur.''

  Sir Arthur took the epistle with a due assumption of consequential
dignity.

  ``Take the old man into the kitchen, and let him get some
refreshment,'' said the young lady, whose compassionate eye had
remarked his thin grey hair and wearied gait.

  ``Mr. Oldbuck, my love, invites us to dinner on Tuesday the
17th,'' said the Baronet, pausing;---``he really seems to forget
that he has not of late conducted himself so civilly towards me
as might have been expected.''

  ``Dear sir, you have so many advantages over poor Mr.
Oldbuck, that no wonder it should put him a little out of
humour; but I know he has much respect for your person and
your conversation;---nothing would give him more pain than to
be wanting in any real attention.''

  ``True, true, Isabella; and one must allow for the original
descent;---something of the German boorishness still flows in
the blood; something of the whiggish and perverse opposition
to established rank and privilege. You may observe that he
never has any advantage of me in dispute, unless when he avails
himself of a sort of pettifogging intimacy with dates, names, and
trifling matters of fact---a tiresome and frivolous accuracy of
memory, which is entirely owing to his mechanical descent.''

  ``He must find it convenient in historical investigation, I
should think, sir?'' said the young lady.

  ``It leads to an uncivil and positive mode of disputing; and
nothing seems more unreasonable than to hear him impugn
even Bellenden's rare translation of Hector Boece, which I have
the satisfaction to possess, and which is a black-letter folio of
great value, upon the authority of some old scrap of parchment
which he has saved from its deserved destiny of being cut up
into tailor's measures. And besides, that habit of minute and
troublesome accuracy leads to a mercantile manner of doing
business, which ought to be beneath a landed proprietor whose
family has stood two or three generations. I question if there's
a dealer's clerk in Fairport that can sum an account of interest
better than Monkbarns.''

  ``But you'll accept his invitation, sir?''

  ``Why, ye---yes; we have no other engagement on hand, I
think. Who can the young man be he talks of?---he seldom
picks up new acquaintance; and he has no relation that I ever
heard of.''

  ``Probably some relation of his brother-in-law Captain
M`Intyre.''

  ``Very possibly---yes, we will accept---the M`Intyres are of
a very ancient Highland family. You may answer his card in
the affirmative, Isabella; I believe I have, no leisure to be
_Dear Sirring_ myself.''

  So this important matter being adjusted, Miss Wardour
intimated ``her own and Sir Arthur's compliments, and that
they would have the honour of waiting upon Mr. Oldbuck. 
Miss Wardour takes this opportunity to renew her hostility
with Mr. Oldbuck, on account of his late long absence from
Knockwinnock, where his visits give so much pleasure.'' With
this _placebo_ she concluded her note, with which old Caxon,
now refreshed in limbs and wind, set out on his return to the
Antiquary's mansion.

