




		CHAPTER THIRTY-THIRD.

	Remorse---she neer forsakes us---
	A bloodhound staunch---she tracks our rapid step
	Through the wild labyrinth of youthful frenzy,
	Unheard, perchance, until old age hath tamed us
	Then in our lair, when Time hath chilled our joints,
	And maimed our hope of combat, or of flight,
	We hear her deep-mouthed bay, announcing all
	Of wrath, and wo, and punishment that bides us.
						Old Play.

  ``I need not tell you,'' said the old woman, addressing the
Earl of Glenallan, ``that I was the favourite and confidential
attendant of Joscelind, Countess of Glenallan, whom God
assoilzie!''---(here she crossed herself)---``and I think farther,
ye may not have forgotten that I shared her regard for mony
years. I returned it by the maist sincere attachment, but I
fell into disgrace frae a trifling act of disobedience, reported to
your mother by ane that thought, and she wasna wrang, that I
was a spy upon her actions and yours.''

  ``I charge thee, woman,'' said the Earl, in a voice trembling
with passion, ``name not her name in my hearing!''

  ``I =must,='' returned the penitent firmly and calmly, ``or how
can you understand me?''

  The Earl leaned upon one of the wooden chairs of the hut,
drew his hat over his face, clenched his hands together, set his
teeth like one who summons up courage to undergo a painful
operation, and made a signal to her to proceed.

  ``I say, then,'' she resumed, ``that my disgrace with my
mistress was chiefly owing to Miss Eveline Neville, then bred
up in Glenallan House as the daughter of a cousin-german and
intimate friend of your father that was gane. There was muckle
mystery in her history,---but wha dared to inquire farther than
the Countess liked to tell?---All in Glenallan House loved Miss
Neville---all but twa, your mother and mysell---we baith hated
her.''

  ``God! for what reason, since a creature so mild, so gentle,
so formed to inspire affection, never walked on this wretched
world?''

  ``It may hae been sae,'' rejoined Elspeth, ``but your mother
hated a' that cam of your father's family---a' but himsell. Her
reasons related to strife which fell between them soon after her
marriage; the particulars are naething to this purpose. But
oh! doubly did she hate Eveline Neville when she perceived
that there was a growing kindness atween you and that unfortunate
young leddy! Ye may mind that the Countess's dislike
didna gang farther at first than just showing o' the cauld
shouther---at least it wasna seen farther; but at the lang run
it brak out into such downright violence that Miss Neville was
even fain to seek refuge at Knockwinnock Castle with Sir
Arthur's leddy, wha (God sain her!) was then wi' the living.''

  ``You rend my heart by recalling these particulars---But go
on,---and may my present agony be accepted as additional
penance for the involuntary crime!''

  ``She had been absent some months,'' continued Elspeth,
``when I was ae night watching in my hut the return of my
husband from fishing, and shedding in private those bitter tears
that my proud spirit wrung frae me whenever I thought on my
disgrace. The sneck was drawn, and the Countess your mother
entered my dwelling. I thought I had seen a spectre, for even
in the height of my favour, this was an honour she had never
done me, and she looked as pale and ghastly as if she had risen
from the grave. She sat down, and wrung the draps from her
hair and cloak,---for the night was drizzling, and her walk had
been through the plantations, that were a' loaded with dew. I
only mention these things that you may understand how weel
that night lives in my memory,---and weel it may. I was surprised
to see her, but I durstna speak first, mair than if I had
seen a phantom---Na, I durst not, my lord, I that hae seen
mony sights of terror, and never shook at them. Sae, after a
silence, she said, `Elspeth Cheyne (for she always gave me my
maiden name), are not ye the daughter of that Reginald Cheyne
who died to save his master, Lord Glenallan, on the field of
Sheriffmuir?' And I answered her as proudly as hersell nearly
---`As sure as you are the daughter of that Earl of Glenallan
whom my father saved that day by his own death.' ''

  Here she made a deep pause.

  ``And what followed?---what followed?---For Heaven's sake,
good woman---But why should I use that word?---Yet, good
or bad, I command you to tell me.''

  ``And little I should value earthly command,'' answered
Elspeth, ``were there not a voice that has spoken to me sleeping
and waking, that drives me forward to tell this sad tale. Aweel,
my Lord---the Countess said to me, `My son loves Eveline
Neville---they are agreed---they are plighted: should they have
a son, my right over Glenallan merges---I sink from that
moment from a Countess into a miserable stipendiary dowager,
I who brought lands and vassals, and high blood and ancient
fame, to my husband, I must cease to be mistress when my son
has an heir-male. But I care not for that---had he married
any but one of the hated Nevilles, I had been patient. But for
them---that they and their descendants should enjoy the right
and honours of my ancestors, goes through my heart like a two-edged
dirk. And this girl---I detest her!'---And I answered,
for my heart kindled at her words, that her hate was equalled
by mine.''

  ``Wretch!'' exclaimed the Earl, in spite of his determination
to preserve silence---``wretched woman! what cause of hate
could have arisen from a being so innocent and gentle?''

  ``I hated what my mistress hated, as was the use with the
liege vassals of the house of Glenallan; for though, my Lord, I
married under my degree, yet an ancestor of yours never went
to the field of battle, but an ancestor of the frail, demented,
auld, useless wretch wha now speaks with you, carried his shield
before him. But that was not a','' continued the beldam, her
earthly and evil passions rekindling as she became heated in
her narration---``that was not a'; I hated Miss Eveline Neville
for her ain sake, I brought her frae England, and, during our
whole journey, she gecked and scorned at my northern speech
and habit, as her southland leddies and kimmers had done at
the boarding-school, as they cald it''---(and, strange as it may
seem, she spoke of an affront offered by a heedless school-girl
without intention, with a degree of inveteracy which, at such a
distance of time, a mortal offence would neither have authorized
or excited in any well-constituted mind)---``Yes, she scorned
and jested at me---but let them that scorn the tartan fear the
dirk!''

  She paused, and then went on---``But I deny not that I
hated her mair than she deserved. My mistress, the Countess,
persevered and said, `Elspeth Cheyne, this unruly boy will
marry with the false English blood. Were days as they have
been, I could throw her into the Massymore<*> of Glenallan, and

* _Massa-mora,_ an ancient name for a dungeon, derived from the Moorish
* language, perhaps as far back as the time of the Crusades.

fetter him in the Keep of Strathbonnel. But these times are
past, and the authority which the nobles of the land should
exercise is delegated to quibbling lawyers and their baser
dependants. Hear me, Elspeth Cheyne! if you are your father's
daughter as I am mine, I will find means that they shall not
marry. She walks often to that cliff that overhangs your
dwelling to look for her lover's boat---(ye may remember the
pleasure ye then took on the sea, my Lord)---let him find her
forty fathom lower than he expects!'---Yes! ye may stare and
frown and clench your hand; but, as sure as I am to face the
only Being I ever feared---and, oh that I had feared him mair!
---these were your mother's words. What avails it to me to lie
to you?---But I wadna consent to stain my hand with blood.---
Then she said, `By the religion of our holy Church they are
ower _sibb_ thegither. But I expect nothing but that both will
become heretics as well as disobedient reprobates;'---that was
her addition to that argument. And then, as the fiend is ever
ower busy wi' brains like mine, that are subtle beyond their use
and station, I was unhappily permitted to add---`But they
might be brought to think themselves sae _sibb_ as no Christian
law will permit their wedlock.' ''

  Here the Earl of Glenallan echoed her words, with a shriek
so piercing as almost to rend the roof of the cottage.---``Ah!
then Eveline Neville was not the---the''------

  ``The daughter, ye would say, of your father?'' continued
Elspeth. ``No---be it a torment or be it a comfort to you---
ken the truth, she was nae mair a daughter of your father's
house than I am.''

  ``Woman, deceive me not!---make me not curse the memory
of the parent I have so lately laid in the grave, for sharing in a
plot the most cruel, the most infernal''------

  ``Bethink ye, my Lord Geraldin, ere ye curse the memory of
a parent that's gane, is there none of the blood of Glenallan
living, whose faults have led to this dreadfu' catastrophe?''

  ``Mean you my brother?---he, too, is gone,'' said the Earl.

  ``No,'' replied the sibyl, ``I mean yoursell, Lord Geraldin. 
Had you not transgressed the obedience of a son by wedding
Eveline Neville in secret while a guest at Knockwinnock, our
plot might have separated you for a time, but would have left
at least your sorrows without remorse to canker them. But
your ain conduct had put poison in the weapon that we threw,
and it pierced you with the mair force because ye cam rushing
to meet it. Had your marriage been a proclaimed and acknowledged
action, our stratagem to throw an obstacle into your
way that couldna be got ower, neither wad nor could hae been
practised against ye.''

  ``Great Heaven!'' said the unfortunate nobleman---``it is as if
a film fell from my obscured eyes! Yes, I now well understand
the doubtful hints of consolation thrown out by my wretched
mother, tending indirectly to impeach the evidence of the horrors
of which her arts had led me to believe myself guilty.''

  ``She could not speak mair plainly,'' answered Elspeth, ``without
confessing her ain fraud,---and she would have submitted to
be torn by wild horses, rather than unfold what she had done;
and if she had still lived, so would I for her sake. They were
stout hearts the race of Glenallan, male and female, and sae
were a' that in auld times cried their gathering-word of _Clochnaben_
---they stood shouther to shouther---nae man parted frae his
chief for love of gold or of gain, or of right or of wrang. The
times are changed, I hear, now.''

  The unfortunate nobleman was too much wrapped up in his
own confused and distracted reflections, to notice the rude
expressions of savage fidelity, in which, even in the latest ebb
of life, the unhappy author of his misfortunes seemed to find a
stern and stubborn source of consolation.

  ``Great Heaven!'' he exclaimed, ``I am then free from a
guilt the most horrible with which man can be stained, and the
sense of which, however involuntary, has wrecked my peace,
destroyed my health, and bowed me down to an untimely grave. 
Accept,'' he fervently uttered, lifting his eyes upwards, ``accept
my humble thanks! If I live miserable, at least I shall not die
stained with that unnatural guilt!---And thou---proceed if thou
hast more to tell---proceed, while thou hast voice to speak it,
and I have powers to listen.''

  ``Yes,'' answered the beldam, ``the hour when you shall hear,
and I shall speak, is indeed passing rapidly away. Death has
crossed your brow with his finger, and I find his grasp turning.
every day coulder at my heart. Interrupt me nae mair with
exclamations and groans and accusations, but hear my tale to
an end! And then---if ye be indeed sic a Lord of Glenallan
as I hae heard of in _my_ day---make your merrymen gather the
thorn, and the brier, and the green hollin, till they heap them
as high as the house-riggin', and burn! burn! burn! the auld
witch Elspeth, and a' that can put ye in mind that sic a
creature ever crawled upon the land!''

  ``Go on,'' said the Earl, ``go on---I will not again interrupt
you.''

  He spoke in a half-suffocated yet determined voice, resolved
that no irritability on his part should deprive him of this
opportunity of acquiring proofs of the wonderful tale he then
heard. But Elspeth had become exhausted by a continuous
narration of such unusual length; the subsequent part of her
story was more broken, and though still distinctly intelligible
in most parts, had no longer the lucid conciseness which the
first part of her narrative had displayed to such an astonishing
degree. Lord Glenallan found it necessary, when she had made
some attempts to continue her narrative without success, to
prompt her memory by demanding---``What proofs she could
propose to bring of the truth of a narrative so different from
that which she had originally told?''

  ``The evidence,'' she replied, ``of Eveline Neville's real birth
was in the Countess's possession, with reasons for its being for
some time kept private;---they may yet be found, if she has
not destroyed them, in the left hand drawer of the ebony cabinet
that stood in the dressing-room. These she meant to suppress
for the time, until you went abroad again, when she trusted,
before your return, to send Miss Neville back to her ain country,
or to get her settled in marriage.''

  ``But did you not show me letters of my father's, which
seemed to me, unless my senses altogether failed me in that
horrible moment, to avow his relationship to---to the unhappy''------

  ``We did; and, with my testimony, how could you doubt
the fact, or her either? But we suppressed the true explanation
of these letters, and that was, that your father thought it right
the young leddy should pass for his daughter for a while, on
account o'some family reasons that were amang them.''

  ``But wherefore, when you learned our union, was this
dreadful artifice persisted in?''

  ``It wasna,'' she replied, ``till Lady Glenallan had communicated
this fause tale, that she suspected ye had actually
made a marriage---nor even then did you avow it sae as to
satisfy her whether the ceremony had in verity passed atween
ye or no---But ye remember, O ye canna but remember weel,
what passed in that awfu' meeting!''

  ``Woman! you swore upon the gospels to the fact which
you now disavow.''

  ``I did,---and I wad hae taen a yet mair holy pledge on it, if
there had been ane---I wad not hae spared the blood of my
body, or the guilt of my soul, to serve the house of Glenallan.''

  ``Wretch! do you call that horrid perjury, attended with
consequences yet more dreadful---do you esteem that a service
to the house of your benefactors?''

  ``I served her, wha was then the head of Glenallan, as she
required me to serve her. The cause was between God and
her conscience---the manner between God and mine---She is
gane to her account, and I maun follow. Have I taulds
you a'?''

  ``No,'' answered Lord Glenallan---``you have yet more to
tell---you have to tell me of the death of the angel whom your
perjury drove to despair, stained, as she thought herself, with a
crime so horrible. Speak truth---was that dreadful---was that
horrible incident''---he could scarcely articulate the words---
``was it as reported? or was it an act of yet further, though not
more atrocious cruelty, inflicted by others?''

  ``I understand you,'' said Elspeth. ``But report spoke truth;
---our false witness was indeed the cause, but the deed was her
ain distracted act. On that fearfu' disclosure, when ye rushed
frae the Countess's presence and saddled your horse, and left
the castle like a fire-flaught, the Countess hadna yet discovered
your private marriage; she hadna fund out that the union,
which she had framed this awfu' tale to prevent, had e'en taen
place. Ye fled from the house as if the fire o' Heaven was
about to fa' upon it, and Miss Neville, atween reason and the
want o't, was put under sure ward. But the ward sleep't, and
the prisoner waked---the window was open---the way was before
her---there was the cliff, and there was the sea!---O, when will
I forget that!''

  ``And thus died,'' said the Earl, ``even so as was reported?''

  ``No, my lord. I had gane out to the cove---the tide was
in, and it flowed, as ye'll remember, to the foot o' that cliff---it
was a great convenience that for my husband's trade---Where
am I wandering?---I saw a white object dart frae the tap o'
the cliff like a sea-maw through the mist, and then a heavy
flash and sparkle of the waters showed me it was a human
creature that had fa'en into the waves. I was bold and strong,
and familiar with the tide. I rushed in and grasped her gown,
and drew her out and carried her on my shouthers---I could hae
carried twa sic then---carried her to my hut, and laid her on
my bed. Neighbours cam and brought help; but the words
she uttered in her ravings, when she got back the use of speech,
were such, that I was fain to send them awa, and get up word
to Glenallan House. The Countess sent down her Spanish
servant Teresa---if ever there was a fiend on earth in human
form, that woman was ane. She and I were to watch the
unhappy leddy, and let no other person approach.---God knows
what Teresa's part was to hae been---she tauld it not to me---
but Heaven took the conclusion in its ain hand. The poor
leddy! she took the pangs of travail before her time, bore a
male child, and died in the arms of me---of her mortal enemy!
Ay, _ye_ may weep---she was a sightly creature to see to---but
think ye, if I didna mourn her then, that I can mourn her now?
Na, na, I left Teresa wi' the dead corpse and new-born babe,
till I gaed up to take the Countess's commands what was to be
done. Late as it was, I ca'd her up, and she gar'd me ca' up
your brother''------

  ``My brother?''

  ``Yes, Lord Geraldin, e'en your brother, that some said she
aye wished to be her heir. At ony rate, he was the person
maist concerned in the succession and heritance of the house of
Glenallan.''

  ``And is it possible to believe, then, that my brother, out of
avarice to grasp at my inheritance, would lend himself to such
a base and dreadful stratagem?''

  ``Your mother believed it,'' said the old beldam with a
fiendish laugh---``it was nae plot of my making; but what
they did or said I will not say, because I did not hear. Lang
and sair they consulted in the black wainscot dressing-room;
and when your brother passed through the room where I was
waiting, it seemed to me (and I have often thought sae since
syne) that the fire of hell was in his cheek and een. But he
had left some of it with his mother, at ony rate. She entered
the room like a woman demented, and the first words she spoke
were, `Elspeth Cheyne, did you ever pull a new-budded flower?'
I answered, as ye may believe, that I often had. `Then,' said
she, `ye will ken the better how to blight the spurious and
heretical blossom that has sprung forth this night to disgrace
my father's noble house---See here;'---(and she gave me a
golden bodkin)---`nothing but gold must shed the blood of
Glenallan. This child is already as one of the dead, and since
thou and Teresa alone ken that it lives, let it be dealt upon as
ye will answer to me!' and she turned away in her fury, and
left me with the bodkin in my hand.---Here it is; that and
the ring of Miss Neville, are a' I hae preserved of my ill-gotten
gear---for muckle was the gear I got. And weel hae I keepit
the secret, but no for the gowd or gear either.''

  Her long and bony hand held out to Lord Glenallan a gold
bodkin, down which in fancy be saw the blood of his infant
trickling.

  ``Wretch! had you the heart?''

  ``I kenna if I could hae had it or no. I returned to my
cottage without feeling the ground that I trode on; but Teresa
and the child were gane---a' that was alive was gane---naething
left but the lifeless corpse.''

  ``And did you never learn my infant's fate?''

  ``I could but guess. I have tauld ye your mother's purpose,
and I ken Teresa was a fiend. She was never mair seen in
Scotland, and I have heard that she returned to her ain land. 
A dark curtain has fa'en ower the past, and the few that
witnessed ony part of it could only surmise something of
seduction and suicide. You yourself''------

  ``I know---I know it all,'' answered the Earl.

  ``You indeed know all that I can say---And now, heir of
Glenallan, can you forgive me?''

  ``Ask forgiveness of God, and not of man,'' said the Earl,
turning away.

  ``And how shall I ask of the pure and unstained what is
denied to me by a sinner like mysell? If I hae sinned, hae I
not suffered?---Hae I had a day's peace or an hour's rest since
these lang wet locks of hair first lay upon my pillow at Craigburnfoot?
---Has not my house been burned, wi' my bairn in
the cradle?---Have not my boats been wrecked, when a' others
weather'd the gale?---Have not a' that were near and dear to
me dree'd penance for my sin?---Has not the fire had its share
o' them---the winds had their part---the sea had her part?---
And oh!'' she added, with a lengthened groan, looking first upwards
towards Heaven, and then bending her eyes on the floor
---``O that the earth would take her part, that's been lang lang
wearying to be joined to it!''

  Lord Glenallan had reached the door of the cottage, but the
generosity of his nature did not permit him to leave the unhappy
woman in this state of desperate reprobation. ``May God forgive
thee, wretched woman,'' he said, ``as sincerely as I do!---
Turn for mercy to Him who can alone grant mercy, and may
your prayers be heard as if they were mine own!---I will send
a religious man.''

  ``Na, na---nae priest! nae priest!'' she ejaculated; and the
door of the cottage opening as she spoke, prevented her from
proceeding.
