




		CHAPTER THIRTY-FIRST.

	Tell me not of it, friend---when the young weep,
	Their tears are luke-warm brine;---from your old eyes
	Sorrow falls down like hail-drops of the North,
	Chilling the furrows of our withered cheeks,
	Cold as our hopes, and hardened as our feeling---
	Theirs, as they fall, sink sightless---ours recoil,
	Heap the fair plain, and bleaken all before us.
						Old Play.

  The Antiquary, being now alone, hastened his pace, which had
been retarded by these various discussions, and the rencontre
which had closed them, and soon arrived before the half-dozen
cottages at Mussel-crag. They had now, in addition to their
usual squalid and uncomfortable appearance, the melancholy
attributes of the house of mourning. The boats were all drawn
up on the beach; and, though the day was fine, and the season
favourable, the chant, which is used by the fishers when at sea,
was silent, as well as the prattle of the children, and the shrill
song of the mother, as she sits mending her nets by the door. 
A few of the neighbours, some in their antique and well-saved
suits of black, others in their ordinary clothes, but all bearing
an expression of mournful sympathy with distress so sudden and
unexpected, stood gathered around the door of Mucklebackit's
cottage, waiting till ``the body was lifted.'' As the Laird of
Monkbarns approached, they made way for him to enter, doffing
their hats and bonnets as he passed, with an air of melancholy
courtesy, and he returned their salutes in the same manner.

  In the inside of the cottage was a scene which our Wilkie
alone could have painted, with that exquisite feeling of nature
that characterises his enchanting productions,

  The body was laid in its coffin within the wooden bedstead
which the young fisher had occupied while alive. At a little
distance stood the father, whose ragged weather-beaten countenance,
shaded by his grizzled hair, had faced many a stormy
night and night-like day. He was apparently revolving his
loss in his mind, with that strong feeling of painful grief
peculiar to harsh and rough characters, which almost breaks
forth into hatred against the world, and all that remain in it,
after the beloved object is withdrawn. The old man had made
the most desperate efforts to save his son, and had only been
withheld by main force from renewing them at a moment when,
without the possibility of assisting the sufferer, he must himself
have perished. All this apparently was boiling in his recollection.
His glance was directed sidelong towards the coffin, as
to an object on which he could not stedfastly look, and yet
from which he could not withdraw his eyes. His answers to
the necessary questions which were occasionally put to him,
were brief, harsh, and almost fierce. His family had not yet
dared to address to him a word, either of sympathy or consolation.
His masculine wife, virago as she was, and absolute
mistress of the family, as she justly boasted herself, on all
ordinary occasions, was, by this great loss, terrified into silence
and submission, and compelled to hide from her husband's
observation the bursts of her female sorrow. As he had rejected
food ever since the disaster had happened, not daring herself to
approach him, she had that morning, with affectionate artifice,
employed the youngest and favourite child to present her
husband with some nourishment. His first action was to put
it from him with an angry violence that frightened the child;
his next, to snatch up the boy and devour him with kisses. 
``Yell be a bra' fallow, an ye be spared, Patie,---but ye'll never
---never can be---what he was to me!---He has sailed the coble
wi' me since he was ten years auld, and there wasna the like o'
him drew a net betwixt this and Buchan-ness.---They say folks
maun submit---I will try.''

  And he had been silent from that moment until compelled
to answer the necessary questions we have already noticed. 
Such was the disconsolate state of the father. 

  In another corner of the cottage, her face covered by her apron,
which was flung over it, sat the mother---the nature of her grief
sufficiently indicated by the wringing of her hands, and the
convulsive agitation of the bosom, which the covering could not
conceal. Two of her gossips, officiously whispering into her ear
the commonplace topic of resignation under irremediable misfortune,
seemed as if they were endeavouring to stun the grief
which they could not console.

  The sorrow of the children was mingled with wonder at the
preparations they beheld around them, and at the unusual display
of wheaten bread and wine, which the poorest peasant, or fisher,
offers to the guests on these mournful occasions; and thus their
grief for their brother's death was almost already lost in admiration
of the splendour of his funeral.

  But the figure of the old grandmother was the most remarkable
of the sorrowing group. Seated on her accustomed chair,
with her usual air of apathy, and want of interest in what
surrounded her, she seemed every now and then mechanically
to resume the motion of twirling her spindle; then to look
towards her bosom for the distaff, although both had been laid
aside. She would then cast her eyes about, as if surprised at
missing the usual implements of her industry, and appear
struck by the black colour of the gown in which they had
dressed her, and embarrassed by the number of persons by
whom she was surrounded. Then, finally, she would raise her
head with a ghastly look, and fix her eyes upon the bed which
contained the coffin of her grandson, as if she had at once, and
for the first time, acquired sense to comprehend her inexpressible
calamity. These alternate feelings of embarrassment,
wonder, and grief, seemed to succeed each other more than once
upon her torpid features. But she spoke not a word---neither
had she shed a tear---nor did one of the family understand, either
from look or expression, to what extent she comprehended the
uncommon bustle around her. Thus she sat among the funeral
assembly like a connecting link between the surviving mourners
and the dead corpse which they bewailed---a being in whom the
light of existence was already obscured by the encroaching
shadows of death.

  When Oldbuck entered this house of mourning, he was
received by a general and silent inclination of the head, and,
according to the fashion of Scotland on such occasions, wine
and spirits and bread were offered round to the guests. Elspeth,
as these refreshments were presented, surprised and startled the
whole company by motioning to the person who bore them to
stop; then, taking a glass in her hand, she rose up, and, as the
smile of dotage played upon her shrivelled features, she pronounced,
with a hollow and tremulous voice, ``Wishing a' your
healths, sirs, and often may we hae such merry meetings!''

  All shrunk from the ominous pledge, and set down the untasted
liquor with a degree of shuddering horror, which will not surprise
those who know how many superstitions are still common
on such occasions among the Scottish vulgar. But as the old
woman tasted the liquor, she suddenly exclaimed with a sort of
shriek, ``What's this?---this is wine---how should there be wine
in my son's house?---Ay,'' she continued with a suppressed groan,
``I mind the sorrowful cause now,'' and, dropping the glass
from her hand, she stood a moment gazing fixedly on the bed
in which the coffin of her grandson was deposited, and then
sinking gradually into her seat, she covered her eyes and forehead
with her withered and pallid hand.

  At this moment the clergyman entered the cottage. Mr.
Blattergowl, though a dreadful proser, particularly on the
subject of augmentations, localities, teinds, and overtures in
that session of the General Assembly, to which, unfortunately
for his auditors, he chanced one year to act as moderator, was
nevertheless a good man, in the old Scottish presbyterian phrase,
God-ward and man-ward. No divine was more attentive in
visiting the sick and afflicted, in catechising the youth, in
instructing the ignorant, and in reproving the erring. And
hence, notwithstanding impatience of his prolixity and prejudices,
personal or professional, and notwithstanding, moreover,
a certain habitual contempt for his understanding, especially on
affairs of genius and taste, on which Blattergowl was apt to be
diffuse, from his hope of one day fighting his way to a chair of
rhetoric or belles lettres,---notwithstanding, I say, all the prejudices
excited against him by these circumstances, our friend
the Antiquary looked with great regard and respect on the said
Blattergowl, though I own he could seldom, even by his sense
of decency and the remonstrances of his womankind, be _hounded
out,_ as he called it, to hear him preach. But he regularly took
shame to himself for his absence when Blattergowl came to
Monkbarns to dinner, to which he was always invited of a
Sunday, a mode of testifying his respect which the proprietor
probably thought fully as agreeable to the clergyman, and
rather more congenial to his own habits.

  To return from a digression which can only serve to introduce
the honest clergyman more particularly to our readers, Mr. 
Blattergowl had no sooner entered the hut, and received the
mute and melancholy salutations of the company whom it
contained, than he edged himself towards the unfortunate
father, and seemed to endeavour to slide in a few words of
condolence or of consolation. But the old man was incapable
as yet of receiving either; he nodded, however, gruffly, and
shook the clergyman's hand in acknowledgment of his good
intentions, but was either unable or unwilling to make any
verbal reply.

  The minister next passed to the mother, moving along the
floor as slowly, silently, and gradually, as if he had been afraid
that the ground would, like unsafe ice, break beneath his feet,
or that the first echo of a footstep was to dissolve some magic
spell, and plunge the hut, with all its inmates, into a subterranean
abyss. The tenor of what he had said to the poor
woman could only be judged by her answers, as, half-stifled by
sobs ill-repressed, and by the covering which she still kept over
her countenance, she faintly answered at each pause in his
speech---``Yes, sir, yes!---Ye're very gude---ye're very gude!---
Nae doubt, nae doubt!---It's our duty to submit!---But, oh
dear! my poor Steenie! the pride o' my very heart, that was
sae handsome and comely, and a help to his family, and a
comfort to us a', and a pleasure to a' that lookit on him!---Oh,
my bairn! my bairn! my bairn! what for is thou lying there!
---and eh! what for am I left to greet for ye!''

  There was no contending with this burst of sorrow and
natural affection. Oldbuck had repeated recourse to his snuff-box
to conceal the tears which, despite his shrewd and caustic
temper, were apt to start on such occasions. The female
assistants whimpered, the men held their bonnets to their faces,
and spoke apart with each other. The clergyman, meantime,
addressed his ghostly consolation to the aged grandmother. 
At first she listened, or seemed to listen, to what he said, with
the apathy of her usual unconsciousness. But as, in pressing
this theme, he approached so near to her ear that the sense of
his words became distinctly intelligible to her, though unheard
by those who stood more distant, her countenance at once
assumed that stern and expressive cast which characterized her
intervals of intelligence. She drew up her head and body,
shook her head in a manner that showed at least impatience, if
not scorn of his counsel, and waved her hand slightly, but with
a gesture so expressive, as to indicate to all who witnessed it
a marked and disdainful rejection of the ghostly consolation
proffered to her. The minister stepped back as if repulsed,
and, by lifting gently and dropping his hand, seemed to show
at once wonder, sorrow, and compassion for her dreadful state
of mind. The rest of the company sympathized, and a stifled
whisper went through them, indicating how much her desperate
and determined manner impressed them with awe, and even
horror.

  In the meantime, the funeral company was completed, by
the arrival of one or two persons who had been expected from
Fairport. The wine and spirits again circulated, and the dumb
show of greeting was anew interchanged. The grandame a
second time took a glass in her hand, drank its contents, and
exclaimed, with a sort of laugh,---``Ha! ha! I hae tasted wine
twice in ae day---Whan did I that before, think ye, cummers?
---Never since''--- and the transient glow vanishing from her
countenance, she set the glass down, and sunk upon the settle
from whence she had risen to snatch at it.

  As the general amazement subsided, Mr. Oldbuck, whose
heart bled to witness what he considered as the errings of the
enfeebled intellect struggling with the torpid chill of age and
of sorrow, observed to the clergyman that it was time to proceed
with the ceremony. The father was incapable of giving directions,
but the nearest relation of the family made a sign to the
carpenter, who in such cases goes through the duty of the
undertaker, to proceed in his office. The creak of the screw-nails
presently announced that the lid of the last mansion of
mortality was in the act of being secured above its tenant. 
The last act which separates us for ever, even from the mortal
relies of the person we assemble to mourn, has usually its effect
upon the most indifferent, selfish, and hard-hearted. With a
spirit of contradiction, which we may be pardoned for esteeming
narrow-minded, the fathers of the Scottish kirk rejected, even
on this most solemn occasion, the form of an address to the
Divinity, lest they should be thought to give countenance to
the rituals of Rome or of England. With much better and
more liberal judgment, it is the present practice of most of the
Scottish clergymen to seize this opportunity of offering a prayer,
and exhortation, suitable to make an impression upon the living,
while they are yet in the very presence of the relics of him
whom they have but lately seen such as they themselves, and
who now is such as they must in their time become. But this
decent and praiseworthy practice was not adopted at the time
of which I am treating, or at least, Mr. Blattergowl did not
act upon it, and the ceremony proceeded without any devotional
exercise.

  The coffin, covered with a pall, and supported upon hand-spikes
by the nearest relatives, now only waited the father to
support the head, as is customary. Two or three of these
privileged persons spoke to him, but he only answered by
shaking his hand and his head in token of refusal. With
better intention than judgment, the friends, who considered
this as an act of duty on the part of the living, and of decency
towards the deceased, would have proceeded to enforce their
request, had not Oldbuck interfered between the distressed
father and his well-meaning tormentors, and informed them,
that he himself, as landlord and master to the deceased, ``would
carry his head to the grave.'' In spite of the sorrowful occasion,
the hearts of the relatives swelled within them at so marked a
distinction on the part of the laird; and old Alison Breck, who
was present among other fish-women, swore almost aloud, ``His
honour Monkbarns should never want sax warp of oysters in
the season'' (of which fish he was understood to be fond), ``if
she should gang to sea and dredge for them hersell, in the
foulest wind that ever blew.'' And such is the temper of the
Scottish common people, that, by this instance of compliance
with their customs, and respect for their persons, Mr. Oldbuck
gained more popularity than by all the sums which he had
yearly distributed in the parish for purposes of private or
general charity.

  The sad procession now moved slowly forward, preceded by
the beadles, or saulies, with their batons,---miserable-looking
old men, tottering as if on the edge of that grave to which they
were marshalling another, and clad, according to Scottish guise,
with threadbare black coats, and hunting-caps decorated with
rusty crape. Monkbarns would probably have remonstrated
against this superfluous expense, had he been consulted; but,
in doing so, he would have given more offence than he gained
popularity by condescending to perform the office of chief-mourner.
Of this he was quite aware, and wisely withheld
rebuke, where rebuke and advice would have been equally
unavailing. In truth, the Scottish peasantry are still infected
with that rage for funeral ceremonial, which once distinguished
the grandees of the kingdom so much, that a sumptuary law
was made by the Parliament of Scotland for the purpose of
restraining it; and I have known many in the lowest stations,
who have denied themselves not merely the comforts, but
almost the necessaries of life, in order to save such a sum of
money as might enable their surviving friends to bury them
like Christians, as they termed it; nor could their faithful
executors be prevailed upon, though equally necessitous, to turn
to the use and maintenance of the living the money vainly
wasted upon the interment of the dead.

  The procession to the churchyard, at about half-a-mile's
distance, was made with the mournful solemnity usual on these
occasions,---the body was consigned to its parent earth,---and
when the labour of the gravediggers had filled up the trench,
and covered it with fresh sod, Mr. Oldbuck, taking his hat off,
saluted the assistants, who had stood by in melancholy silence,
and with that adieu dispersed the mourners.

  The clergyman offered our Antiquary his company to walk
homeward; but Mr. Oldbuck had been so much struck with
the deportment of the fisherman and his mother, that, moved
by compassion, and perhaps also, in some degree, by that
curiosity which induces us to seek out even what gives us pain
to witness, he preferred a solitary walk by the coast, for the
purpose of again visiting the cottage as he passed.
