


 

		CHAPTER TWENTY-FIFTH.

	--------- See thou shake the bags
	Of hoarding abbots; angels imprisoned
	Set thou at liberty ---------------
	Bell, book, and candle, shall not drive me back,
	If gold and silver beckon to come on.
						King John.

  The night set in stormy, with wind and occasional showers of
rain. ``Eh, sirs,'' said the old mendicant, as he took his place
on the sheltered side of the large oak-tree to wait for his
associate---``Eh, sirs, but human nature's a wilful and wilyard
thing!---Is it not an unco lucre o' gain wad bring this Dousterdivel
out in a blast o' wind like this, at twal o'clock at night, to
thir wild gousty wa's?---and amna I a bigger fule than himsell
to bide here waiting for him?''

  Having made these sage reflections, he wrapped himself close
in his cloak, and fixed his eye on the moon as she waded amid
the stormy and dusky clouds, which the wind from time to
time drove across her surface. The melancholy and uncertain
gleams that she shot from between the passing shadows fell full
upon the rifted arches and shafted windows of the old building,
which were thus for an instant made distinctly visible in their
ruinous state, and anon became again a dark, undistinguished,
and shadowy mass. The little lake had its share of these transient
beams of light, and showed its waters broken, whitened,
and agitated under the passing storm, which, when the clouds
swept over the moon, were only distinguished by their sullen
and murmuring plash against the beach. The wooded glen
repeated, to every successive gust that hurried through its
narrow trough, the deep and various groan with which the
trees replied to the whirlwind, and the sound sunk again, as
the blast passed away, into a faint and passing murmur,
resembling the sighs of an exhausted criminal after the first
pangs of his torture are over. In these sounds, superstition
might have found ample gratification for that State of excited
terror which she fears and yet loves. But such feeling is made
no part of Ochiltree's composition. His mind wandered back
to the scenes of his youth.

  ``I have kept guard on the outposts baith in Germany and
America,'' he said to himself, ``in mony a waur night than this,
and when I ken'd there was maybe a dozen o' their riflemen in
the thicket before me. But I was aye gleg at my duty---
naebody ever catched Edie sleeping.''

  As he muttered thus to himself, he instinctively shouldered
his trusty pike-staff, assumed the port of a sentinel on duty,
and, as a step advanced towards the tree, called, with a tone
assorting better with his military reminiscences than his present
state---``Stand! who goes there?''

  ``De devil, goot Edie,'' answered Dousterswivel, ``why does
you speak so loud as a baarenhauter, or what you call a factionary---
I mean a sentinel?''

  ``Just because I thought I was a sentinel at that moment,''
answered the mendicant. ``Here's an awsome night! Hae ye
brought the lantern and a pock for the siller?''

  ``Ay-ay, mine goot friend,'' said the German, ``here it is---
my pair of what you call saddlebag; one side will be for you,
one side for me;---I will put dem on my horse to save you de
trouble, as you are old man.''

  ``Have you a horse here, then?'' asked Edie Ochiltree.

  ``O yes, mine friend---tied yonder by de stile,'' responded the
adept.

  ``Weel, I hae just ae word to the bargain---there sall nane
o' my gear gang on your beast's back.''

  ``What was it as you would be afraid of?'' said the foreigner.

  ``Only of losing sight of horse, man, and money,'' again replied
the gaberlunzie.

  ``Does you know dat you make one gentlemans out to be one
great rogue?''

  ``Mony gentlemen,'' replied Ochiltree, ``can make that out
for themselves---But what's the sense of quarrelling?---If ye
want to gang on, gang on---if no---I'll gae back to the gude
ait-straw in Ringan Aikwood's barn that I left wi' right ill-will
e'now, and I'll pit back the pick and shule whar I got them.''

  Dousterswivel deliberated a moment, whether, by suffering
Edie to depart, he might not secure the whole of the expected
wealth for his own exclusive use. But the want of digging
implements, the uncertainty whether, if he had them, he could
clear out the grave to a sufficient depth without assistance, and,
above all, the reluctance which he felt, owing to the experience
of the former night, to venture alone on the terrors of Misticot's
grave, satisfied him the attempt would be hazardous. Endeavouring,
therefore, to assume his usual cajoling tone, though
internally incensed, he begged ``his goot friend Maister Edie
Ochiltrees would lead the way, and assured him of his acquiescence
in all such an excellent friend could propose.''

  ``Aweel, aweel, then,'' said Edie, ``tak gude care o' your feet
amang the lang grass and the loose stones. I wish we may get
the light keepit in neist, wi' this fearsome wind---but there's a
blink o' moonlight at times.''

  Thus saying, old Edie, closely accompanied by the adept, led
the way towards the ruins, but presently made a full halt in
front of them.

  ``Ye're a learned man, Mr. Dousterdeevil, and ken muckle
o' the marvellous works o' nature---Now, will ye tell me ae
thing?---D'ye believe in ghaists and spirits that walk the earth?
---d'ye believe in them, ay or no?''

  ``Now, goot Mr. Edie,'' whispered Dousterswivel, in an expostulatory
tone of voice, ``is this a times or a places for such a
questions?''

  ``Indeed is it, baith the tane and the t'other, Mr. Dustanshovel;
for I maun fairly tell ye, there's reports that auld
Misticot walks. Now this wad be an uncanny night to meet
him in, and wha kens if he wad be ower weel pleased wi' our
purpose of visiting his pose?''

  ``_Alle guten Geister_''---muttered the adept, the rest of the
conjuration being lost in a tremulous warble of his voice,---``I
do desires you not to speak so, Mr. Edie; for, from all I heard
dat one other night, I do much believes''------

  ``Now I,'' said Ochiltree, entering the chancel, and flinging
abroad his arm with an air of defiance, ``I wadna gie the crack
o' my thumb for him were he to appear at this moment: he's
but a disembodied spirit, as we are embodied anes.''

  ``For the lofe of heavens,'' said Dousterswivel, ``say nothing
at all neither about somebodies or nobodies!''

  ``Aweel,'' said the beggar (expanding the shade of the
lantern), ``here's the stane, and, spirit or no spirit, I'se be a
wee bit deeper in the grave;'' and he jumped into the place
from which the precious chest had that morning been removed. 
After striking a few strokes, he tired, or affected to tire, and said
to his companion, ``I'm auld and failed now, and canna keep at
it---time about's fair play, neighbour; ye maun get in and tak
the shule a bit, and shule out the loose earth, and then I'll tak
turn about wi' you.''

  Dousterswivel accordingly took the place which the beggar
had evacuated, and toiled with all the zeal that awakened
avarice, mingled with the anxious wish to finish the undertaking
and leave the place as soon as possible, could inspire in a mind
at once greedy, suspicious, and timorous.

  Edie, standing much at his ease by the side of the hole, contented
himself with exhorting his associate to labour hard. 
``My certie! few ever wrought for siccan a day's wage; an it
be but---say the tenth part o' the size o' the kist, No. I., it will
double its value, being filled wi' gowd instead of silver. Od,
ye work as if ye had been bred to pick and shule---ye could win
your round half-crown ilka day. Tak care o' your taes wi' that
stane!'' giving a kick to a large one which the adept had heaved
out with difficulty, and which Edie pushed back again to the
great annoyance of his associate's shins.

  Thus exhorted by the mendicant, Dousterswivel struggled
and laboured among the stones and stiff clay, toiling like a
horse, and internally blaspheming in German. When such an
unhallowed syllable escaped his lips, Edie changed his battery
upon him.

  ``O dinna swear! dinna swear! Wha kens whals listening!
---Eh! gude guide us, what's you!---Hout, it's just a branch of
ivy flightering awa frae the wa'; when the moon was in, it lookit
unco like a dead man's arm wi' a taper in't---I thought it was
Misticot himsell. But never mind, work you away---fling the
earth weel up by out o' the gate---Od, if ye're no as clean a
worker at a grave as Win Winnet himsell! What gars ye stop
now?---ye're just at the very bit for a chance.''

  ``Stop!'' said the German, in a tone of anger and disappointment,
``why, I am down at de rocks dat de cursed ruins (God
forgife me!) is founded upon.''

  ``Weel,'' said the beggar, ``that's the likeliest bit of ony. It
will be but a muckle through-stane laid doun to kiver the gowd
---tak the pick till't, and pit mair strength, man---ae gude down-right
devvel will split it, I'se warrant ye---Ay, that will do
Od, he comes on wi' Wallace's straiks!''

  In fact, the adept, moved by Edie's exhortations, fetched two
or three desperate blows, and succeeded in breaking, not indeed
that against which he struck, which, as he had already conjectured,
was the solid rock, but the implement which he wielded,
jarring at the same time his arms up to the shoulder-blades.

  ``Hurra, boys!---there goes Ringan's pick-axe!'' cried Edie
``it's a shame o' the Fairport folk to sell siccan frail gear. Try
the shule---at it again, Mr. Dusterdeevil.''

  The adept, without reply, scrambled out of the pit, which was
now about six feet deep, and addressed his associate in a voice
that trembled with anger. ``Does you know, Mr. Edies Ochiltrees,
who it is you put off your gibes and your jests upon?''

  ``Brawly, Mr. Dusterdeevil---brawly do I ken ye, and has
done mony a day; but there's nae jesting in the case, for I am
wearying to see ae our treasures; we should hae had baith ends
o' the pockmanky filled by this time---I hope it's bowk eneugh
to haud a' the gear?''

  ``Look you, you base old person,'' said the incensed philosopher,
``if you do put another jest upon me, I will cleave your
skull-piece with this shovels!''

  ``And whare wad my hands and my pike-staff be a' the
time?'' replied Edie, in a tone that indicated no apprehension. 
``Hout, tout, Maister Dusterdeevil, I haena lived sae lang in the
warld neither, to be shuled out o't that gate. What ails ye to
be cankered, man, wi' your friends? I'll wager I'll find out the
treasure in a minute;'' and he jumped into the pit, and took up
the spade.

  ``I do swear to you,'' said the adept, whose suspicions were
now fully awake, ``that if you have played me one big trick, I
will give you one big beating, Mr. Edies.''

  ``Hear till him now!'' said Ochiltree, ``he kens how to gar
folk find out the gear---Od, I'm thinking he's been drilled that
way himsell some day.''

  At this insinuation, which alluded obviously to the former
scene betwixt himself and Sir Arthur, the philosopher lost the
slender remnant of patience he had left, and being of violent
passions, heaved up the truncheon of the broken mattock to
discharge it upon the old man's head. The blow would in all
probability have been fatal, had not he at whom it was aimed
exclaimed in a stern and firm voice, ``Shame to ye, man!---do
ye think Heaven or earth will suffer ye to murder an auld man
that might be your father?---Look behind ye, man!''

  Dousterswivel turned instinctively, and beheld, to his utter
astonishment, a tall dark figure standing close behind him. 
The apparition gave him no time to proceed by exorcism or
otherwise, but having instantly recourse to the _voie de fait,_ took
measure of the adept's shoulders three or four times with blows
so substantial, that he fell under the weight of them, and
remained senseless for some minutes between fear and stupefaction.
When he came to himself, he was alone in the ruined
chancel, lying upon the soft and damp earth which had been
thrown out of Misticot's grave. He raised himself with a
confused sensation of anger, pain, and terror, and it was not
until he had sat upright for some minutes, that he could arrange
his ideas sufficiently to recollect how he came there, or with
what purpose. As his recollection returned, he could have
little doubt that the bait held out to him by Ochiltree, to bring
him to that solitary spot, the sarcasms by which he had provoked
him into a quarrel, and the ready assistance which he had at
hand for terminating it in the manner in which it had ended,
were all parts of a concerted plan to bring disgrace and damage
on Herman Dousterswivel. He could hardly suppose that he
was indebted for the fatigue, anxiety, and beating which he had
undergone, purely to the malice of Edie Ochiltree singly, but
concluded that the mendicant had acted a part assigned to him
by some person of greater importance. His suspicions hesitated
between Oldbuck and Sir Arthur Wardour. The former had
been at no pains to conceal a marked dislike of him---but the
latter he had deeply injured; and although he judged that Sir
Arthur did not know the extent of his wrongs towards him,
yet it was easy to suppose he had gathered enough of the truth
to make him desirous of revenge. Ochiltree had alluded to at
least one circumstance which the adept had every reason to
suppose was private between Sir Arthur and himself, and therefore
must have been learned from the former. The language
of Oldbuck also intimated a conviction of his knavery, which
Sir Arthur heard without making any animated defence. 
Lastly, the way in which Dousterswivel supposed the Baronet to
have exercised his revenge, was not inconsistent with the practice
of other countries with which the adept was better acquainted
than with those of North Britain. With him, as with many
bad men, to suspect an injury, and to nourish the purpose of
revenge, was one and the same movement. And before Dousterswivel
had fairly recovered his legs, he had mentally sworn the
ruin of his benefactor, which, unfortunately, he possessed too
much the power of accelerating.

  But although a purpose of revenge floated through his brain,
it was no time to indulge such speculations. The hour, the
place, his own situation, and perhaps the presence or near
neighbourhood of his assailants, made self-preservation the
adept's first object. The lantern had been thrown down and
extinguished in the scuffle. The wind, which formerly howled
so loudly through the aisles of the ruin, had now greatly fallen,
lulled by the rain, which was descending very fast. The moon,
from the same cause, was totally obscured, and though Dousterswivel
had some experience of the ruins, and knew that he
must endeavour to regain the eastern door of the chancel, yet
the confusion of his ideas was such, that he hesitated for some
time ere he could ascertain in what direction he was to seek
it. In this perplexity, the suggestions of superstition, taking
the advantage of darkness and his evil conscience, began again
to present themselves to his disturbed imagination. ``But
bah!'' quoth he valiantly to himself, ``it is all nonsense all
one part of de damn big trick and imposture. Devil! that one
thick-skulled Scotch Baronet, as I have led by the nose for five
year, should cheat Herman Dousterswivel!''

  As he had come to this conclusion, an incident occurred
which tended greatly to shake the grounds on which he had
adopted it. Amid the melancholy _sough_ of the dying wind,
and the plash of the rain-drops on leaves and stones, arose, and
apparently at no great distance from the listener, a strain of
vocal music so sad and solemn, as if the departed spirits of the
churchmen who had once inhabited these deserted rains were
mourning the solitude and desolation to which their hallowed
precincts had been abandoned. Dousterswivel, who had now
got upon his feet, and was groping around the wall of the
chancel, stood rooted to the ground on the occurrence of this
new phenomenon. Each faculty of his soul seemed for the
moment concentred in the sense of hearing, and all rushed
back with the unanimous information, that the deep, wild, and
prolonged chant which he now heard, was the appropriate
music of one of the most solemn dirges of the Church of Rome. 
Why performed in such a solitude, and by what class of
choristers, were questions which the terrified imagination of the
adept, stirred with all the German superstitions of nixies, oak-kings,
wer-wolves, hobgoblins, black spirits and white, blue
spirits and grey, durst not even attempt to solve.

  Another of his senses was soon engaged in the investigation. 
At the extremity of one of the transepts of the church, at the
bottom of a few descending steps, was a small iron-grated door,
opening, as far as he recollected, to a sort of low vault or
sacristy. As he cast his eye in the direction of the sound, he
observed a strong reflection of red light glimmering through
these bars, and against the steps which descended to them. 
Dousterswivel stood a moment uncertain what to do; then,
suddenly forming a desperate resolution, he moved down the
aisle to the place from which the light proceeded.

  Fortified with the sign of the cross, and as many exorcisms
as his memory could recover, he advanced to the grate, from
which, unseen, he could see what passed in the interior of the
vault. As he approached with timid and uncertain steps, the
chant, after one or two wild and prolonged cadences, died away
into profound silence. The grate, when he reached it, presented
a singular spectacle in the interior of the sacristy. An open
grave, with four tall flambeaus, each about six feet high, placed
at the four corners---a bier, having a corpse in its shroud, the
arms folded upon the breast, rested upon tressels at one side of
the grave, as if ready to be interred---a priest, dressed in his
cope and stole, held open the service book---another churchman
in his vestments bore a holy-water sprinkler, and two boys in
white surplices held censers with incense---a man, of a figure
once tall and commanding, but now bent with age or infirmity,
stood alone and nearest to the coffin, attired in deep mourning---
such were the most prominent figures of the group. At a
little distance were two or three persons of both sexes, attired
in long mourning hoods and cloaks; and five or six others in
the same lugubrious dress, still farther removed from the body,
around the walls of the vault, stood ranged in motionless order,
each bearing in his hand a huge torch of black wax. The
smoky light from so many flambeaus, by the red and indistinct
atmosphere which it spread around, gave a hazy, dubious, and
as it were phantom-like appearance to the outlines of this
singular apparition, The voice of the priest---loud, clear, and
sonorous---now recited, from the breviary which he held in his
hand, those solemn words which the ritual of the Catholic church
has consecrated to the rendering of dust to dust. Meanwhile,
Dousterswivel, the place, the hour, and the surprise considered,
still remained uncertain whether what he saw was substantial,
or an unearthly representation of the rites to which in former
times these walls were familiar, but which are now rarely
practised in Protestant countries, and almost never in Scotland. 
He was uncertain whether to abide the conclusion of the
ceremony, or to endeavour to regain the chancel, when a
change in his position made him visible through the grate to
one of the attendant mourners. The person who first espied
him indicated his discovery to the individual who stood apart
and nearest the coffin, by a sign, and upon his making a
sign in reply, two of the group detached themselves, and,
gliding along with noiseless steps, as if fearing to disturb the
service, unlocked and opened the grate which separated them
from the adept. Each took him by an arm, and exerting a
degree of force, which he would have been incapable of resisting
had his fear permitted him to attempt opposition, they placed
him on the ground in the chancel, and sat down, one on each
side of him, as if to detain him. Satisfied he was in the power
of mortals like himself, the adept would have put some questions
to them; but while one pointed to the vault, from which the
sound of the priest's voice was distinctly heard, the other placed
his finger upon his lips in token of silence, a hint which the
German thought it most prudent to obey. And thus they
detained him until a loud Alleluia, pealing through the deserted
arches of St. Ruth, closed the singular ceremony which it had
been his fortune to witness.

  When the hymn had died away with all its echoes, the
voice of one of the sable personages under whose guard the
adept had remained, said, in a familiar tone and dialect, ``Dear
sirs, Mr. Dousterswivel, is this you? could not ye have let us
ken an ye had wussed till hae been present at the ceremony?---
My lord couldna tak it weel your coming blinking and jinking
in, in that fashion.''

  ``In de name of all dat is gootness, tell me what you are?''
interrupted the German in his turn.

  ``What I am? why, wha should I be but Ringan Aikwood, the
Knockwinnock poinder?---and what are ye doing here at this
time o' night, unless ye were come to attend the leddy's burial?''

  ``I do declare to you, mine goot Poinder Aikwood,'' said the
German, raising himself up, ``that I have been this vary nights
murdered, robbed, and put in fears of my life.''

  ``Robbed! wha wad do sic a deed here?---Murdered! od ye
speak pretty blithe for a murdered man---Put in fear! what put
you in fear, Mr. Dousterswivel?''

  ``I will tell you, Maister Poinder Aikwood Ringan, just
dat old miscreant dog villain blue-gown, as you call Edie
Ochiltrees.''

  ``I'll neer believe that,'' answered Ringan;---``Edie was ken'd
to me, and my father before me, for a true, loyal, and sooth-fast
man; and, mair by token, he's sleeping up yonder in our
barn, and has been since ten at e'en---Sae touch ye wha liket,
Mr. Dousterswivel, and whether onybody touched ye or no, I'm
sure Edie's sackless.''

  ``Maister Ringan Aikwood Poinders, I do not know what you
call sackless,---but let alone all de oils and de soot dat you say
he has, and I will tell you I was dis night robbed of fifty pounds.
by your oil and sooty friend, Edies Ochiltree; and he is no more
in your barn even now dan I ever shall be in de kingdom of
heafen.''

  ``Weel, sir, if ye will gae up wi' me, as the burial company
has dispersed, we'se mak ye down a bed at the lodge, and we'se
see if Edie's at the barn. There was twa wild-looking chaps left
the auld kirk when we were coming up wi' the corpse, that's certain;
and the priest, wha likes ill that ony heretics should look
on at our church ceremonies, sent twa o' the riding saulies after
them; sae we'll hear a' about it frae them.''

  Thus speaking, the kindly apparition, with the assistance of
the mute personage, who was his son, disencumbered himself of
his cloak, and prepared to escort Dousterswivel to the place of
that rest which the adept so much needed.

  ``I will apply to the magistrates to-morrow,'' said the adept;
``oder, I will have de law put in force against all the peoples.''

  While he thus muttered vengeance against the cause of his
injury, he tottered from among the ruins, supporting himself on
Ringan and his son, whose assistance his state of weakness rendered
very necessary.

  When they were clear of the priory, and had gained the little
meadow in which it stands, Dousterswivel could perceive the
torches which had caused him so much alarm issuing in irregular
procession from the ruins, and glancing their light, like that of
the _ignis fatuus,_ on the banks of the lake. After moving along
the path for some short space with a fluctuating and irregular
motion, the lights were at once extinguished.

  ``We aye put out the torches at the Halie-cross Well on sic
occasions,'' said the forester to his guest. And accordingly no
farther visible sign of the procession offered itself to Dousterswivel,
although his ear could catch the distant and decreasing
echo of horses' hoofs in the direction towards which the mourners
had bent their course.
