




		CHAPTER EIGHTEENTH.

	As when a Gryphon through the wilderness,
	With winged course, o'er hill and moory dale,
	Pursues the Arimaspian, who by stealth
	Had from his wakeful custody purloined
	The guarded gold: So eagerly the Fiend------
					Paradise Lost.

  When their collation was ended, Sir Arthur resumed the
account of the mysteries of the divining-rod, as a subject on
which he had formerly conversed with Dousterswivel. ``My
friend Mr. Oldbuck will now be prepared, Mr. Dousterswivel,
to listen with more respect to the stories you have told us of
the late discoveries in Germany by the brethren of your
association.''

  ``Ah, Sir Arthur, that was not a thing to speak to those
gentlemans, because it is want of credulity---what you call faith
---that spoils the great enterprise.''

  ``At least, however, let my daughter read the narrative she
has taken down of the story of Martin Waldeck.''

  ``Ah! that was vary true story---but Miss Wardour, she is
so sly and so witty, that she has made it just like one romance
---as well as Goethe or Wieland could have done it, by mine
honest wort.''

  ``To say the truth, Mr. Dousterswivel,'' answered Miss
Wardour, ``the romantic predominated in the legend so much
above the probable, that it was impossible for a lover of fairyland
like me to avoid lending a few touches to make it perfect
in its kind. But here it is, and if you do not incline to leave
this shade till the heat of the day has somewhat declined, and
will have sympathy with my bad composition, perhaps Sir
Arthur or Mr. Oldbuck will read it to us.''

  ``Not I,'' said Sir Arthur; ``I was never fond of reading
aloud. ''

  ``Nor I,'' said Oldbuck, ``for I have forgot my spectacles. 
But here is Lovel, with sharp eyes and a good voice; for Mr.
Blattergowl, I know, never reads anything, lest he should be
suspected of reading his sermons.''

  The task was therefore imposed upon Lovel, who received,
with some trepidation, as Miss Wardour delivered, with a little
embarrassment, a paper containing the lines traced by that fair
hand, the possession of which he coveted as the highest blessing
the earth could offer to him. But there was a necessity of
suppressing his emotions; and after glancing over the manuscript,
as if to become acquainted with the character, he collected
himself, and read the company the following tale:---

	[=The Fortunes of Martin Waldeck.=]

  The solitudes of the Harz forest in Germany,<*> but especially

* The outline of this story is taken from the German, though the Author
* is at present unable to say in which of the various collections of the popular
* legends in that language the original is to be found.

the mountains called Blocksberg, or rather Brockenberg, are the
chosen scenes for tales of witches, demons, and apparitions. 
The occupation of the inhabitants, who are either miners or
foresters, is of a kind that renders them peculiarly prone to
superstition, and the natural phenomena which they witness in
pursuit of their solitary or subterraneous profession, are often
set down by them to the interference of goblins or the power of
magic. Among the various legends current in that wild
country, there is a favourite one, which supposes the Harz to
be haunted by a sort of tutelar demon, in the shape of a wild
man, of huge stature, his head wreathed with oak leaves, and
his middle cinctured with the same, bearing in his hand a pine
torn up by the roots. It is certain that many persons profess
to have seen such a form traversing, with huge strides, in a
line parallel to their own course, the opposite ridge of a
mountain, when divided from it by a narrow glen; and indeed
the fact of the apparition is so generally admitted, that modern
scepticism has only found refuge by ascribing it to optical
deception.<*>

*  The shadow of the person who sees the phantom, being reflected upon
* a cloud of mist, like the image of the magic lantern upon a white sheet, is
* supposed to have formed the apparition.


  In elder times, the intercourse of the demon with the inhabitants
was more familiar, and, according to the traditions of the
Harz, he was wont, with the caprice usually ascribed to these
earth-born powers, to interfere with the affairs of mortals,
sometimes for their weal, sometimes for their wo. But it was
observed that even his gifts often turned out, in the long run,
fatal to those on whom they were bestowed, and it was no
uncommon thing for the pastors, in their care of their flocks,
to compose long sermons, the burden whereof was a warning
against having any intercourse, direct or indirect, with the Harz
demon. The fortunes of Martin Waldeck have been often
quoted by the aged to their giddy children, when they were
heard to scoff at a danger which appeared visionary.

  A travelling capuchin had possessed himself of the pulpit of
the thatched church at a little hamlet called _Morgenbrodt,_ lying
in the Harz district, from which he declaimed against the wickedness
of the inhabitants, their communication with fiends, witches,
and fairies, and, in particular, with the woodland goblin of the
Harz. The doctrines of Luther had already begun to spread
among the peasantry (for the incident is placed under the reign
of Charles V.), and they laughed to scorn the zeal with which
the venerable man insisted upon his topic. At length, as his
vehemence increased with opposition, so their opposition rose in
proportion to his vehemence. The inhabitants did not like to
hear an accustomed quiet demon, who had inhabited the
Brockenberg for so many ages, summarily confounded with
Baal-peor, Ashtaroth, and Beelzebub himself, and condemned
without reprieve to the bottomless Tophet. The apprehensions
that the spirit might avenge himself on them for listening to
such an illiberal sentence, added to their national interest in his
behalf. A travelling friar, they said, that is here to-day and
away to-morrow, may say what be pleases: but it is we, the
ancient and constant inhabitants of the country, that are left at
the mercy of the insulted demon, and must, of course, pay for
all. Under the irritation occasioned by these reflections, the
peasants from injurious language betook themselves to stones,
and having pebbled the priest pretty handsomely, they drove
him out of the parish to preach against demons elsewhere.

  Three young men, who had been present and assisting on
this occasion were upon their return to the hut where they
carried on the laborious and mean occupation of preparing
charcoal for the smelting furnaces. On the way, their conversation
naturally turned upon the demon of the Harz and the
doctrine of the capuchin. Max and George Waldeck, the two
elder brothers, although they allowed the language of the
capuchin to have been indiscreet and worthy of censure, as presuming
to determine upon the precise character and abode of
the spirit, yet contended it was dangerous, in the highest degree,
to accept of his gifts, or hold any communication with him,
He was powerful, they allowed, but wayward and capricious,
and those who had intercourse with him seldom came to a good
end. Did he not give the brave knight, Ecbert of Rabenwald,
that famous black steed, by means of which he vanquished all
the champions at the great tournament at Bremen? and did
not the same steed afterwards precipitate itself with its rider
into an abyss so steep and fearful, that neither horse nor man
were ever seen more? Had he not given to Dame Gertrude
Trodden a curious spell for making butter come? and was she
not burnt for a witch by the grand criminal judge of the Electorate,
because she availed herself of his gift? But these, and
many other instances which they quoted, of mischance and ill-luck
ultimately attending on the apparent benefits conferred by
the Harz spirit, failed to make any impression upon Martin
Waldeck, the youngest of the brothers.

  Martin was youthful, rash, and impetuous; excelling in all
the exercises which distinguish a mountaineer, and brave and
undaunted from his familiar intercourse with the dangers that
attend them. He laughed at the timidity of his brothers. 
``Tell me not of such folly,'' he said; ``the demon is a good
demon---he lives among us as if he were a peasant like ourselves
---haunts the lonely crags and recesses of the mountains like a
huntsman or goatherd---and he who loves the Harz forest and
its wild scenes cannot be indifferent to the fate of the hardy
children of the soil. But, if the demon were as malicious as
you would make him, how should he derive power over mortals,
who barely avail themselves of his gifts, without binding themselves
to submit to his pleasure? When you carry your charcoal
to the furnace, is not the money as good that is paid you by
blaspheming Blaize, the old reprobate overseer, as if you got it
from the pastor himself? It is not the goblins gifts which can
endanger you, then, but it is the use you shall make of them
that you must account for. And were the demon to appear to
me at this moment, and indicate to me a gold or silver mine, I
would begin to dig away even before his back were turned,---
and I would consider myself as under protection of a much
Greater than he, while I made a good use of the wealth he
pointed out to me.''

  To this the elder brother replied, that wealth ill won was
seldom well spent; while Martin presumptuously declared, that
the possession of all the treasures of the Harz would not make
the slightest alteration on his habits, morals, or character.

  His brother entreated Martin to talk less wildly upon the
subject, and with some difficulty contrived to withdraw his
attention, by calling it to the consideration of the approaching
boar-chase. This talk brought them to their hut, a wretched
wigwam, situated upon one side of a wild, narrow, and romantic
dell, in the recesses of the Brockenberg. They released their
sister from attending upon the operation of charring the wood,
which requires constant attention, and divided among themselves
the duty of watching it by night, according to their custom, one
always waking, while his brothers slept.

  Max Waldeck, the eldest, watched during the first two hours
of the night, and was considerably alarmed by observing, upon
the opposite bank of the glen, or valley, a huge fire surrounded
by some figures that appeared to wheel around it with antic
gestures. Max at first bethought him of calling up his brothers;
but recollecting the daring character of the youngest, and finding
it impossible to wake the elder without also disturbing Martin
---conceiving also what he saw to be an illusion of the demon,
sent perhaps in consequence of the venturous expressions used
by Martin on the preceding evening, he thought it best to
betake himself to the safeguard of such prayers as he could
murmur over, and to watch in great terror and annoyance this
strange and alarming apparition. After blazing for some time,
the fire faded gradually away into darkness, and the rest of
Max's watch was only disturbed by the remembrance of its
terrors.

  George now occupied the place of Max, who had retired to
rest. The phenomenon of a huge blazing fire, upon the opposite
bank of the glen, again presented itself to the eye of the
watchman. It was surrounded as before by figures, which, distinguished
by their opaque forms, being between the spectator
and the red glaring light, moved and fluctuated around it as if
engaged in some mystical ceremony. George, though equally
cautious, was of a bolder character than his elder brother. He
resolved to examine more nearly the object of his wonder; and,
accordingly. after crossing the rivulet which divided the glen,
he climbed up the opposite bank, and approached within an
arrow's flight of the fire, which blazed apparently with the same
fury as when he first witnessed it.

  The appearance, of the assistants who surrounded it resembled
those phantoms which are seen in a troubled dream, and at
once confirmed the idea he had entertained from the first, that
they did not belong to the human world. Amongst these strange
unearthly forms, George Waldeck distinguished that of a giant
overgrown with hair, holding an uprooted fir in his hand, with
which, from time to time, he seemed to stir the blazing fire, and
having no other clothing than a wreath of oak leaves around
his forehead and loins. George's heart sunk within him at
recognising the well-known apparition of the Harz demon, as
he had been often described to him by the ancient shepherds
and huntsmen who had seen his form traversing the mountains. 
He turned, and was about to fly; but upon second thoughts,
blaming his own cowardice, he recited mentally the verse of the
Psalmist, ``All good angels, praise the Lord!'' which is in that
country supposed powerful as an exorcism, and turned himself
once more towards the place where he had seen the fire. But
it was no longer visible.

  The pale moon alone enlightened the side of the valley; and
when George, with trembling steps, a moist brow, and hair
bristling upright under his collier's cap, came to the spot on
which the fire had been so lately visible, marked as it was by a
scathed oak-tree, there appeared not on the heath the slightest
vestiges of what he had seen. The moss and wild flowers were
unscorched, and the branches of the oak-tree, which had so
lately appeared enveloped in wreaths of flame and smoke, were
moist with the dews of midnight.

  George returned to his hut with trembling steps, and, arguing
like his elder brother, resolved to say nothing of what he had
seen, lest he should awake in Martin that daring curiosity which
he almost deemed to be allied with impiety.

  It was now Martin's turn to watch. The household cock
had given his first summons, and the night was well-nigh spent. 
Upon examining the state of the furnace in which the wood
was deposited in order to its being _coked_ or _charred,_ he was
surprised to find that the fire had not been sufficiently maintained;
for in his excursion and its consequences, George had
forgot the principal object of his watch. Martin's first thought
was to call up the slumberers; but observing that both his
brothers slept unwontedly deep and heavily, he respected their
repose, and set himself to supply the furnace with fuel without
requiring their aid. What he heaped upon it was apparently
damp and unfit for the purpose, for the fire seemed rather to
decay than revive. Martin next went to collect some boughs
from a stack which had been carefully cut and dried for this
purpose; but, when he returned, he found the fire totally extinguished.
This was a serious evil, and threatened them with loss
of their trade for more than one day. The vexed and mortified
watchman set about to strike a light in order to rekindle the fire
but the tinder was moist, and his labour proved in this respect
also ineffectual. He was now about to call up his brothers,
for circumstances seemed to be pressing, when flashes of light
glimmered not only through the window, but through every
crevice of the rudely built hut, and summoned him to behold
the same apparition which had before alarmed the successive
watches of his brethren. His first idea was, that the Muhllerhaussers,
their rivals in trade, and with whom they had had
many quarrels, might have encroached upon their bounds for
the purpose of pirating their wood; and he resolved to awake
his brothers, and be revenged on them for their audacity. But
a short reflection and observation on the gestures and manner
of those who seemed to ``work in the fire,'' induced him to
dismiss this belief, and although rather sceptical in such
matters, to conclude that what he saw was a supernatural
phenomenon. ``But be they men or fiends,'' said the undaunted
forester, ``that busy themselves yonder with such fantastical
rites and gestures, I will go and demand a light to rekindle our
furnace.'' He, relinquished at the same time the idea of awaking
his brethren. There was a belief that such adventures as
he was about to undertake were accessible only to one person
at a time; he feared also that his brothers, in their scrupulous
timidity, might interfere to prevent his pursuing the investigation
he had resolved to commence; and, therefore, snatching
his boar-spear from the wall, the undaunted Martin Waldeck
set forth on the adventure alone.

  With the same success as his brother George, but with
courage far superior, Martin crossed the brook, ascended the
hill, and approached so near the ghostly assembly, that he
could recognise, in the presiding figure, the attributes of the
Harz demon. A cold shuddering assailed him for the first
time in his life; but the recollection that he had at a distance
dared and even courted the intercourse which was now about
to take place, confirmed his staggering courage; and pride
supplying what he wanted in resolution, he advanced with
tolerable firmness towards the fire, the figures which surrounded
it appearing still more wild, fantastical, and supernatural, the
more near he approached to the assembly. He was received
with a loud shout of discordant and unnatural laughter, which,
to his stunned ears, seemed more alarming than a combination
of the most dismal and melancholy sounds that could be
imagined. ``Who art thou?'' said the giant, compressing his
savage and exaggerated features into a sort of forced gravity,
while they were occasionally agitated by the convulsion of the
laughter which he seemed to suppress.

  ``Martin Waldeck, the forester,'' answered the hardy youth;
---``and who are you?''

  ``The King of the Waste and of the Mine,'' answered the
spectre;---``and why hast thou dared to encroach on my
mysteries?''

  ``I came in search of light to rekindle my fire,'' answered
Martin, hardily, and then resolutely asked in his turn, ``What
mysteries are those that you celebrate here?''

  ``We celebrate,'' answered the complaisant demon, ``the
wedding of Hermes with the Black Dragon---But take thy fire
that thou camest to seek, and begone! no mortal may look upon
us and live.''

  The peasant struck his spear-point into a large piece of
blazing wood, which he heaved up with some difficulty, and
then turned round to regain his hut, the, shouts of laughter
being renewed behind him with treble violence, and ringing far
down the narrow valley. When Martin returned to the hut,
his first care, however much astonished with what he had seen,
was to dispose the kindled coal among the fuel so as might best
light the fire of his furnace; but after many efforts, and all
exertions of bellows and fire-prong, the coal he had brought
from the demon's fire became totally extinct without kindling
any of the others. He turned about, and observed the fire still
blazing on the hill, although those who had been busied around
it had disappeared. As he conceived the spectre had been
jesting with him, he gave way to the natural hardihood of his
temper, and, determining to see the adventure to an end,
resumed the road to the fire, from which, unopposed by the
demon, he brought off in the same manner a blazing piece of
charcoal, but still without being able to succeed in lighting his
fire. Impunity having increased his rashness, he resolved upon
a third experiment, and was as successful as before in reaching
the fire; but when he had again appropriated a piece of burning
coal, and had turned to depart, he heard the harsh and supernatural
voice which had before accosted him, pronounce these
words, ``Dare not return hither a fourth time!''

  The attempt to kindle the fire with this last coal having proved
as ineffectual as on the former occasions, Martin relinquished
the hopeless attempt, and flung himself on his bed of leaves,
resolving to delay till the next morning the communication of his
supernatural adventure to his brothers. He was awakened
from a heavy sleep into which he had sunk, from fatigue of
body and agitation of mind, by loud exclamations of surprise
and joy. His brothers, astonished at finding the fire extinguished
when they awoke, had proceeded to arrange the fuel in
order to renew it, when they found in the ashes three huge
metallic masses, which their skill (for most of the peasants in
the Harz are practical mineralogists) immediately ascertained
to be pure gold.

  It was some damp upon their joyful congratulations when
they learned from Martin the mode in which he had obtained
this treasure, to which their own experience of the nocturnal
vision induced them to give full credit. But they were unable
to resist the temptation of sharing in their brother's wealth. 
Taking now upon him as head of the house, Martin Waldeck
bought lands and forests, built a castle, obtained a
patent of nobility, and, greatly to the indignation of the
ancient aristocracy of the neighbourhood, was invested with all
the privileges of a man of family. His courage in public war,
as well as in private feuds, together with the number of retainers
whom he kept in pay, sustained him for some time against the
odium which was excited by his sudden elevation, and the
arrogance of his pretensious.

  And now it was seen in the instance of Martin Waldeck, as
it has been in that of many others, how little mortals can
foresee the effect of sudden prosperity on their own disposition. 
The evil propensities in his nature, which poverty had checked
and repressed, ripened and bore their unhallowed fruit under
the influence of temptation and the means of indulgence. As
Deep calls unto Deep, one bad passion awakened another
the fiend of avarice invoked that of pride, and pride was to be
supported by cruelty and oppression. Waldeck's character,
always bold and daring but rendered harsh and assuming by
prosperity, soon made him odious, not to the nobles only, but
likewise to the lower ranks, who saw, with double dislike, the
oppressive rights of the feudal nobility of the empire so remorselessly
exercised by one who had risen from the very dregs of
the people. His adventure, although carefully concealed, began
likewise to be whispered abroad, and the clergy already stigmatized
as a wizard and accomplice of fiends, the wretch, who,
having acquired so huge a treasure in so strange a manner,
had not sought to sanctify it by dedicating a considerable portion
to the use of the church. Surrounded by enemies, public and
private, tormented by a thousand feuds, and threatened by the
church with excommunication, Martin Waldeck, or, as we must
now call him, the Baron von Waldeck, often regretted bitterly
the labours and sports of his unenvied poverty. But his
courage failed him not under all these difficulties, and seemed
rather to augment in proportion to the danger which darkened
around him, until an accident precipitated his fall.

  A proclamation by the reigning Duke of Brunswick had
invited to a solemn tournament all German nobles of free and
honourable descent; and Martin Waldeck, splendidly armed,
accompanied by his two brothers, and a gallantly-equipped
retinue, had the arrogance to appear among the chivalry of the
province, and demand permission to enter the lists. This was
considered as filling up the measure of his presumption. A
thousand voices exclaimed, ``We will have no cinder-sifter
mingle in our games of chivalry.'' Irritated to frenzy, Martin
drew his sword and hewed down the herald, who, in compliance
with the general outcry, opposed his entry into the lists. An
hundred swords were unsheathed to avenge what was in those
days regarded as a crime only inferior to sacrilege or regicide. 
Waldeck, after defending himself like a lion, was seized, tried
on the spot by the judges of the lists, and condemned, as the
appropriate punishment for breaking the peace of his sovereign,
and violating the sacred person of a herald-at-arms, to have his
right hand struck from his body, to be ignominiously deprived
of the honour of nobility, of which he was unworthy, and to be
expelled from the city. When he had been stripped of his
arms, and sustained the mutilation imposed by this severe
sentence, the unhappy victim of ambition was abandoned to
the rabble, who followed him with threats and outcries levelled
alternately against the necromancer and oppressor, which at
length ended in violence. His brothers (for his retinue were
fled and dispersed) at length succeeded in rescuing him from
the hands of the populace, when, satiated with cruelty, they
had left him half dead through loss of blood, and through the
outrages he had sustained. They were not permitted, such was
the ingenious cruelty of their enemies, to make use of any other
means of removing him, excepting such a collier's cart as they
had themselves formerly used, in which they deposited their
brother on a truss of straw, scarcely expecting to reach any
place of shelter ere death should release him from his misery.

  When the Waldecks, journeying in this miserable manner,
had approached the verge of their native country, in a hollow
way, between two mountains, they perceived a figure advancing
towards them, which at first sight seemed to be an aged man. 
But as he approached, his limbs and stature increased, the
cloak fell from his shoulders, his pilgrim's staff was changed
into an uprooted pine-tree, and the gigantic figure of the Harz
demon passed before them in his terrors. When he came
opposite to the cart which contained the miserable Waldeck,
his huge features dilated into a grin of unutterable contempt
and malignity, as he asked the sufferer, ``How like you the fire
=my= coals have kindled?'' The power of motion, which terror
suspended in his two brothers, seemed to be restored to Martin
by the energy of his courage. He raised himself on the cart,
bent his brows, and, clenching his fist, shook it at the spectre
with a ghastly look of hate and defiance. The goblin vanished
with his usual tremendous and explosive laugh, and left Waldeck
exhausted with this effort of expiring nature.

  The terrified brethren turned their vehicle toward the towers
of a convent, which arose in a wood of pine-trees beside the
road. They were charitably received by a bare-footed and long-bearded
capuchin, and Martin survived only to complete the
first confession he had made since the day of his sudden prosperity,
and to receive absolution from the very priest whom,
precisely on that day three years, he had assisted to pelt out of
the hamlet of Morgenbrodt. The three years of precarious
prosperity were supposed to have a mysterious correspondence
with the number of his visits to the spectral fire upon the bill.

  The body of Martin Waldeck was interred in the convent
where he expired, in which his brothers, having assumed the
habit of the order, lived and died in the performance of acts of
charity and devotion. His lands, to which no one asserted any
claim, lay waste until they were reassumed by the emperor as
a lapsed fief, and the ruins of the castle, which Waldeck had
called by his own name, are still shunned by the miner and
forester as haunted by evil spirits. Thus were the miseries
attendant upon wealth, hastily attained and ill employed,
exemplified in the fortunes of Martin Waldeck.
