




		CHAPTER SECOND.

	Sir, they do scandal me upon the road here!
	A poor quotidian rack of mutton roasted
	Dry to be grated! and that driven down
	With beer and butter-milk, mingled together.
	It is against my freehold, my inheritance.
	=Wine= is the word that glads the heart of man,
	And mine's the house of wine. _Sack,_ says my bush,
	_Be merry and drink Sherry,_ that's my posie.
					Ben Jonson's _New Inn._

  As the senior traveller descended the crazy steps of the diligence
at the inn, he was greeted by the fat, gouty, pursy landlord,
with that mixture of familiarity and respect which the
Scotch innkeepers of the old school used to assume towards
their more valued customers.

  ``Have a care o' us, Monkbarns (distinguishing him by his
territorial epithet, always most agreeable to the ear of a Scottish
proprietor), is this you? I little thought to have seen your
honour here till the summer session was ower.''

  ``Ye donnard auld deevil,'' answered his guest, his Scottish
accent predominating when in anger though otherwise not
particularly remarkable,---``ye donnard auld crippled idiot, what
have I to do with the session, or the geese that flock to it, or
the hawks that pick their pinions for them?''

  ``Troth, and that's true,'' said mine host, who, in fact, only
spoke upon a very general recollection of the stranger's original
education, yet would have been sorry not to have been supposed
accurate as to the station and profession of him, or any other
occasional guest---``That's very true,---but I thought ye had
some law affair of your ain to look after---I have ane mysell---a
ganging plea that my father left me, and his father afore left to
him. It's about our back-yard---ye'll maybe hae heard of it in
the Parliament-house, Hutchison against Mackitchinson---it's
a weel-kenn'd plea---its been four times in afore the fifteen, and
deil ony thing the wisest o' them could make o't, but just to
send it out again to the outer-house.---O it's a beautiful thing
to see how lang and how carefully justice is considered in this
country!''

  ``Hold your tongue, you fool,'' said the traveller, but in great
good-humour, ``and tell us what you can give this young gentleman
and me for dinner.''

  ``Ou, there's fish, nae doubt,---that's sea-trout and caller*

* [For Scotch expressions, see Glossary at end of volume.]

haddocks,'' said Mackitchinson, twisting his napkin; ``and ye'll
be for a mutton-chop, and there's cranberry tarts, very weel
preserved, and---and there's just ony thing else ye like.''

  ``Which is to say, there is nothing else whatever? Well,
well, the fish and the chop, and the tarts, will do very well. But
don't imitate the cautious delay that you praise in the courts of
justice. Let there be no remits from the inner to the outer
house, hear ye me?''

  ``Na, na,'' said Mackitchinson, whose long and heedful perusal
of volumes of printed session papers had made him acquainted
with some law phrases---``the denner shall be served _quam
primum_ and that _peremptorie._'' And with the flattering laugh of
a promising host, he left them in his sanded parlour, hung with
prints of the Four Seasons.

  As, notwithstanding his pledge to the contrary, the glorious
delays of the law were not without their parallel in the kitchen
of the inn, our younger traveller had an opportunity to step out
and make some inquiry of the people of the house concerning
the rank and station of his companion. The information which
he received was of a general and less authentic nature, but quite
sufficient to make him acquainted with the name, history, and
circumstances of the gentleman, whom we shall endeavour, in
a few words, to introduce more accurately to our readers.

  Jonathan Oldenbuck, or Oldinbuck, by popular contraction
Oldbuck, of Monkbarns, was the second son of a gentleman
possessed of a small property in the neighbourhood of a thriving
seaport town on the north-eastern coast of Scotland, which, for
various reasons, we shall denominate Fairport. They had been
established for several generations, as landowners in the county,
and in most shires of England would have been accounted a
family of some standing But the shire of ------ was filled with
gentlemen of more ancient descent and larger fortune. In the
last generation, also, the neighbouring gentry had been almost
uniformly Jacobites, while the proprietors of Monkbarns, like
the burghers of the town near which they were settled, were
steady assertors of the Protestant succession. The latter had,
however, a pedigree of their own, on which they prided themselves
as much as those who despised them valued their
respective Saxon, Norman, or Celtic genealogies. The first
Oldenbuck, who had settled in their family mansion shortly
after the Reformation, was, they asserted, descended from one
of the original printers of Germany, and had left his country in
consequence of the persecutions directed against the professors of
the Reformed religion. He had found a refuge in the town
near which his posterity dwelt, the more readily that he was a
sufferer in the Protestant cause, and certainly not the less so,
that he brought with him money enough to purchase the small
estate of Monkbarns, then sold by a dissipated laird, to whose
father it had been gifted, with other church lands, on the dissolution
of the great and wealthy monastery to which it had
belonged. The Oldenbucks were therefore, loyal subjects on all
occasions of insurrection; and, as they kept up a good intelligence
with the borough, it chanced that the Laird of Monkbarns, who
flourished in 1745, was provost of the town during that ill-fated
year, and had exerted himself with much spirit in favour of
King George, and even been put to expenses on that score,
which, according to the liberal conduct of the existing government
towards their friends, had never been repaid him. By
dint of solicitation, however, and borough interest, he contrived
to gain a place in the customs, and, being a frugal, careful man,
had found himself enabled to add considerably to his paternal
fortune. He had only two sons, of whom, as we have hinted,
the present laird was the younger, and two daughters, one of
whom still flourished in single blessedness, and the other, who
was greatly more juvenile, made a love-match with a captain in
the _Forty-twa,_ who had no other fortune but his commission and
a Highland pedigree. Poverty disturbed a union which love
would otherwise have made happy, and Captain M`Intyre, in
justice to his wife and two children, a boy and girl, had found
himself obliged to seek his fortune in the East Indies. Being
ordered upon an expedition against Hyder Ally, the detachment
to which he belonged was cut off, and no news ever reached his
unfortunate wife, whether he fell in battle, or was murdered in
prison, or survived in what the habits of the Indian tyrant
rendered a hopeless captivity. She sunk under the accumulated
load of grief and uncertainty, and left a son and daughter to the
charge of her brother, the existing Laird of Monkbarns.

  The history of that proprietor himself is soon told. Being,
as we have said, a second son, his father destined him to a share
in a substantial mercantile concern, carried on by some of his
maternal relations. From this Jonathan's mind revolted in the
most irreconcilable manner. He was then put apprentice to the
profession of a writer, or attorney, in which he profited so far,
that he made himself master of the whole forms of feudal investitures,
and showed such pleasure in reconciling their incongruities,
and tracing their origin, that his master had great hope
he would one day be an able conveyancer. But he halted upon
the threshold, and, though he acquired some knowledge of the
origin and system of the law of his country, he could never be
persuaded to apply it to lucrative and practical purposes. It
was not from any inconsiderate neglect of the advantages attending
the possession of money that he thus deceived the hopes
of his master. ``Were he thoughtless or light-headed, or _rei su<ae>
prodigus,_'' said his instructor, ``I would know what to make of
him. But he never pays away a shilling without looking
anxiously after the change, makes his sixpence go farther than
another lad's half-crown, and wilt ponder over an old black-letter
copy of the acts of parliament for days, rather than go to
the golf or the change-house; and yet he will not bestow one of
these days on a little business of routine, that would put twenty
shillings in his pocket---a strange mixture of frugality and
industry, and negligent indolence---I don't know what to make
of him. ''

  But in process of time his pupil gained the means of making
what he pleased of himself; for his father having died, was not
long survived by his eldest son, an arrant fisher and fowler, who
departed this life, in consequence of a cold caught in his vocation,
while shooting ducks in the swamp called Kittlefittingmoss,
notwithstanding his having drunk a bottle of brandy that
very night to keep the cold out of his stomach. Jonathan,
therefore, succeeded to the estate, and with it to the means of
subsisting without the hated drudgery of the law. His wishes
were very moderate; and as the rent of his small property rose
with the improvement of the country, it soon greatly exceeded
his wants and expenditure; and though too indolent to make
money, he was by no means insensible to the pleasure of beholding
it accumulate. The burghers of the town near which he
lived regarded him with a sort of envy, as one who affected to
divide himself from their rank in society, and whose studies and
pleasures seemed to them alike incomprehensible. Still, however,
a sort of hereditary respect for the Laird of Monkbarns, augmented
by the knowledge of his being a ready-money man, kept
up his consequence with this class of his neighbours. The country
gentlemen were generally above him in fortune, and beneath
him in intellect, and, excepting one with whom he lived in
habits of intimacy, had little intercourse with Mr. Oldbuck of
Monkbarns. He, had, however, the usual resources, the company
of the clergyman, and of the doctor, when he chose to
request it, and also his own pursuits and pleasures, being in
correspondence with most of the virtuosi of his time, who, like
himself, measured decayed entrenchments, made plans of ruined
castles, read illegible inscriptions, and wrote essays on medals in
the proportion of twelve pages to each letter of the legend. 
Some habits of hasty irritation he had contracted, partly, it was
said in the borough of Fairport, from an early disappointment in
love in virtue of which he had commenced misogynist, as he
called it, but yet more by the obsequious attention paid to him
by his maiden sister and his orphan niece, whom he had trained
to consider him as the greatest man upon earth, and whom he
used to boast of as the only women he had ever seen who were
well broke in and bitted to obedience; though, it must be owned,
Miss Grizzy Oldbuck was sometimes apt to _jibb_ when he pulled
the reins too tight. The rest of his character must be gathered
from the story, and we dismiss with pleasure the tiresome task
of recapitulation.

  During the time of dinner, Mr. Oldbuck, actuated by the same
curiosity which his fellow-traveller had entertained on his account,
made some advances, which his aye and station entitled
him to do in a more direct manner, towards ascertaining the
name, destination, and quality of his young companion.

  His name, the young gentleman said, was Lovel.

  ``What! the cat, the rat, and Lovel our dog? Was he descended
from King Richard's favourite?''

  ``He had no pretensions,'' he said, ``to call himself a whelp
of that litter; his father was a north-of-England gentleman. 
He was at present travelling to Fairport (the town near to
which Monkbarns was situated), and, if he found the place agreeable,
might perhaps remain there for some weeks.''

  ``Was Mr. Lovel's excursion solely for pleasure?''

  ``Not entirely.''

  ``Perhaps on business with some of the commercial people of
Fairport?''

  ``It was partly on business, but had no reference to commerce.''

  Here he paused; and Mr. Oldbuck, having pushed his inquiries
as far as good manners permitted, was obliged to change
the conversation. The Antiquary, though by no means an
enemy to good cheer, was a determined foe to all unnecessary
expense on a journey; and upon his companion giving a hint
concerning a bottle of port wine, he drew a direful picture
of the mixture, which, he said, was usually sold under that
denomination, and affirming that a little punch was more
genuine and better suited for the season, he laid his hand upon
the bell to order the materials. But Mackitchinson had, in his
own mind, settled their beverage otherwise, and appeared bearing
in his hand an immense double quart bottle, or magnum, as
it is called in Scotland, covered with saw-dust and cobwebs, the
warrants of its antiquity.

  ``Punch!'' said he, catching that generous sound as he
entered the parlour, ``the deil a drap punch ye'se get here the
day, Monkbarns, and that ye may lay your account wi'.''

  ``What do you mean, you impudent rascal?''

  ``Ay, ay, it's nae matter for that---but do you mind the trick
ye served me the last time ye were here!''

  ``I trick you!''

  ``Ay, just yoursell, Monkbarns. The Laird o' Tamlowrie
and Sir Gilbert Grizzlecleuch, and Auld Rossballoh, and the
Bailie, were just setting in to make an afternoon o't, and you,
wi' some o' your auld-warld stories, that the mind o' man canna
resist, whirl'd them to the back o' beyont to look at the auld
Roman camp---Ah, sir!'' turning to Lovel, ``he wad wile the
bird aff the tree wi' the tales he tells about folk lang syne---
and did not I lose the drinking o' sax pints o' gude claret, for
the deil ane wad hae stirred till he had seen that out at the
least?''

  ``D'ye hear the impudent scoundrel!'' said Monkbarns, but
laughing at the same time; for the worthy landlord, as he used
to boast, know the measure of a guest's foot as well as e'er a
souter on this side Solway; ``well, well, you may send us in a
bottle of port.''

  ``Port! na, na! ye maun leave port and punch to the like o'
us, it's claret that's fit for you lairds; and, I dare say, nane of
the folk ye speak so much o' ever drank either of the twa.''

  ``Do you hear how absolute the knave is? Well, my young
friend, we must for once prefer the _Falernian_ to the _vile
Sabinum._''

  The ready landlord had the cork instantly extracted, decanted
the wine into a vessel of suitable capaciousness, and, declaring
it _parfumed_ the very room, left his guests to make the most of it.

  Mackitchinson's wine was really good, and had its effect
upon the spirits of the elder guest, who told some good stories,
cut some sly jokes, and at length entered into a learned discussion
concerning the ancient dramatists; a ground on which he found
his new acquaintance so strong, that at length be began to suspect
he had made them his professional study. ``A traveller
partly for business and partly for pleasure?---why, the stage
partakes of both; it is a labour to the performers, and affords,
or is meant to afford, pleasure to the spectators. He seems, in
manner and rank, above the class of young men who take that
turn; but I remember hearing them say, that the little theatre
at Fairport was to open with the performance of a young
gentleman, being his first appearance on any stage.---If this
should be thee, Lovel!---Lovel? yes, Lovel or Belville are just
the names which youngsters are apt to assume on such occasions
---on my life, I am sorry for the lad.''

  Mr. Oldbuck was habitually parsimonious, but in no respects
mean; his first thought was to save his fellow-traveller any part
of the expense of the entertainment, which he supposed must
be in his situation more or less inconvenient. He therefore
took an opportunity of settling privately with Mr. Mackitchinson. 
The young traveller remonstrated against his liberality, and only
acquiesced in deference to his years and respectability.

  The mutual satisfaction which they found in each other's
society induced Mr. Oldbuck to propose, and Lovel willingly to
accept, a scheme for travelling together to the end of their journey.
Mr. Oldbuck intimated a wish to pay two-thirds of the
hire of a post-chaise, saying, that a proportional quantity of
room was necessary to his accommodation; but this Mr. Lovel
resolutely declined. Their expense then was mutual, unless
when Lovel occasionally slipt a shilling into the hand of a
growling postilion; for Oldbuck, tenacious of ancient customs,
never extended his guerdon beyond eighteen-pence a stage. In
this manner they travelled, until they arrived at Fairport*

* [The ``Fairport'' of this novel is supposed to refer to the town of
* Arbroath, in Forfarshire, and ``Musselcrag,'' _post,_ to the fishing village of
* Auchmithie, in the same county.]

about two o'clock on the following day.

  Lovel probably expected that his travelling companion would
have invited him to dinner on his arrival; but his consciousness
of a want of ready preparation for unexpected guests, and perhaps
some other reasons, prevented Oldbuck from paying him that
attention. He only begged to see him as early as he could
make it convenient to call in a forenoon, recommended him to a
widow who had apartments to let, and to a person who kept a
decent ordinary; cautioning both of them apart, that he only
knew Mr. Lovel as a pleasant companion in a post-chaise, and
did not mean to guarantee any bills which he might contract
while residing at Fairport. The young gentleman's figure and
manners; not to mention a well-furnished trunk, which soon
arrived by sea, to his address at Fairport, probably went as
far in his favour as the limited recommendation of his fellow-traveller.
