




		CHAPTER TWENTY-FOURTH.

	_Clause._---You now shall know the king o' the beggars' treasure:---
	Yes---ere to-morrow you shall find your harbour
	Here,---fail me not, for if I live I'll fit you.
						The Beggar's Bush.

  The German, determined, it would seem, to assert the vantage-ground
on which the discovery had placed him, replied with
great pomp and stateliness to the attack of the Antiquary.

  ``Maister Oldenbuck, all dis may be very witty and comedy,
but I have nothing to say---nothing at all---to people dat will
not believe deir own eye-sights. It is vary true dat I ave not
any of de things of de art, and it makes de more wonder what
I has done dis day. But I would ask of you, mine honoured
and goot and generous patron, to put your hand into your right-hand
waistcoat pocket, and show me what you shall find dere.''

  Sir Arthur obeyed his direction, and pulled out the small plate
of silver which he had used under the adept's auspices upon the
former occasion. ``It is very true,'' said Sir Arthur, looking
gravely at the Antiquary; ``this is the graduated and calculated
sigil by which Mr. Dousterswivel and I regulated our first discovery.''

  ``Pshaw! pshaw! my dear friend,'' said Oldbuck, ``you are
too wise to believe in the influence of a trumpery crown-piece,
beat out thin, and a parcel of scratches upon it. I tell thee,
Sir Arthur, that if Dousterswivel had known where to get this
treasure himself, you would not have been lord of the least share
of it.''

  ``In troth, please your honour,'' said Edie, who put in his
word on all occasions, ``I think, since Mr. Dunkerswivel has
had sae muckle merit in discovering a' the gear, the least ye
can do is to gie him that o't that's left behind for his labour;
for doubtless he that kend where to find sae muckle will hae
nae difficulty to find mair.''

  Dousterswivel's brow grew very dark at this proposal of
leaving him to his ``ain purchase,'' as Ochiltree expressed it;
but the beggar, drawing him aside, whispered a word or two in
his ear, to which he seemed to give serious attention,

  Meanwhile Sir Arthur, his heart warm with his good fortune,
said aloud, ``Never mind our friend Monkbarns, Mr. Dousterswivel,
but come to the Castle to-morrow, and I'll convince you
that I am not ungrateful for the hints you have given me about
this matter---and the fifty Fairport dirty notes, as you call them,
are heartily at your service. Come, my lads, get the cover of
this precious chest fastened up again.''

  But the cover had in the confusion fallen aside among the
rubbish, or the loose earth which had been removed from the
grave---in short, it was not to be seen.

  ``Never mind, my good lads, tie the tarpaulin over it, and
get it away to the carriage.---Monkbarns, will you walk? I
must go back your way to take up Miss Wardour.''

  ``And, I hope, to take up your dinner also, Sir Arthur, and
drink a glass of wine for joy of our happy adventure. Besides,
you should write about the business to the Exchequer, in case
of any interference on the part of the Crown. As you are lord
of the manor, it will be easy to get a deed of gift, should they
make any claim. We must talk about it, though.''

  ``And I particularly recommend silence to all who are present,''
said Sir Arthur, looking round. All bowed and professed
themselves dumb.

  ``Why, as to that,'' said Monkbarns, ``recommending secrecy
where a dozen of people are acquainted with the circumstance
to be concealed, is only putting the truth in masquerade, for
the story will be circulated under twenty different shapes. But
never mind---we will state the true one to the Barons, and that
is all that is necessary.''

  ``I incline to send off an express to-night,'' said the Baronet.

  ``I can recommend your honour to a sure hand,'' said Ochiltree;
``little Davie Mailsetter, and the butcher's reisting powny.''

  ``We will talk over the matter as we go to Monkbarns,'' said
Sir Arthur. ``My lads'' (to the work-people), ``come with me
to the Four Horse-shoes, that I may take down all your names.
---Dousterswivel, I won't ask you to go down to Monkbarns, as
the laird and you differ so widely in opinion; but do not fail to
come to see me to-morrow.''

  Dousterswivel growled out an answer, in which the words,
``duty,''---``mine honoured patron,''---and ``wait upon Sir
Arthurs,''---were alone distinguishable; and after the Baronet
and his friend had left the ruins, followed by the servants and
workmen, who, in hope of reward and whisky, joyfully attended
their leader, the adept remained in a brown study by the side of
the open grave.

  ``Who was it as could have thought this?'' he ejaculated unconsciously.
``Mine heiligkeit! I have heard of such things,
and often spoken of such things---but, sapperment! I never,
thought to see them! And if I had gone but two or dree feet
deeper down in the earth---mein himmel! it had been all mine
own---so much more as I have been muddling about to get from
this fool's man.''

  Here the German ceased his soliloquy, for, raising his eyes,
he encountered those of Edie Ochiltree, who had not followed
the rest of the company, but, resting as usual on his pike-staff,
had planted himself on the other side of the grave. The features
of the old man, naturally shrewd and expressive almost to an appearance
of knavery, seemed in this instance so keenly knowing,
that even the assurance of Dousterswivel, though a professed
adventurer, sunk beneath their glances. But he saw the necessity
of an <e'>claircissement, and, rallying his spirits, instantly
began to sound the mendicant on the occurrences of the day.
``Goot Maister Edies Ochiltrees''------

  ``Edie Ochiltree, nae maister---your puir bedesman and the
king's,'' answered the Blue-Gown.

  ``Awell den, goot Edie, what do you think of all dis?''

  ``I was just thinking it was very kind (for I darena say very
simple) o' your honour to gie thae twa rich gentles, wha hae
lands and lairdships, and siller without end, this grand pose o'
silver and treasure (three times tried in the fire, as the Scripture
expresses it), that might hae made yoursell and ony twa or three
honest bodies beside, as happy and content as the day was lang.''

  ``Indeed, Edie, mine honest friends, dat is very true; only I did
not know, dat is, I was not sure, where to find the gelt myself.''

  ``What! was it not by your honours advice and counsel that
Monkbarns and the Knight of Knockwinnock came here then?''

  ``Aha---yes; but it was by another circumstance. I did not
know dat dey would have found de treasure, mine friend; though
I did guess, by such a tintamarre, and cough, and sneeze, and
groan, among de spirit one other night here, dat there might be
treasure and bullion hereabout. Ach, mein himmel! the spirit
will hone and groan over his gelt, as if he were a Dutch Burgomaster
counting his dollars after a great dinner at the Stadthaus.''

  ``And do you really believe the like o' that, Mr. Dusterdeevil !
---a skeelfu' man like you---hout fie!''

  ``Mein friend,'' answered the adept, foreed by circumstances
to speak something nearer the truth than he generally used to
do, ``I believed it no more than you and no man at all, till I
did hear them hone and moan and groan myself on de oder night,
and till I did this day see de cause, which was an great chest
all full of de pure silver from Mexico---and what would you ave
nae think den?''

  ``And what wad ye gie to ony ane,'' said Edie, ``that wad
help ye to sic another kistfu' o' silver!''

  ``Give?---mein himmel!---one great big quarter of it.''

  ``Now if the secret were mine,'' said the mendicant, ``I wad
stand out for a half; for you see, though I am but a puir ragged
body, and couldna carry silver or gowd to sell for fear o' being
taen up, yet I could find mony folk would pass it awa for me at
unco muckle easier profit than ye're thinking on.''

  ``Ach, himmel!---Mein goot friend, what was it I said?---I
did mean to say you should have de tree quarter for your half,
and de one quarter to be my fair half.''

  ``No, no, Mr. Dusterdeevil, we will divide equally what we
find, like brother and brother. Now, look at this board that I
just flung into the dark aisle out o' the way, while Monkbarns
was glowering ower a' the silver yonder. He's a sharp chiel
Monkbarns---I was glad to keep the like o' this out o' his sight. 
Ye'll maybe can read the character better than me---I am nae
that book learned, at least I'm no that muckle in practice.''

  With this modest declaration of ignorance, Ochiltree brought
forth from behind a pillar the cover of the box or chest of
treasure, which, when forced from its hinges, had been carelessly
flung aside during the ardour of curiosity to ascertain the contents
which it concealed, and had been afterwards, as it seems,
secreted by the mendicant. There was a word and a number
upon the plank, and the beggar made them more distinct by
spitting upon his ragged blue handkerchief, and rubbing off the
clay by which the inscription was obscured. It was in the ordinary
black letter.

  ``Can ye mak ought o't?'' said Edie to the adept.

  ``S,'' said the philosopher, like a child getting his lesson in
the primer---``S, T, A, R, C, H,---_Starch!_---dat is what de
woman-washers put into de neckerchers, and de shirt collar.''

  ``Search!'' echoed Ochiltree; ``na, na, Mr. Dusterdeevil, ye
are mair of a conjuror than a clerk---it's _search,_ man, _search_---
See, there's the _Ye_ clear and distinct.''

  ``Aha! I see it now---it is _search---number one._ Mein
himmel! then there must be a _number two,_ mein goot friend:
for _search_ is what you call to seek and dig, and this is but
_number one!_ Mine wort, there is one great big prize in de wheel
for us, goot Maister Ochiltree.''

  ``Aweel, it may be sae; but we canna howk fort enow---we hae
nae shules, for they hae taen them a' awa---and it's like some o'
them will be sent back to fling the earth into the hole, and mak
a' things trig again. But an ye'll sit down wi' me a while in
the wood, I'se satisfy your honour that ye hae just lighted on
the only man in the country that could hae tauld about Malcolm
Misticot and his hidden treasure---But first we'll rub out the
letters on this board, for fear it tell tales.''

  And, by the assistance of his knife, the beggar erased and
defaced the characters so as to make them quite unintelligible,
and then daubed the board with clay so as to obliterate all traces
of the erasure.

  Dousterswivel stared at him in ambiguous silence. There was
an intelligence and alacrity about all the old man's movements,
which indicated a person that could not be easily overreached,
and yet (for even rogues acknowledge in some degree the spirit
of precedence) our adept felt the disgrace of playing a secondary
part, and dividing winnings with so mean an associate. His
appetite for gain, however, was sufficiently sharp to overpower
his offended pride, and though far more an impostor than a dupe,
he was not without a certain degree of personal faith even in the
gross superstitions by means of which he imposed upon others. 
Still, being accustomed to act as a leader on such occasions, he
felt humiliated at feeling himself in the situation of a vulture
marshalled to his prey by a carrion-crow.---``Let me, however,
hear this story to an end,'' thought Dousterswivel, ``and it will
be hard if I do not make mine account in it better as Maister
Edie Ochiltrees makes proposes.''

  The adept, thus transformed into a pupil from a teacher of
the mystic art, followed Ochiltree in passive acquiescence to the
Prior's Oak---a spot, as the reader may remember, at a short
distance from the ruins, where the German sat down, and
silence waited the old man's communication.

  ``Maister Dustandsnivel,'' said the narrator, ``it's an unco
while since I heard this business treated anent;---for the lairds
of Knockwinnock, neither Sir Arthur, nor his father, nor his
grandfather---and I mind a wee bit about them a'---liked to
hear it spoken about; nor they dinna like it yet---But nae
matter; ye may be sure it was clattered about in the kitchen,
like onything else in a great house, though it were forbidden in
the ha'---and sae I hae heard the circumstance rehearsed by auld
servants in the family; and in thir present days, when things
o' that auld-warld sort arena keepit in mind round winter fire-sides
as they used to be, I question if there's onybody in the
country can tell the tale but mysell---aye out-taken the laird
though, for there's a parchment book about it, as I have heard,
in the charter-room at Knockwinnock Castle.''

  ``Well, all dat is vary well---but get you on with your stories,
mine goot friend,'' said Dousterswivel.

  ``Aweel, ye see,'' continued the mendicant, ``this was a job
in the auld times o' rugging and riving through the hale country,
when it was ilka ane for himsell, and God for us a'---when nae
man wanted property if he had strength to take it, or had it
langer than he had power to keep it. It was just he ower her,
and she ower him, whichever could win upmost, a' through the
east country here, and nae doubt through the rest o' Scotland
in the self and same manner.

  ``Sae in these days Sir Richard Wardour came into the land,
and that was the first o' the name ever was in this country. 
There's been mony o' them sin' syne; and the maist, like him
they ca'd Hell-in-Harness, and the rest o' them, are sleeping
down in yon ruins. They were a proud dour set o' men, but
unco brave, and aye stood up for the weel o' the country, God
sain them a'---there's no muckle popery in that wish. They
ca'd them the Norman Wardours, though they cam frae the
south to this country. So this Sir Richard, that they ca'd
Red-hand, drew up wi' the auld Knockwinnock o' that day---for
then they were Knockwinnocks of that Ilk---and wad fain marry
his only daughter, that was to have the castle and the land. 
Laith, laith was the lass---(Sybil Knockwinnock they ca'd her
that tauld me the tale)---laith, laith was she to gie into the
match, for she had fa'en a wee ower thick wi' a cousin o' her
ain that her father had some ill-will to; and sae it was, that
after she had been married to Sir Richard jimp four months---
for marry him she maun, it's like---ye'll no hinder her gieing
them a present o' a bonny knave bairn. Then there was siccan
a ca'-thro', as the like was never seen; and she's be burnt,
and he's be slain, was the best words o' their mouths. But it
was a' sowdered up again some gait, and the bairn was sent awa,
and bred up near the Highlands, and grew up to be a fine wanle
fallow, like mony ane that comes o' the wrang side o' the blanket;
and Sir Richard wi' the Red-hand, he had a fair offspring o'his
ain, and a was lound and quiet till his head was laid in the
ground. But then down came Malcolm Misticot---(Sir Arthur
says it should be _Misbegot,_ but they aye ca'd him Misticot that
spoke o't lang syne)---down cam this Malcolm, the love-begot,
frae Glen-isla, wi' a string o' lang-legged Highlanders at his
heels, that's aye ready for onybody's mischief, and he threeps
the castle and lands are his ain as his mother's eldest son, and
turns a' the Wardours out to the hill. There was a sort of
fighting and blude-spilling about it, for the gentles took
different sides; but Malcolm had the uppermost for a lang
time, and keepit the Castle of Knockwinnock, and strengthened
it, and built that muckle tower that they ca' Misticot's tower to
this day.''

  ``Mine goot friend, old Mr. Edie Ochiltree.'' interrupted the
German, ``this is all as one like de long histories of a baron of
sixteen quarters in mine countries; but I would as rather hear of
de silver and gold.''

  ``Why, ye see,'' continued the mendicant, ``this Malcolm was
weel helped by an uncle, a brother o' his father's, that was
Prior o' St. Ruth here; and muckle treasure they gathered
between them, to secure the succession of their house in the
lands of Knockwinnock. Folk said that the monks in thae
days had the art of multiplying metals---at ony rate, they were
very rich. At last it came to this, that the young Wardour,
that was Red-hand's son, challenged Misticot to fight with him
in the lists as they ca'd them---that's no lists or tailor's runds
and selvedges o' claith, but a palin'-thing they set up for them
to fight in like game-cocks. Aweel, Misticot was beaten, and
at his brother's mercy---but he wadna touch his life, for the
blood of Knockwinnock that was in baith their veins: so
Malcolm was compelled to turn a monk, and he died soon after
in the priory, of pure despite and vexation. Naebody ever
kenn'd whare his uncle the prior earded him, or what he did
wi' his gowd and silver, for he stood on the right o' halie kirk,
and wad gie nae account to onybody. But the prophecy gat
abroad in the country, that whenever Misticot's grave was fund
out, the estate of Knockwinnock should be lost and won.''

  ``Ach! mine goot old friend, Maister Edie, and dat is not so
very unlikely, if Sir Arthurs will quarrel wit his goot friends to
please Mr. Oldenbuck.---And so you do tink dat dis golds and
silvers belonged to goot Mr. Malcolm Mishdigoat?''

  ``Troth do I, Mr. Dousterdeevil.''

  ``And you do believe dat dere is more of dat sorts behind?''

  ``By my certie do I---How can it be otherwise?---_Search---
No. I_---that is as muckle as to say, search and ye'll find number
twa. Besides, yon kist is only silver, and I aye heard that'
Misticot's pose had muckle yellow gowd in't.''

  ``Den, mine goot friends,'' said the adept, jumping up hastily,
``why do we not set about our little job directly?''

  ``For twa gude reasons,'' answered the beggar, who quietly
kept his sitting posture;---``first, because, as I said before, we
have naething to dig wi', for they hae taen awa the picks and
shules; and, secondly, because there will be a wheen idle gowks
coming to glower at the hole as lang as it is daylight, and
maybe the laird may send somebody to fill it up---and ony way
we wad be catched. But if you will meet me on this place at
twal o'clock wi' a dark lantern, I'll hae tools ready, and we'll
gang quietly about our job our twa sells, and naebody the wiser
for't.''

  ``Be---be---but, mine goot friend,'' said Dousterswivel, from
whose recollection his former nocturnal adventure was not to
be altogether erased, even by the splendid hopes which Edie's
narrative held forth, ``it is not so goot or so safe, to be about
goot Maister Mishdigoat's grabe at dat time of night---you have
forgot how I told you de spirits did hone and mone dere. I
do assure you, dere is disturbance dere.''

  ``If ye're afraid of ghaists,'' answered the mendicant, coolly,
``I'll do the job mysell, and bring your share o' the siller to
ony place you like to appoint.''

  ``No---no---mine excellent old Mr. Edie,---too much trouble
for you---I will not have dat---I will come myself---and it will
be bettermost; for, mine old friend, it was I, Herman Dousterswivel,
discovered Maister Mishdigoat's grave when I was looking
for a place as to put away some little trumpery coins, just to
play one little trick on my dear friend Sir Arthur, for a little
sport and pleasures. Yes, I did take some what you call rubbish,
and did discover Maister Mishdigoat's own monumentsh---It's
like dat he meant I should be his heirs---so it would not be
civility in me not to come mineself for mine inheritance.''

  ``At twal o'clock, then,'' said the mendicant, ``we meet under
this tree. I'll watch for a while, and see that naebody meddles
wi' the grave---it's only saying the laird's forbade it---then get
my bit supper frae Ringan the poinder up by, and leave to
sleep in his barn; and I'll slip out at night, and neer be mist.''

  ``Do so, mine goot Maister Edie, and I will meet you here
on this very place, though all de spirits should moan and sneeze
deir very brains out.''

  So saying he shook hands with the old man, and with this
mutual pledge of fidelity to their appointment, they separated
for the present.
