




		CHAPTER EIGHTH.

	There is a cliff, whose high and bending head
	Looks fearfully on the confined deep;
	Bring me but to the very brim of it,
	And I'll repair the misery thou dost bear.
						King Lear.

  The shout of human voices from above was soon augmented,
and the gleam of torches mingled with those lights of evening
which still remained amidst the darkness of the storm. Some
attempt was made to hold communication between the assistants
above and the sufferers beneath, who were still clinging to their
precarious place of safety; but the howling of the tempest limited
their intercourse to cries as inarticulate as those of the winged
denizens of the crag, which shrieked in chorus, alarmed by the
reiterated sound of human voices, where they had seldom been
heard.

  On the verge of the precipice an anxious group had now
assembled. Oldbuck was the foremost and most earnest,
pressing forward with unwonted desperation to the very brink
of the crag, and extending his head (his hat and wig secured by
a handkerchief under his chin) over the dizzy height, with an
air of determination which made his more timorous assistants
tremble.

  ``Haud a care, haud a care, Monkbarns!'' cried Caxon,
clinging to the skirts of his patron, and withholding him from
danger as far as his strength permitted---``God's sake, haud a
care!---Sir Arthur's drowned already, and an ye fa' over the
cleugh too, there will be but ae wig left in the parish, and that's
the minister's.''

  ``Mind the peak there,'' cried Mucklebackit, an old fisherman
and smuggler---``mind the peak---Steenie, Steenie Wilks, bring
up the tackle---I'se warrant we'll sune heave them on board,
Monkbarns, wad ye but stand out o' the gate.''

  ``I see them,'' said Oldbuck---``I see them low down on that
flat stone---Hilli-hilloa, hilli-ho-a!''

  ``I see them mysell weel eneugh,'' said Mucklebackit; ``they
are sitting down yonder like hoodie-craws in a mist; but d'yo
think ye'll help them wi' skirling that gate like an auld skart
before a flaw o' weather?---Steenie, lad, bring up the mast---
Od, I'se hae them up as we used to bouse up the kegs o' gin
and brandy lang syne---Get up the pickaxe, make a step for
the mast---make the chair fast with the rattlin---haul taught
and belay!''

  The fishers had brought with them the mast of a boat, and
as half of the country fellows about had now appeared, either
out of zeal or curiosity, it was soon sunk in the ground, and
sufficiently secured. A yard across the upright mast, and a
rope stretched along it, and reeved through a block at each
end, formed an extempore crane, which afforded the means of
lowering an arm-chair, well secured and fastened, down to the
flat shelf on which the sufferers had roosted. Their joy at
hearing the preparations going on for their deliverance was
considerably qualified when they beheld the precarious vehicle
by means of which they were to be conveyed to upper air. It
swung about a yard free of the spot which they occupied,
obeying each impulse of the tempest, the empty air all around
it, and depending upon the security of a rope, which, in the
increasing darkness, had dwindled to an almost imperceptible
thread. Besides the hazard of committing a human being to
the vacant atmosphere in such a slight means of conveyance,
there was the fearful danger of the chair and its occupant being
dashed, either by the wind or the vibrations of the cord, against
the rugged face of the precipice. But to diminish the risk as
much as possible, the experienced seaman had let down with
the chair another line, which, being attached to it, and held by
the persons beneath, might serve by way of _gy,_ as Mucklebackit
expressed it, to render its descent in some measure steady
and regular. Still, to commit one's self in such a vehicle,
through a howling tempest of wind and rain, with a beetling
precipice above and a raging abyss below, required that courage
which despair alone can inspire. Yet, wild as the sounds and
sights of danger were, both above, beneath, and around, and
doubtful and dangerous as the mode of escaping appeared to
be, Lovel and the old mendicant agreed, after a moment's
consultation, and after the former, by a sudden strong pull,
had, at his own imminent risk, ascertained the security of the
rope, that it would be best to secure Miss Wardour in the
chair, and trust to the tenderness and care of those above for
her being safely craned up to the top of the crag.

  ``Let my father go first,'' exclaimed Isabella; ``for God's
sake, my friends, place him first in safety!''

  ``It cannot be, Miss Wardour,'' said Lovel;---``your life
must be first secured---the rope which bears your weight
may''---

  ``I will not listen to a reason so selfish!''

  ``But ye maun listen to it, my bonnie lassie,'' said Ochiltree,
``for a' our lives depend on it---besides, when ye get on the tap
o' the heugh yonder, ye can gie them a round guess o' what's
ganging on in this Patmos o' ours---and Sir Arthur's far by
that, as I'm thinking.''

  Struck with the truth of this reasoning, she exclaimed,
``True, most true; I am ready and willing to undertake the
first risk---What shall I say to our friends above?''

  ``Just to look that their tackle does not graze on the face o'
the crag, and to let the chair down and draw it up hooly and
fairly;---we will halloo when we are ready.''

  With the sedulous attention of a parent to a child, Lovel
bound Miss Wardour with his handkerchief, neckcloth, and the
mendicant's leathern belt, to the back and arms of the chair,
ascertaining accurately the security of each knot, while Ochiltree
kept Sir Arthur quiet. ``What are ye doing wi' my
bairn?---what are ye doing?---She shall not be separated from
me---Isabel, stay with me, I command you!''

  ``Lordsake, Sir Arthur, haud your tongue, and be thankful
to God that there's wiser folk than you to manage this job,''
cried the beggar, worn out by the unreasonable exclamations of
the poor Baronet.

  ``Farewell, my father!'' murmured Isabella---``farewell, my
---my friends!'' and shutting her eyes, as Edie's experience
recommended, she gave the signal to Lovel, and he to those
who were above. She rose, while the chair in which she sate
was kept steady by the line which Lovel managed beneath. 
With a beating heart he watched the flutter of her white dress,
until the vehicle was on a level with the brink of the precipice.

  ``Canny now, lads, canny now!'' exclaimed old Mucklebackit,
who acted as commodore; ``swerve the yard a bit---Now---
there! there she sits safe on dry land.''

  A loud shout announced the successful experiment to her
fellow-sufferers beneath, who replied with a ready and cheerful
halloo. Monkbarns, in his ecstasy of joy, stripped his great-coat
to wrap up the young lady, and would have pulled off his
coat and waistcoat for the same purpose, had he not been
withheld by the cautious Caxon. ``Haud a care o' us! your
honour will be killed wi' the hoast---ye'll no get out o'your
night-cowl this fortnight---and that will suit us unco ill.---Na,
na---there's the chariot down by; let twa o' the folk carry the
young leddy there.''

  ``You're right,'' said the Antiquary, readjusting the sleeves
and collar of his coat, ``you're right, Caxon; this is a naughty
night to swim in.---Miss Wardour, let me convey you to the
chariot.''

  ``Not for worlds till I see my father safe.''

  In a few distinct words, evincing how much her resolution
had surmounted even the mortal fear of so agitating a hazard,
she explained the nature of the situation beneath, and the
wishes of Lovel and Ochiltree.

  ``Right, right, that's right too---I should like to see the son
of Sir Gamelyn de Guardover on dry land myself---I have a
notion he would sign the abjuration oath, and the Ragman-roll
to boot, and acknowledge Queen Mary to be nothing better
than she should be, to get alongside my bottle of old port that
he ran away from, and left scarce begun. But he's safe now,
and here a' comes''---(for the chair was again lowered, and Sir
Arthur made fast in it, without much consciousness on his own
part)---``here a' comes---Bowse away, my boys! canny wi' him
---a pedigree of a hundred links is hanging on a tenpenny tow
---the whole barony of Knockwinnock depends on three plies
of hemp---_respice finem, respice funem_---look to your end---
look to a rope's end.---Welcome, welcome, my good old friend,
to firm land, though I cannot say to warm land or to dry land. 
A cord for ever against fifty fathom of water, though not in the
sense of the base proverb---a fico for the phrase,---better _sus. per
funem,_ than _sus. per coll._"

  While Oldbuck ran on in this way, Sir Arthur was safely
wrapped in the close embraces of his daughter, who, assuming
that authority which the circumstances demanded, ordered some
of the assistants to convey him to the chariot, promising to follow
in a few minutes, She lingered on the cliff, holding an old
countryman's arm, to witness probably the safety of those whose
dangers she had shared.

  ``What have we here?'' said Oldbuck, as the vehicle once
more ascended---``what patched and weather-beaten matter is
this?'' Then as the torches illumed the rough face and grey
hairs of old Ochiltree,---``What! is it thou?---Come, old Mocker,
I must needs be friends with thee---but who the devil makes up
your party besides?''

  ``Ane that's weel worth ony twa o' us, Monkbarns;---it's the
young stranger lad they ca' Lovel---and he's behaved this blessed
night as if he had three lives to rely on, and was willing to waste
them a' rather than endanger ither folk's. Ca' hooly, sirs, as ye,
wad win an auld man's blessing!---mind there's naebody below
now to haud the gy---Hae a care o' the Cat's-lug corner---bide
weel aff Crummie's-horn!''

  ``Have a care indeed,'' echoed Oldbuck. ``What! is it my _rara
avis_---my black swan---my ph<oe>nix of companions in a post-chaise ?
---take care of him, Mucklebackit.''

  ``As muckle care as if he were a graybeard o' brandy; and I
canna take mair if his hair were like John Harlowe's.---Yo ho,
my hearts! bowse away with him!''

  Lovel did, in fact, run a much greater risk than any of his
precursors. His weight was not sufficient to render his ascent
steady amid such a storm of wind, and he swung like an agitated
pendulum at the mortal risk of being dashed against the rocks.
But he was young, bold, and active, and, with the assistance of
the beggar's stout piked staff, which he had retained by advice
of the proprietor, contrived to bear himself from the face of the
precipice, and the yet more hazardous projecting cliffs which
varied its surface. Tossed in empty space, like an idle and
unsubstantial feather, with a motion that agitated the brain at
once with fear and with dizziness, he retained his alertness of
exertion and presence of mind; and it was not until he was
safely grounded upon the summit of the cliff, that he felt temporary
and giddy sickness. As he recovered from a sort of half
swoon, he cast his eyes eagerly around. The object which they
would most willingly have sought, was already in the act of
vanishing. Her white garment was just discernible as she
followed on the path which her father had taken. She had
lingered till she saw the last of their company rescued from
danger, and until she had been assured by the hoarse voice of
Mucklebackit, that ``the callant had come off wi' unbrizzed
banes, and that he was but in a kind of dwam.'' But Lovel
was not aware that she had expressed in his fate even this degree
of interest,---which, though nothing more than was due to
a stranger who had assisted her in such an hour of peril, he
would have gladly purchased by braving even more imminent
danger than he had that evening been exposed to. The beggar
she had already commanded to come to Knockwinnock that
night. He made an excuse.---``Then to-morrow let me see
you.''

  The old man promised to obey. Oldbuck thrust something
into his hand---Ochiltree looked at it by the torchlight, and
returned it---``Na, na! I never tak gowd---besides, Monkbarns,
ye wad maybe be rueing it the morn.'' Then turning to the
group of fishermen and peasants---``Now, sirs, wha will gie me
a supper and some clean pease-strae?''

  ``I,'' ``and I,'' ``and I,'' answered many a ready voice.

  ``Aweel, since sae it is, and I can only sleep in ae barn at ance,
I'll gae down with Saunders Mucklebackit---he has aye a soup o'
something comfortable about his begging---and, bairns, I'll maybe
live to put ilka ane o' ye in mind some ither night that ye hae
promised me quarters and my awmous;'' and away he went with
the fisherman.

  Oldbuck laid the band of strong possession on Lovel---``Deil
a stride ye's go to Fairport this night, young man---you must go
home with me to Monkbarns. Why, man, you have been a hero
---a perfect Sir William Wallace, by all accounts. Come, my
good lad, take hold of my arm;---I am not a prime support in
such a wind---but Caxon shall help us out---Here, you old idiot,
come on the other side of me.---And how the deil got you down
to that infernal Bessy's-apron, as they call it? Bess, said they?
Why, curse her, she has spread out that vile pennon or banner
of womankind, like all the rest of her sex, to allure her votaries
to death and headlong ruin.''

  ``I have been pretty well accustomed to climbing, and I have
long observed fowlers practise that pass down the cliff.''

  ``But how, in the name of all that is wonderful, came you to
discover the danger of the pettish Baronet and his far more
deserving daughter?''

  ``I saw them from the verge of the precipice.''

  ``From the verge!---umph---And what possessed you _dumosa
pendere procul de rupe?_---though _dumosa_ is not the appropriate
epithet---what the deil, man, tempted ye to the verge of the
craig?''

  ``Why---I like to see the gathering and growling of a coming
storm---or, in your own classical language, Mr. Oldbuck, _suave est
mari magno_---and so forth---but here we reach the turn to Fairport.
I must wish you good-night.''

  ``Not a step, not a pace, not an inch, not a shathmont, as I
may say,---the meaning of which word has puzzled many that
think themselves antiquaries. I am clear we should read _salmon-length_
for _shathmont's-length._ You are aware that the space allotted
for the passage of a salmon through a dam, dike, or weir, by
statute, is the length within which a full-grown pig can turn himself
round. Now I have a scheme to prove, that, as terrestrial objects
were thus appealed to for ascertaining submarine measurement,
so it must be supposed that the productions of the water were
established as gauges of the extent of land.---Shathmont---salmont
---you see the close alliance of the sounds; dropping out two _h_'s,
and a _t,_ and assuming an _l,_ makes the whole difference---I wish
to heaven no antiquarian derivation had demanded heavier concessions.''

  ``But, my dear sir, I really must go home---I am wet to the
skin.''

  ``Shalt have my night-gown, man, and slippers, and catch
the antiquarian fever as men do the plague, by wearing infected
garments. Nay, I know what you would be at---you are afraid
to put the old bachelor to charges. But is there not the remains
of that glorious chicken-pie---which, _meo arbitrio,_ is better cold
than hot---and that bottle of my oldest port, out of which the
silly brain-sick Baronet (whom I cannot pardon, since he has
escaped breaking his neck) had just taken one glass, when his
infirm noddle went a wool-gathering after Gamelyn de Guardover?''

  So saying he dragged Lovel forward, till the Palmer's-port of
Monkbarns received them. Never, perhaps, had it admitted
two pedestrians more needing rest for Monkbarns's fatigue
had been in a degree very contrary to his usual habits, and his
more young and robust companion had that evening undergone
agitation of mind which had harassed and wearied him even
more than his extraordinary exertions of body.
