




		CHAPTER TWELFTH.

	Beggar?---the only freeman of your commonwealth;
	Free above Scot-free, that observe no laws,
	Obey no governor, use no religion
	But what they draw from their own ancient custom,
	Or constitute themselves, yet they are no rebels.
							Brome.

  With our reader's permission, we will outstep the slow, though
sturdy pace of the Antiquary, whose halts, as he, turned round
to his companion at every moment to point out something
remarkable in the landscape, or to enforce some favourite topic
more emphatically than the exercise of walking permitted,
delayed their progress considerably.

  Notwithstanding the fatigues and dangers of the preceding
evening, Miss Wardour was able to rise at her usual hour, and
to apply herself to her usual occupations, after she had first
satisfied her anxiety concerning her father's state of health. 
Sir Arthur was no farther indisposed than by the effects of
great agitation and unusual fatigue, but these were sufficient
to induce him to keep his bedchamber.

  To look back on the events of the preceding day, was, to
Isabella, a very unpleasing retrospect. She owed her life, and
that of her father, to the very person by whom, of all others,
she wished least to be obliged, because she could hardly even
express common gratitude towards him without encouraging
hopes which might be injurious to them both. ``Why should
it be my fate to receive such benefits, and conferred at so much
personal risk, from one whose romantic passion I have so
unceasingly laboured to discourage? Why should chance have
given him this advantage over me? and why, oh why, should
a half-subdued feeling in my own bosom, in spite of my sober
reason, almost rejoice that he has attained it?''

  While Miss Wardour thus taxed herself with wayward
caprice, she, beheld advancing down the avenue, not her younger
and more dreaded preserver, but the old beggar who had
made such a capital figure in the melodrama of the preceding
evening.

  She rang the bell for her maid-servant. ``Bring the old man
up stairs.''

  The servant returned in a minute or two---``He will come
up at no rate, madam;---he says his clouted shoes never were
on a carpet in his life, and that, please God, they never shall.---
Must I take him into the servants' hall?''

  ``No; stay, I want to speak with him---Where is he?'' for
she had lost sight of him as he approached the house.

  ``Sitting in the sun on the stone-bench in the court, beside
the window of the flagged parlour.''

  ``Bid him stay there---I'll come down to the parlour, and
speak with him at the window.''

  She came down accordingly, and found the mendicant half-seated,
half-reclining, upon the bench beside the window. 
Edie Ochiltree, old man and beggar as he was, had apparently
some internal consciousness of the favourable, impressions connected
with his tall form, commanding features, and long white
beard and hair. It used to be remarked of him, that he was
seldom seen but in a posture which showed these personal
attributes to advantage. At present, as he lay half-reclined,
with his wrinkled yet ruddy cheek, and keen grey eye turned up
towards the sky, his staff and bag laid beside him, and a cast
of homely wisdom and sarcastic irony in the expression of his
countenance, while he gazed for a moment around the court-yard,
and then resumed his former look upward, he might have
been taken by an artist as the model of an old philosopher of
the Cynic school, musing upon the frivolity of mortal pursuits,
and the precarious tenure of human possessions, and looking up
to the source from which aught permanently good can alone
be derived. The young lady, as she presented her tall and
elegant figure at the open window, but divided from the court-yard
by a grating, with which, according to the fashion of
ancient times, the lower windows of the castle were secured,
gave an interest of a different kind, and might be supposed,
by a romantic imagination, an imprisoned damsel communicating
a tale of her durance to a palmer, in order that he
might call upon the gallantry of every knight whom he should
meet in his wanderings, to rescue her from her oppressive
thraldom.

  After Miss Wardour had offered, in the terms she thought
would be most acceptable, those thanks which the beggar
declined as far beyond his merit, she began to express herself
in a manner which she supposed would speak more feelingly
to his apprehension. ``She did not know,'' she said, ``what
her father intended particularly to do for their preserver, but
certainly it would be something that would make him easy
for life; if he chose to reside at the castle, she would give
orders''------

  The old man smiled, and shook his head. ``I wad be baith
a grievance and a disgrace to your fine servants, my leddy, and
I have never been a disgrace to onybody yet, that I ken of.''

  ``Sir Arthur would give strict orders''------

  ``Ye're very kind---I doubtna, I doubtna; but there are
some things a master can command, and some he canna---I
daresay he wad gar them keep hands aff me---(and troth, I
think they wad hardly venture on that ony gate)---and he wad
gar them gie me my soup parritch and bit meat. But trow ye
that Sir Arthur's command could forbid the gibe o' the tongue
or the blink o' the ee, or gar them gie me my food wi' the look
o' kindness that gars it digest sae weel, or that he could make
them forbear a' the slights and taunts that hurt ane's spirit
mair nor downright misca'ing?---Besides, I am the idlest auld
carle that ever lived; I downa be bound down to hours o'
eating and sleeping; and, to speak the honest truth, I wad be
a very bad example in ony weel regulated family.''

  ``Well, then, Edie, what do you think of a neat cottage and
a garden, and a daily dole, and nothing to do but to dig a little
in your garden when you pleased yourself?''

  ``And how often wad that be, trow ye, my leddy? maybe no
ance atween Candlemas and Yule and if a' thing were done
to my hand, as if I was Sir Arthur himsell, I could never bide
the staying still in ae place, and just seeing the same joists and
couples aboon my head night after night.---And then I have a
queer humour o' my ain, that sets a strolling beggar weel
eneugh, whase word naebody minds---but ye ken Sir Arthur
has odd sort o' ways---and I wad be jesting or scorning at them
---and ye wad be angry, and then I wad be just fit to hang
mysell.''

  ``O, you are a licensed man,'' said Isabella; ``we shall give
you all reasonable scope: So you had better be ruled, and
remember your age.''

  ``But I am no that sair failed yet,'' replied the mendicant.
``Od, ance I gat a wee soupled yestreen, I was as yauld as an
eel. And then what wad a' the country about do for want o'
auld Edie Ochiltree, that brings news and country cracks frae
ae farm-steading to anither, and gingerbread to the lasses, and
helps the lads to mend their fiddles, and the gudewives to clout
their pans, and plaits rush-swords and grenadier caps for the
weans, and busks the laird's flees, and has skill o' cow-ills and
horse-ills, and kens mair auld sangs and tales than a' the
barony besides, and gars ilka body laugh wherever he comes?
Troth, my leddy, I canna lay down my vocation; it would be a
public loss.''

  ``Well, Edie, if your idea of your importance is so strong as
not to be shaken by the prospect of independence''------

  ``Na, na, Miss---it's because I am mair independent as I am,''
answered the old man; ``I beg nae mair at ony single house
than a meal o' meat, or maybe but a mouthfou o't---if it's
refused at ae place, I get it at anither---sae I canna be said to
depend on onybody in particular, but just on the country at
large.''

  ``Well, then, only promise me that you will let me know
should you ever wish to settle as you turn old, and more
incapable of making your usual rounds; and, in the meantime,
take this.''

  ``Na, na, my leddy: I downa take muckle siller at ance---
it's against our rule; and---though it's maybe no civil to be
repeating the like o' that---they say that siller's like to be
scarce wi' Sir Arthur himsell, and that he's run himsell out o'
thought wi' his honkings and minings for lead and copper
yonder.''

  Isabella had some anxious anticipations to the same effect,
but was shocked to hear that her father's embarrassments
were such public talk; as if scandal ever failed to stoop upon
so acceptable a quarry as the failings of the good man, the
decline of the powerful, or the decay of the prosperous.---Miss
Wardour sighed deeply---``Well, Edie, we have enough to pay
our debts, let folks say what they will, and requiting you is one
of the foremost---let me press this sum upon you.''

  ``That I might be robbed and murdered some night between
town and town? or, what's as bad, that I might live in constant
apprehension o't?---I am no''---(lowering his voice to a
whisper, and looking keenly around him)---``I am no that clean
unprovided for neither; and though I should die at the back
of a dyke, they'll find as muckle quilted in this auld blue gown
as will bury me like a Christian, and gie the lads and lasses a
blythe lykewake too; sae there's the gaberlunzie's burial provided
for, and I need nae mair. Were the like o' me ever to
change a note, wha the deil d'ye think wad be sic fules as to
gie me charity after that?---it wad flee through the country
like wildfire, that auld Edie suld hae done siccan a like thing,
and then, I'se warrant, I might grane my heart out or onybody
wad gie me either a bane or a bodle.''

  ``Is there nothing, then, that I can do for you?''

  ``Ou ay---I'll aye come for my awmous as usual,---and whiles
I wad be fain o' a pickle sneeshin, and ye maun speak to the
constable and ground-officer just to owerlook me; and maybe
ye'll gie a gude word for me to Sandie Netherstanes, the miller,
that he may chain up his muckle dog---I wadna hae him to
hurt the puir beast, for it just does its office in barking at a
gaberlunzie like me. And there's ae thing maybe mair,---but
ye'll think it's very bald o' the like o' me to speak o't.''

  ``What is it, Edie?---if it respects you it shall be done if it is
in my power.''

  ``It respects yoursell, and it is in your power, and I maun
come out wi't. Ye are a bonny young leddy, and a gude ane,
and maybe a weel-tochered ane---but dinna ye sneer awa the
lad Lovel, as ye did a while sinsyne on the walk beneath the
Briery-bank, when I saw ye baith, and heard ye too, though ye
saw nae me. Be canny wi' the lad, for he loes ye weel, and it's
to him, and no to anything I could have done for you, that Sir
Arthur and you wan ower yestreen.''

  He uttered these words in a low but distinct tone of voice;
and without waiting for an answer, walked towards a low door
which led to the apartments of the servants, and so entered the
house.

  Miss Wardour remained for a moment or two in the situation
in which she had heard the old man's last extraordinary speech,
leaning, namely, against the bars of the window; nor could
she determine upon saying even a single word, relative to a
subject so delicate, until the beggar was out of sight. It was,
indeed, difficult to determine what to do. That her having
had an interview and private conversation with this young and
unknown stranger, should be a secret possessed by a person of
the last class in which a young lady would seek a confidant,
and at the mercy of one who was by profession gossip-general
to the whole neighbourhood, gave her acute agony. She had no
reason, indeed, to suppose that the old man would wilfully do
anything to hurt her feelings, much less to injure her; but the
mere freedom of speaking to her upon such a subject, showed,
as might have been expected, a total absence of delicacy; and
what he might take it into his head to do or say next, that she
was pretty sure so professed an admirer of liberty would not
hesitate to do or say without scruple. This idea so much hurt
and vexed her, that she half-wished the officious assistance of
Lovel and Ochiltree had been absent upon the preceding
evening.

  While she was in this agitation of spirits, she suddenly
observed Oldbuck and Lovel entering the court. She drew
instantly so far back from the window, that she could without
being seen, observe how the Antiquary paused in front of the
building, and pointing to the various scutcheons of its former
owners, seemed in the act of bestowing upon Lovel much
curious and erudite information, which, from the absent look of
his auditor, Isabella might shrewdly guess was entirely thrown
away. The necessity that she should take some resolution
became instant and pressing;---she rang, therefore, for a servant,
and ordered him to show the visitors to the drawing-room,
while she, by another staircase, gained her own apartment, to
consider, ere she made her appearance, what line of conduct
were fittest for her to pursue. The guests, agreeably to her
instructions, were introduced into the room where company
was usually received.
