




		CHAPTER FORTY-FIRST.

	So, while the Goose, of whom the fable told,
	Incumbent, brooded o'er her eggs of gold,
	With hand outstretched, impatient to destroy,
	Stole on her secret nest the cruel Boy,
	Whose gripe rapacious changed her splendid dream,
	---For wings vain fluttering, and for dying scream.
					The Loves of the Sea-weeds.

  From the time that Sir Arthur Wardour had become possessor
of the treasure found in Misticot's grave, he had been in
a state of mind more resembling ecstasy than sober sense. 
Indeed, at one time his daughter had become seriously apprehensive
for his intellect; for, as he had no doubt that he had
the secret of possessing himself of wealth to an unbounded extent,
his language and carriage were those of a man who had
acquired the philosopher's stone. He talked of buying contiguous
estates, that would have led him from one side of the
island to the other, as if he were determined to brook no neighbour
save the sea. He corresponded with an architect of eminence,
upon a plan of renovating the castle of his forefathers on
a style of extended magnificence that might have rivalled that
of Windsor, and laying out the grounds on a suitable scale. 
Troops of liveried menials were already, in fancy, marshalled
in his halls, and---for what may not unbounded wealth authorize
its possessor to aspire to?---the coronet of a marquis, perhaps
of a duke, was glittering before his imagination. His daughter---
to what matches might she not look forward? Even an alliance
with the blood-royal was not beyond the sphere of his hopes.
His son was already a general---and he himself whatever ambition
could dream of in its wildest visions.

  In this mood, if any one endeavoured to bring Sir Arthur
down to the regions of common life, his replies were in the vein
of Ancient Pistol---

	A fico for the world, and worldlings base
	I speak of Africa and golden joys!

  The reader may conceive the amazement of Miss Wardour,
when, instead of undergoing an investigation concerning the
addresses of Lovel, as she had expected from the long conference
of her father with Mr. Oldbuck, upon the morning of the fated
day when the treasure was discovered, the conversation of Sir
Arthur announced an imagination heated with the hopes of
possessing the most unbounded wealth. But she was seriously
alarmed when Dousterswivel was sent for to the Castle, and
was closeted with her father---his mishap condoled with---
his part taken, and his loss compensated. All the suspicions
which she had long entertained respecting this man became
strengthened, by observing his pains to keep up the golden
dreams of her father, and to secure for himself, under various
pretexts, as much as possible out of the windfall which had so
strangely fallen to Sir Arthur's share.

  Other evil symptoms began to appear, following close on
each other. Letters arrived every post, which Sir Arthur, as
soon as he had looked at the directions, flung into the fire
without taking the trouble to open them. Miss Wardour could
not help suspecting that these epistles, the contents of which
seemed to be known to her father by a sort of intuition, came
from pressing creditors. In the meanwhile, the temporary aid
which he had received from the treasure dwindled fast away. 
By far the greater part had been swallowed up by the necessity
of paying the bill of six hundred pounds, which had threatened
Sir Arthur with instant distress. Of the rest, some part was
given to the adept, some wasted upon extravagances which
seemed to the poor knight fully authorized by his full-blown
hopes,---and some went to stop for a time the mouths of such
claimants as, being weary of fair promises, had become of
opinion with Harpagon, that it was necessary to touch something
substantial. At length circumstances announced but too
plainly, that it was all expended within two or three days after
its discovery; and there appeared no prospect of a supply. Sir
Arthur, naturally impatient, now taxed Dousterswivel anew
with breach of those promises through which he had hoped to
convert all his lead into gold. But that worthy gentleman's
turn was now served; and as he had grace enough to wish to
avoid witnessing the fall of the house which he had undermined,
he was at the trouble of bestowing a few learned terms of art upon
Sir Arthur, that at least he might not be tormented before his
time. He took leave of him, with assurances that he would
return to Knockwinnock the next morning, with such information
as would not fail to relieve Sir Arthur from all his distresses.

  ``For, since I have consulted in such matters, I ave never,''
said Mr. Herman Dousterswivel, ``approached so near de _arcanum,_
what you call de great mystery,---de Panchresta---de Polychresta
---I do know as much of it as Pelaso de Taranta, or Basilius---
and either I will bring you in two and tree days de No. III.
of Mr. Mishdigoat, or you shall call me one knave myself, and
never look me in de face again no more at all.''

  The adept departed with this assurance, in the firm resolution
of making good the latter part of the proposition, and never
again appearing before his injured patron. Sir Arthur remained
in a doubtful and anxious state of mind. The positive assurances
of the philosopher, with the hard words Panchresta, Basilius,
and so forth, produced some effect on his mind. But he had
been too often deluded by such jargon, to be absolutely relieved
of his doubt, and he retired for the evening into his library, in
the fearful state of one who, hanging over a precipice, and
without the means of retreat, perceives the stone on which he
rests gradually parting from the rest of the crag, and about to
give way with him.

  The visions of hope decayed, and there increased in proportion
that feverish agony of anticipation with which a man, educated
in a sense of consequence, and possessed of opulence,---the
supporter of an ancient name, and the father of two promising
children,---foresaw the hour approaching which should deprive
him of all the splendour which time had made familiarly necessary
to him, and send him forth into the world to struggle with poverty,
with rapacity, and with scorn. Under these dire forebodings,
his temper, exhausted by the sickness of delayed hope, became
peevish and fretful, and his words and actions sometimes expressed
a reckless desperation, which alarmed Miss Wardour
extremely. We have seen, on a former occasion, that Sir Arthur
was a man of passions lively and quick, in proportion to the
weakness of his character in other respects; he was unused to
contradiction, and if he had been hitherto, in general, good-humoured
and cheerful, it was probably because the course of
his life had afforded no such frequent provocation as to render
his irritability habitual.

  On the third morning after Dousterswivel's departure, the
servant, as usual, laid on the breakfast table the newspaper and
letters of the day. Miss Wardour took up the former to avoid
the continued ill-humour of her father, who had wrought himself
into a violent passion, because the toast was over-browned.

  ``I perceive how it is,'' was his concluding speech on this
interesting subject,---``my servants, who have had their share
of my fortune, begin to think there is little to be made of me
in future. But while I _am_ the scoundrel's master I will be so,
and permit no neglect---no, nor endure a hair's-breadth diminution
of the respect I am entitled to exact from them.''

  ``I am ready to leave your honour's service this instant,'' said
the domestic upon whom the fault had been charged, ``as soon
as you order payment of my wages.''

  Sir Arthur, as if stung by a serpent, thrust his hand into his
pocket, and instantly drew out the money which it contained,
but which was short of the man's claim. ``What money have
you got, Miss Wardour?'' he said, in a tone of affected calmness,
but which concealed violent agitation.

  Miss Wardour gave him her purse; he attempted to count
the bank notes which it contained, but could not reckon them. 
After twice miscounting the sum, he threw the whole to his
daughter, and saying, in a stern voice, ``Pay the rascal, and let
him leave the house instantly!'' he strode out of the room.

  The mistress and servant stood alike astonished at the agitation
and vehemence of his manner.

  ``I am sure, ma'am, if I had thought I was particularly wrang,
I wadna hae made ony answer when Sir Arthur challenged me. 
I hae been lang in his service, and he has been a kind master,
and you a kind mistress, and I wad like ill ye should think I
wad start for a hasty word. I am sure it was very wrang o'
me to speak about wages to his honour, when maybe he has
something to vex him. I had nae thoughts o' leaving the family
in this way.''

  ``Go down stair, Robert,'' said his mistress---``something
has happened to fret my father---go down stairs, and let Alick
answer the bell.''

  When the man left the room, Sir Arthur re-entered, as if he
had been watching his departure. ``What's the meaning of
this?'' he said hastily, as he observed the notes lying still on
the table---``Is he not gone? Am I neither to be obeyed as a
master or a father?''

  ``He is gone to give up his charge to the housekeeper, sir,---
I thought there was not such instant haste.''

  ``There _is_ haste, Miss Wardour,'' answered her father, interrupting
her;---``What I do henceforth in the house of my forefathers,
must be done speedily, or never.''

  He then sate down, and took up with a trembling hand the
basin of tea prepared for him, protracting the swallowing of it,
as if to delay the necessity of opening the post-letters which lay
on the table, and which he eyed from time to time, as if they
had been a nest of adders ready to start into life and spring
upon him.

  ``You will be happy to hear,'' said Miss Wardour, willing to
withdraw her father's mind from the gloomy reflections in which
he appeared to be plunged, ``you will be happy to hear, sir,
that Lieutenant Taffril's gun-brig has got safe into Leith Roads
---I observe there had been apprehensions for his safety---I am
glad we did not hear them till they were contradicted.''

  ``And what is Taffril and his gun-brig to me?''

  ``Sir!'' said Miss Wardour in astonishment; for Sir Arthur,
in his ordinary state of mind, took a fidgety sort of interest in
all the gossip of the day and country.

  ``I say,'' he repeated in a higher and still more impatient
key, ``what do I care who is saved or lost? It's nothing to me,
I suppose?''

  ``I did not know you were busy, Sir Arthur; and thought,
as Mr. Taffril is a brave man, and from our own country, you
would be happy to hear''---

  ``Oh, I am happy---as happy as possible---and, to make you
happy too, you shall have some of my good news in return.''
And he caught up a letter. ``It does not signify which I open
first---they are all to the same tune.''

  He broke the seal hastily, ran the letter over, and then threw
it to his daughter. ``Ay---I could not have lighted more
happily!---this places the copestone.''

  Miss Wardour, in silent terror, took up the letter. ``Read
it---read it aloud!'' said her father; ``it cannot be read too
often; it will serve to break you in for other good news of the
same kind.''

  She began to read with a faltering voice, ``Dear Sir.''

  ``He _dears_ me too, you see, this impudent drudge of a writer's
office, who, a twelvemonth since, was not fit company for my
second table---I suppose I shall be `dear Knight' with him by
and by.''

  ``Dear Sir,'' resumed Miss Wardour; but, interrupting herself,
``I see the contents are unpleasant, sir---it will only vex
you my reading them aloud.''

  ``If you will allow me to know my own pleasure, Miss Wardour,
I entreat you to go on---I presume, if it were unnecessary,
I should not ask you to take the trouble.''

  ``Having been of late taken into copartnery,'' continued
Miss Wardour, reading the letter, ``by Mr. Gilbert Greenhorn,
son of your late correspondent and man of business, Girnigo
Greenhorn, Esq., writer to the signet, whose business I conducted
as parliament-house clerk for many years, which business will
in future be carried on under the firm of Greenhorn and Grinderson
(which I memorandum for the sake of accuracy in addressing
your future letters), and having had of late favours of yours,
directed to my aforesaid partner, Gilbert Greenhorn, in consequence
of his absence at the Lamberton races, have the honour
to reply to your said favours.''

  ``You see my friend is methodical, and commences by explaining
the causes which have procured me so modest and
elegant a correspondent. Go on---I can bear it.''

  And he laughed that bitter laugh which is perhaps the most
fearful expression of mental misery. Trembling to proceed, and
yet afraid to disobey, Miss Wardour continued to read---``I am
for myself and partner, sorry we cannot oblige you by looking
out for the sums you mention, or applying for a suspension in
the case of Goldiebirds' bond, which would be more inconsistent,
as we have been employed to act as the said Goldiebirds' procurators
and attorneys, in which capacity we have taken out a
charge of horning against you, as you must be aware by the
schedule left by the messenger, for the sum of four thousand
seven hundred and fifty-six pounds five shillings and sixpence
one-fourth of a penny sterling, which, with annual-rent and
expenses effeiring, we presume will be settled during the currency
of the charge, to prevent further trouble. Same time, I am under
the necessity to observe our own account, amounting to seven
hundred and sixty-nine pounds ten shillings and sixpence, is also
due, and settlement would be agreeable; but as we hold your
rights, title-deeds, and documents in hypothec, shall have no
objection to give reasonable time---say till the next money term. 
I am, for myself and partner, concerned to add, that Messrs. 
Goldiebirds' instructions to us are to proceed _peremptorie_ and _sine
mora,_ of which I have the pleasure to advise you, to prevent
future mistakes, reserving to ourselves otherwise to ag<e'> as accords. 
I am, for self and partner, dear sir, your obliged humble servant,
Gabriel Grinderson, for Greenhorn and Grinderson.''

  ``Ungrateful villain!'' said Miss Wardour.

  ``Why, no---it's in the usual rule, I suppose; the blow could
not have been perfect if dealt by another hand---it's all just as
it should be,'' answered the poor Baronet, his affected composure
sorely belied by his quivering lip and rolling eye---``But here's
a postscript I did not notice---come, finish the epistle.''

  ``I have to add (not for self but partner) that Mr. Greenhorn
will accommodate you by taking your service of plate, or
the bay horses, if sound in wind and limb, at a fair appreciation,
in part payment of your accompt.''

  ``G---d confound him!'' said Sir Arthur, losing all command
of himself at this condescending proposal: ``his grandfather
shod my father's horses, and this descendant of a scoundrelly
blacksmith proposes to swindle me out of mine! But I will
write him a proper answer.''

  And he sate down and began to write with great vehemence,
then stopped and read aloud:---``Mr. Gilbert Greenhorn,---in
answer to two letters of a late date, I received a letter from a
person calling himself Grinderson, and designing himself as
your partner. When I address any one, I do not usually expect
to be answered by deputy---I think I have been useful to your
father, and friendly and civil to yourself, and therefore am now
surprised---And yet,'' said he, stopping short, ``why should I be
surprised at that or anything else? or why should I take up
my time in writing to such a scoundrel?---I shan't be always
kept in prison, I suppose; and to break that puppy's bones
when I get out, shall be my first employment.''

  ``In prison, sir?'' said Miss Wardour, faintly.

  ``Ay, in prison to be sure. Do you make any question about
that? Why, Mr. what's his name's fine letter for self and
partner seems to be thrown away on you, or else you have got
four thousand so many hundred pounds, with the due proportion
of shillings, pence, and half-pence, to pay that aforesaid
demand, as he calls it.''

  ``I, sir? O if I had the means!---But where's my brother?
---why does he not come, and so long in Scotland? He might
do something to assist us.''

  ``Who, Reginald?---I suppose he's gone with Mr. Gilbert
Greenhorn, or some such respectable person, to the Lamberton
races---I have expected him this week past; but I cannot
wonder that my children should neglect me as well as every
other person. But I should beg your pardon, my love, who
never either neglected or offended me in your life.''

  And kissing her cheek as she threw her arms round his neck,
he experienced that consolation which a parent feels, even in
the most distressed state, in the assurance that he possesses the
affection of a child.

  Miss Wardour took the advantage of this revulsion of feeling,
to endeavour to soothe her father's mind to composure. She
reminded him that he had many friends.

  ``I had many once,'' said Sir Arthur; ``but of some I have
exhausted their kindness with my frantic projects; others are
unable to assist me---others are unwilling. It is all over with
me. I only hope Reginald will take example by my folly.''

  ``Should I not send to Monkbarns, sir?'' said his daughter.

  ``To what purpose? He cannot lend me such a sum, and
would not if he could, for he knows I am otherwise drowned in
debt; and he would only give me scraps of misanthropy and
quaint ends of Latin.''

  ``But he is shrewd and sensible, and was bred to business,
and, I am sure, always loved this family.''

  ``Yes, I believe he did. It is a fine pass we are come to,
when the affection of an Oldbuck is of consequence to a Wardour!
But when matters come to extremity, as I suppose they presently
will---it may be as well to send for him. And now go take
your walk, my dear---my mind is more composed than when I
had this cursed disclosure to make. You know the worst, and
may daily or hourly expect it. Go take your walk---I would
willingly be alone for a little while.''

  When Miss Wardour left the apartment, her first occupation
was to avail herself of the half permission granted by her father,
by despatching to Monkbarns the messenger, who, as we have
already seen, met the Antiquary and his nephew on the sea-beach.

  Little recking, and indeed scarce knowing, where she was
wandering, chance directed her into the walk beneath the
Briery Bank, as it was called. A brook, which in former days
had supplied the castle-moat with water, here descended through
a narrow dell, up which Miss Wardour's taste had directed a
natural path, which was rendered neat and easy of ascent, without
the air of being formally made and preserved. It suited
well the character of the little glen, which was overhung with
thickets and underwood, chiefly of larch and hazel, intermixed
with the usual varieties of the thorn and brier. In this walk
had passed that scene of explanation between Miss Wardour
and Lovel which was overheard by old Edie Ochiltree. With
a heart softened by the distress which approached her family,
Miss Wardour now recalled every word and argument which
Lovel had urged in support of his suit, and could not help
confessing to herself, it was no small subject of pride to have
inspired a young man of his talents with a passion so strong
and disinterested. That he should have left the pursuit of a
profession in which he was said to be rapidly rising, to bury
himself in a disagreeable place like Fairport, and brood over an
unrequited passion, might be ridiculed by others as romantic,
but was naturally forgiven as an excess of affection by the
person who was the object of his attachment. Had he possessed
an independence, however moderate, or ascertained a clear and
undisputed claim to the rank in society he was well qualified
to adorn, she might now have had it in her power to offer her
father, during his misfortunes, an asylum in an establishment of
her own. These thoughts, so favourable to the absent lover,
crowded in, one after the other, with such a minute recapitulation
of his words, looks, and actions, as plainly intimated that
his former repulse had been dictated rather by duty than inclination.
Isabella was musing alternately upon this subject, and
upon that of her father's misfortunes, when, as the path winded
round a little hillock covered with brushwood, the old Blue-Gown
suddenly met her.

  With an air as if he had something important and mysterious
to communicate, he doffed his bonnet, and assumed the
cautious step and voice of one who would not willingly be
overheard. ``I hae been wishing muckle to meet wi' your
leddyship---for ye ken I darena come to the house for Dousterswivel.''

  ``I heard indeed,'' said Miss Wardour, dropping an alms into
the bonnet---``I heard that you had done a very foolish, if not
a very bad thing, Edie---and I was sorry to hear it.''

  ``Hout, my bonny leddy---fulish? A' the world's fules---and
how should auld Edie Ochiltree be aye wise?---And for the
evil---let them wha deal wi' Dousterswivel tell whether he gat
a grain mair than his deserts.''

  ``That may be true, Edie, and yet,'' said Miss Wardour,
``you may have been very wrong.''

  ``Weel, weel, we'se no dispute that e'ennow---it's about yoursell
I'm gaun to speak. Div ye ken what's hanging ower the
house of Knockwinnock?''

  ``Great distress, I fear, Edie,'' answered Miss Wardour;
``but I am surprised it is already so public.''

  ``Public!---Sweepclean, the messenger, will be there the day
wi' a' his tackle. I ken it frae ane o' his concurrents, as they
ca' them, that's warned to meet him; and they'll be about their
wark belyve; whare they clip, there needs nae kame---they
shear close eneugh.''

  ``Are you sure this bad hour, Edie, is so very near?---come,
I know, it will.''

  ``It's e'en as I tell you, leddy. But dinna be cast down---
there's a heaven ower your head here, as weel as in that fearful
night atween the Ballyburghness and the Halket-head. D'ye
think He, wha rebuked the waters, canna protect you against the
wrath of men, though they be armed with human authority?''

  ``It is indeed all we have to trust to.''

  ``Ye dinna ken---ye dinna ken: when the night's darkest, the
dawn's nearest. If I had a gude horse, or could ride him when
I had him, I reckon there wad be help yet. I trusted to hae
gotten a cast wi' the Royal Charlotte, but she's coupit yonder,
it's like, at Kittlebrig. There was a young gentleman on
the box, and he behuved to drive; and Tam Sang, that suld
hae mair sense, he behuved to let him, and the daft callant
couldna tak the turn at the corner o' the brig; and od! he
took the curbstane, and he's whomled her as I wad whomle a
toom bicker---it was a luck I hadna gotten on the tap o' her. 
Sae I came down atween hope and despair, to see if ye wad
send me on.''

  ``And, Edie---where would ye go?'' said the young lady.

  ``To Tannonburgh, my leddy'' (which was the first stage from
Fairport, but a good deal nearer to Knockwinnock), ``and that
without delay---it's a' on your ain business.''

  ``Our business, Edie? Alas! I give you all credit for your
good meaning; but''------

  ``There's nae _buts_ about it, my leddy, for gang I maun,'' said
the persevering Blue-Gown.

  ``But what is it that you would do at Tannonburgh?---or
how can your going there benefit my father's affairs?''

  ``Indeed, my sweet leddy,'' said the gaberlunzie, ``ye maun
just trust that bit secret to auld Edie's grey pow, and ask nae
questions about it. Certainly if I wad hae wared my life for
you yon night, I can hae nae reason to play an ill pliskie t'ye
in the day o' your distress.''

  ``Well, Edie, follow me then,'' said Miss Wardour, ``and I
will try to get you sent to Tannonburgh.''

  ``Mak haste then, my bonny leddy---mak haste, for the love
o' goodness!''---and he continued to exhort her to expedition
until they reached the Castle.
