



 
		CHAPTER THIRTY-SECOND.

	What is this secret sin, this untold tale,
	That art cannot extract, nor penance cleanse?
	---------------Her muscles hold their place;
	Nor discomposed, nor formed to steadiness,
	No sudden flushing, and no faltering lip.---
					Mysterious Mother.

  The coffin had been borne from the place where it rested.
The mourners, in regular gradation, according to their rank or
their relationship to the deceased, had filed from the cottage,
while the younger male children were led along to totter after
the bier of their brother, and to view with wonder a ceremonial
which they could hardly comprehend. The female gossips next
rose to depart, and, with consideration for the situation of the
parents, carried along with them the girls of the family, to give
the unhappy pair time and opportunity to open their hearts to
each other and soften their grief by communicating it. But
their kind intention was without effect. The last of them had
darkened the entrance of the cottage, as she went out, and
drawn the door softly behind her, when the father, first ascertaining
by a hasty glance that no stranger remained, started
up, clasped his hands wildly above his head, uttered a cry of the
despair which he had hitherto repressed, and, in all the impotent
impatience of grief, half rushed half staggered forward to the
bed on which the coffin had been deposited, threw himself down
upon it, and smothering, as it were, his head among the bed-clothes,
gave vent to the full passion of his sorrow. It was in
vain that the wretched mother, terrified by the vehemence of
her husband's affliction---affliction still more fearful as agitating
a man of hardened manners and a robust frame---suppressed
her own sobs and tears, and, pulling him by the skirts of his
coat, implored him to rise and remember, that, though one was
removed, he had still a wife and children to comfort and
support. The appeal came at too early a period of his anguish,
and was totally unattended to; he continued to remain prostrate,
indicating, by sobs so bitter and violent, that they shook
the bed and partition against which it rested, by clenched
hands which grasped the bed-clothes, and by the vehement and
convulsive motion of his legs, how deep and how terrible was
the agony of a father's sorrow.

  ``O, what a day is this! what a day is this!'' said the poor
mother, her womanish affliction already exhausted by sobs and
tears, and now almost lost in terror for the state in which she
beheld her husband---``O, what an hour is this! and naebody
to help a poor lone woman---O, gudemither, could ye but speak
a word to him!---wad ye but bid him be comforted!''

  To her astonishment, and even to the increase of her fear,
her husband's mother heard and answered the appeal. She
rose and walked across the floor without support, and without
much apparent feebleness, and standing by the bed on which
her son had extended himself, she said, ``Rise up, my son, and
sorrow not for him that is beyond sin and sorrow and temptation.
Sorrow is for those that remain in this vale of sorrow
and darkness---I, wha dinna sorrow, and wha canna sorrow for
ony ane, hae maist need that ye should a' sorrow for me.''

  The voice of his mother, not heard for years as taking part
in the active duties of life, or offering advice or consolation,
produced its effect upon her son. He assumed a sitting posture
on the side of the bed, and his appearance, attitude, and gestures,
changed from those of angry despair to deep grief and dejection. 
The grandmother retired to her nook, the mother mechanically
took in her hand her tattered Bible, and seemed to read, though
her eyes were drowned with tears.

  They were thus occupied, when a loud knock was heard at
the door.

  ``Hegh, sirs!'' said the poor mother, ``wha is that can be
coming in that gate e'enow?---They canna hae heard o' our misfortune,
I'm sure.''

  The knock being repeated, she rose and opened the door,
saying querulously, ``Whatna gait's that to disturb a sorrowfu'
house?''

  A tall man in black stood before her, whom she instantly
recognised to be Lord Glenallan. ``Is there not,'' he said, ``an
old woman lodging in this or one of the neighbouring cottages,
called Elspeth, who was long resident at Craigburnfoot of Glenallan?''

  ``It's my gudemither, my lord,'' said Margaret; ``but she
canna see onybody e'enow---Ohon! we're dreeing a sair weird---
we hae had a heavy dispensation!''

  ``God forbid,'' said Lord Glenallan, ``that I should on light
occasion disturb your sorrow;---but my days are numbered---
your mother-in-law is in the extremity of age, and, if I see her
not to-day, we may never meet on this side of time.''

  ``And what,'' answered the desolate mother, ``wad ye see at an
auld woman, broken down wi' age and sorrow and heartbreak?
Gentle or semple shall not darken my door the day my bairn's
been carried out a corpse.''

  While she spoke thus, indulging the natural irritability of
disposition and profession, which began to mingle itself with
her grief when its first uncontrolled bursts were gone by, she
held the door about one-third part open, and placed herself in
the gap, as if to render the visitor's entrance impossible. But
the voice of her husband was heard from within---``Wha's that,
Maggie? what for are ye steaking them out?---let them come
in; it doesna signify an auld rope's end wha comes in or wha
gaes out o' this house frae this time forward.''

  The woman stood aside at her husband's command, and
permitted Lord Glenallan to enter the hut. The dejection
exhibited in his broken frame and emaciated countenance,
formed a strong contrast with the effects of grief, as they were
displayed in the rude and weatherbeaten visage of the fisherman,
and the masculine features of his wife. He approached the old
woman as she was seated on her usual settle, and asked her, in
a tone as audible as his voice could make it, ``Are you Elspeth
of the Craigburnfoot of Glenallan?''

  ``Wha is it that asks about the unhallowed residence of that
evil woman?'' was the answer returned to his query.

  ``The unhappy Earl of Glenallan.''

  ``Earl!---Earl of Glenallan!''

  ``He who was called William Lord Geraldin,'' said the
Earl; ``and whom his mother's death has made Earl of
Glenallan.''

  ``Open the bole,'' said the old woman firmly and hastily to
her daughter-in-law, ``open the bole wi' speed, that I may see
if this be the right Lord Geraldin---the son of my mistress---
him that I received in my arms within the hour after he was
born---him that has reason to curse me that I didna smother
him before the hour was past!''

  The window, which had been shut in order that a gloomy
twilight might add to the solemnity of the funeral meeting,
was opened as she commanded, and threw a sudden and strong
light through the smoky and misty atmosphere of the stifling
cabin. Falling in a stream upon the chimney, the rays illuminated,
in the way that Rembrandt would have chosen, the
features of the unfortunate nobleman, and those of the old sibyl,
who now, standing upon her feet, and holding him by one hand,
peered anxiously in his features with her light-blue eyes, and
holding her long and withered fore-finger within a small distance
of his face, moved it slowly as if to trace the outlines and reconcile
what she recollected with that she now beheld. As she
finished her scrutiny, she said, with a deep sigh, ``It's a sair---
sair change; and wha's fault is it?---but that's written down
where it will be remembered---it's written on tablets of brass
with a pen of steel, where all is recorded that is done in the flesh.
---And what,'' she said after a pause, ``what is Lord Geraldin
seeking from a poor auld creature like me, that's dead already,
and only belongs sae far to the living that she isna yet laid in
the moulds?''

  ``Nay,'' answered Lord Glenallan, ``in the name of Heaven,
why was it that you requested so urgently to see me?---and
why did you back your request by sending a token which you
knew well I dared not refuse?''

  As he spoke thus, he took from his purse the ring which Edie
Ochiltree had delivered to him at Glenallan House. The sight
of this token produced a strange and instantaneous effect upon
the old woman. The palsy of fear was immediately added to
that of age, and she began instantly to search her pockets with
the tremulous and hasty agitation of one who becomes first
apprehensive of having lost something of great importance;---
then, as if convinced of the reality of her fears, she turned to
the Earl, and demanded, ``And how came ye by it then?---how
came ye by it? I thought I had kept it sae securely---what
will the Countess say?''

  ``You know,'' said the Earl, ``at least you must have heard,
that my mother is dead.''

  ``Dead! are ye no imposing upon me? has she left a' at last,
lands and lordship and lineages?''

  ``All, all,'' said the Earl, ``as mortals must leave all human
vanities.''

  ``I mind now,'' answered Elspeth---``I heard of it before
but there has been sic distress in our house since, and my
memory is sae muckle impaired---But ye are sure your mother,
the Lady Countess, is gane hame?''

  The Earl again assured her that her former mistress was no
more.

  ``Then,'' said Elspeth, ``it shall burden my mind nae langer!
---When she lived, wha dared to speak what it would hae displeased
her to hae had noised abroad? But she's gane---and I
will confess all.''

  Then turning to her son and daughter-in-law, she commanded
them imperatively to quit the house, and leave Lord Geraldin
(for so she still called him) alone with her. But Maggie
Mucklebackit, her first burst of grief being over, was by no
means disposed in her own house to pay passive obedience to
the commands of her mother-in-law, an authority which is
peculiarly obnoxious to persons in her rank of life, and which
she was the more astonished at hearing revived, when it seemed
to have been so long relinquished and forgotten.

  ``It was an unco thing,'' she said, in a grumbling tone of
voice,---for the rank of Lord Glenallan was somewhat imposing
---``it was an unco thing to bid a mother leave her ain house
wi' the tear in her ee, the moment her eldest son had been
carried a corpse out at the door o't.''

  The fisherman, in a stubborn and sullen tone, added to the
same purpose. ``This is nae day for your auld-warld stories,
mother. My lord, if he be a lord, may ca' some other day---or
he may speak out what he has gotten to say if he likes it;
there's nane here will think it worth their while to listen to him
or you either. But neither for laird or loon, gentle or semple,
will I leave my ain house to pleasure onybody on the very day
my poor''------

  Here his voice choked, and he could proceed no farther; but
as he had risen when Lord Glenallan came in, and had since
remained standing, he now threw himself doggedly upon a seat,
and remained in the sullen posture of one who was determined
to keep his word.

  But the old woman, whom this crisis seemed to repossess in
all those powers of mental superiority with which she had once
been eminently gifted, arose, and advancing towards him, said,
with a solemn voice, ``My son, as ye wad shun hearing of your
mother's shame---as ye wad not willingly be a witness of her
guilt---as ye wad deserve her blessing and avoid her curse, I
charge ye, by the body that bore and that nursed ye, to leave
me at freedom to speak with Lord Geraldin, what nae mortal
ears but his ain maun listen to. Obey my words, that when ye
lay the moulds on my head---and, oh that the day were come!
---ye may remember this hour without the reproach of having
disobeyed the last earthly command that ever your mother
wared on you.''

  The terms of this solemn charge revived in the fisherman's
heart the habit of instinctive obedience in which his mother
had trained him up, and to which he had submitted implicitly
while her powers of exacting it remained entire. The recollection
mingled also with the prevailing passion of the moment;
for, glancing his eye at the bed on which the dead body had
been laid, he muttered to himself, ``_He_ never disobeyed _me,_ in
reason or out o' reason, and what for should I vex _her_?'' Then,
taking his reluctant spouse by the arm, he led her gently out of
the cottage, and latched the door behind them as he left it.

  As the unhappy parents withdrew, Lord Glenallan, to prevent
the old woman from relapsing into her lethargy, again pressed
her on the subject of the communication which she proposed to
make to him.

  ``Ye will have it sune eneugh,'' she replied;---``my mind's
clear eneugh now, and there is not---I think there is not---a
chance of my forgetting what I have to say. My dwelling at
Craigburnfoot is before my een, as it were present in reality:---
the green bank, with its selvidge, just where the burn met wi'
the sea---the twa little barks, wi' their sails furled, lying in the
natural cove which it formed---the high cliff that joined it with
the pleasure-grounds of the house of Glenallan, and hung right
ower the stream---Ah! yes---I may forget that I had a husband
and have lost him---that I hae but ane alive of our four fair sons
---that misfortune upon misfortune has devoured our ill-gotten
wealth---that they carried the corpse of my son's eldest-born
frae the house this morning---But I never can forget the days
I spent at bonny Craigburnfoot!''

  ``You were a favourite of my mother,'' said Lord Glenallan,
desirous to bring her back to the point, from which she was
wandering.

  ``I was, I was,---ye needna mind me o' that. She brought
me up abune my station, and wi' knowledge mair than my
fellows---but, like the tempter of auld, wi' the knowledge of
gude she taught me the knowledge of evil.''

  ``For God's sake, Elspeth,'' said the astonished Earl, ``proceed,
if you can, to explain the dreadful hints you have thrown
out! I well know you are confidant to one dreadful secret,
which should split this roof even to hear it named---but speak
on farther.''

  ``I will,'' she said---``I will!---just bear wi' me for a little;''
---and again she seemed lost in recollection, but it was no
longer tinged with imbecility or apathy. She was now entering
upon the topic which had long loaded her mind, and which
doubtless often occupied her whole soul at times when she
seemed dead to all around her. And I may add, as a remarkable
fact, that such was the intense operation of mental energy upon
her physical powers and nervous system, that, notwithstanding
her infirmity of deafness, each word that Lord Glenallan spoke
during this remarkable conference, although in the lowest tone
of horror or agony, fell as full and distinct upon Elspeth's ear
as it could have done at any period of her life. She spoke also
herself clearly, distinctly, and slowly, as if anxious that the
intelligence she communicated should be fully understood;
concisely at the same time, and with none of the verbiage or
circumlocutory additions natural to those of her sex and condition.
In short, her language bespoke a better education, as
well as an uncommonly firm and resolved mind, and a character
of that sort from which great virtues or great crimes may be
naturally expected. The tenor of her communication is disclosed
in the following chapter.
