





		CHAPTER TWENTY-EIGHTH.

	---------------------This ring.---
	This little ring, with necromantic force,
	Has raised the ghost of pleasure to my fears,
	Conjured the sense of honour and of love
	Into such shapes, they fright me from myself.
					The Fatal Marriage.


  The ancient forms of mourning were observed in Glenallan
House, notwithstanding the obduracy with which the members
of the family were popularly supposed to refuse to the dead the
usual tribute of lamentation. It was remarked, that when she
received the fatal letter announcing the death of her second, and,
as was once believed, her favourite son, the hand of the
Countess did not shake, nor her eyelid twinkle, any more than
upon perusal of a letter of ordinary business. Heaven only
knows whether the suppression of maternal sorrow, which her
pride commanded, might not have some effect in hastening her
own death. It was at least generally supposed that the apoplectic
stroke, which so soon afterwards terminated her existence, was,
as it were, the vengeance of outraged Nature for the restraint
to which her feelings had been subjected. But although Lady
Glenallan forebore the usual external signs of grief, she had
caused many of the apartments, amongst others her own and
that of the Earl, to be hung with the exterior trappings of woe.

  The Earl of Glenallan was therefore seated in an apartment
hung with black cloth, which waved in dusky folds along its
lofty walls. A screen, also covered with black baize, placed
towards the high and narrow window, intercepted much of the
broken light which found its way through the stained glass,
that represented, with such skill as the fourteenth century
possessed, the life and sorrows of the prophet Jeremiah. The
table at which the Earl was seated was lighted with two lamps
wrought in silver, shedding that unpleasant and doubtful light
which arises from the mingling of artificial lustre with that
of general daylight. The same table displayed a silver
crucifix, and one or two clasped parchment books. A large
picture, exquisitely painted by Spagnoletto, represented the
martyrdom of St. Stephen, and was the only ornament of the
apartment.

  The inhabitant and lord of this disconsolate chamber was a
man not past the prime of life, yet so broken down with disease
and mental misery, so gaunt and ghastly, that he appeared but
a wreck of manhood; and when he hastily arose and advanced
towards his visitor, the exertion seemed almost to overpower his
emaciated frame. As they met in the midst of the apartment,
the contrast they exhibited was very striking. The hale cheek,
firm step, erect stature, and undaunted presence and bearing of
the old mendicant, indicated patience and content in the extremity
of age, and in the lowest condition to which humanity
can sink; while the sunken eye, pallid cheek, and tottering form
of the nobleman with whom he was confronted, showed how
little wealth, power, and even the advantages of youth, have to
do with that which gives repose to the mind, and firmness to
the frame.

  The Earl met the old man in the middle of the room, and
having commanded his attendant to withdraw into the gallery,
and suffer no one to enter the antechamber till he rung the bell,
awaited, with hurried yet fearful impatience, until he heard first
the door of his apartment, and then that of the antechamber,
shut and fastened by the spring-bolt. When he was satisfied
with this security against being overheard, Lord Glenallan came
close up to the mendicant, whom he probably mistook for some
person of a religious order in disguise, and said, in a hasty yet
faltering tone, ``In the name of all our religion holds most holy,
tell me, reverend father, what am I to expect from a communication
opened by a token connected with such horrible recollections?''

  The old man, appalled by a manner so different from what he
had expected from the proud and powerful nobleman, was at a
loss how to answer, and in what manner to undeceive him. 
``Tell me,'' continued the Earl, in a tone of increasing trepidation
and agony---``tell me, do you come to say that all that
has been done to expiate guilt so horrible, has been too little
and too trivial for the offence, and to point out new and more
efficacious modes of severe penance?---I will not blench from
it, father---let me suffer the pains of my crime here in the body,
rather than hereafter in the spirit!''

  Edie had now recollection enough to perceive, that if he did
not interrapt the frankness of Lord Glenallan's admissions, he
was likely to become the confidant of more than might be safe
for him to know. He therefore uttered with a hasty and
trembling voice---``Your lordship's honour is mistaken---I am
not of your persuasion, nor a clergyman, but, with all reverence,
only puir Edie Ochiltree, the king's bedesman and your
honour's.''

  This explanation be accompanied by a profound bow after
his manner, and then, drawing himself up erect, rested his arm
on his staff, threw back his long white hair, and fixed his eyes
upon the Earl, as he waited for an answer.

  ``And you are not then,'' said Lord Glenallan, after a pause
of surprise---``You are not then a Catholic priest?''

  ``God forbid!'' said Edie, forgetting in his confusion to whom
he was speaking; ``I am only the king's bedesman and your
honour's, as I said before.''

  The Earl turned hastily away, and paced the room twice or
thrice, as if to recover the effects of his mistake, and then,
coming close up to the mendicant, he demanded, in a stern and
commanding tone, what he meant by intruding himself on his
privacy, and from whence he had got the ring which he had
thought proper to send him. Edie, a man of much spirit, was
less daunted at this mode of interrogation than he had been
confused by the tone of confidence in which the Earl had opened
their conversation. To the reiterated question from whom he
had obtained the ring, he answered composedly, ``From one who
was better known to the Earl than to him.''

  ``Better known to me, fellow?'' said Lord Glenallan: ``what
is your meaning?---explain yourself instantly, or you shall experience
the consequence of breaking in upon the hours of family
distress.''

  ``It was auld Elspeth Mucklebackit that sent me here,'' said
the beggar, ``in order to say''------

  ``You dote, old man!'' said the Earl; ``I never heard the
name---but this dreadful token reminds me''------

  ``I mind now, my lord,'' said Ochiltree, ``she tauld me your
lordship would be mair familiar wi' her, if I ca'd her Elspeth o'
the Craigburnfoot---she had that name when she lived on your
honour's land, that is, your honour's worshipful mother's that
was then---Grace be wi' her!''

  ``Ay,'' said the appalled nobleman, as his countenance sunk,
and his cheek assumed a hue yet more cadaverous; ``that
name is indeed written in the most tragic page of a deplorable
history. But what can she desire of me? Is she dead or
living?''

  ``Living, my lord; and entreats to see your lordship before
she dies, for she has something to communicate that hangs upon
her very soul, and she says she canna flit in peace until she sees
you.''

  ``Not until she sees me!---what can that mean? But she
is doting with age and infirmity. I tell thee, friend, I called
at her cottage myself, not a twelvemonth since, from a report
that she was in distress, and she did not even know my face or
voice.''

  ``If your honour wad permit me,'' said Edie, to whom the
length of the conference restored a part of his professional
audacity and native talkativeness---``if your honour wad but
permit me, I wad say, under correction of your lordship's better
judgment, that auld Elspeth's like some of the ancient ruined
strengths and castles that ane sees amang the hills. There are
mony parts of her mind that appear, as I may say, laid waste
and decayed, but then there's parts that look the steever, and
the stronger, and the grander, because they are rising just like
to fragments amaong the ruins o' the rest. She's an awful
woman.''

  ``She always was so,'' said the Earl, almost unconsciously
echoing the observation of the mendicant; ``she always was
different from other women---likest perhaps to her who is now no
more, in her temper and turn of mind.---She wishes to see me,
then?''

  ``Before she dies,'' said Edie, ``she earnestly entreats that
pleasure.''

  ``It will be a pleasure to neither of us,'' said the Earl, sternly,
``yet she shall be gratified. She lives, I think, on the sea-shore
to the southward of Fairport?''

  ``Just between Monkbarns and Knockwinnock Castle, but
nearer to Monkbarns. Your lordship's honour will ken the laird
and Sir Arthur, doubtless?''

  A stare, as if he did not comprehend the question, was Lord
Glenallan's answer. Edie saw his mind was elsewhere, and did
not venture to repeat a query which was so little germain to
the matter.

  ``Are you a Catholic, old man?'' demanded the Earl.

  ``No, my lord,'' said Ochiltree stoutly; for the remembrance
of the unequal division of the dole rose in his mind at the
moment; ``I thank Heaven I am a good Protestant.''

  ``He who can conscientiously call himself _good,_ has indeed
reason to thank Heaven, be his form of Christianity what it will
---But who is he that shall dare to do so!''

  ``Not I,'' said Edie; ``I trust to beware of the sin of presumption.''

  ``What was your trade in your youth?'' continued the Earl.

  ``A soldier, my lord; and mony a sair day's kemping I've seen. 
I was to have been made a sergeant, but''------

  ``A soldier! then you have slain and burnt, and sacked and
spoiled?''

  ``I winna say,'' replied Edie, ``that I have been better than
my neighbours;---it's a rough trade---war's sweet to them that
never tried it.''

  ``And you are now old and miserable, asking from precarious
charity the food which in your youth you tore from the hand of
the poor peasant?''

  ``I am a beggar, it is true, my lord; but I am nae just sae
miserable neither. For my sins, I hae had grace to repent of
them, if I might say sae, and to lay them where they may be
better borne than by me; and for my food, naebody grudges an
auld man a bit and a drink---Sae I live as I can, and am contented
to die when I am ca'd upon.''

  ``And thus, then, with little to look back upon that is pleasant
or praiseworthy in your past life---with less to look forward to
on this side of eternity, you are contented to drag out the rest
of your existence? Go, begone! and in your age and poverty
and weariness, never envy the lord of such a mansion as this,
either in his sleeping or waking moments---Here is something
for thee.''

  The Earl put into the old man's hand five or six guineas. 
Edie would perhaps have stated his scruples, as upon other
occasions, to the amount of the benefaction, but the tone of
Lord Glenallan was too absolute to admit of either answer or
dispute. The Earl then called his servant---``See this old man
safe from the castle---let no one ask him any questions---and
you, friend, begone, and forget the road that leads to my house.''

  ``That would be difficult for me,'' said Edie, looking at the
gold which he still held in his hand, ``that would be e'en
difficult, since your honour has gien me such gade cause to
remember it.''

  Lord Glenallan stared, as hardly comprehending the old man's
boldness in daring to bandy words with him, and, with his
hand, made him another signal of departure, which the mendicant
instantly obeyed.
