




		CHAPTER SIXTEENTH.

	``I am bewitched with the rogue's company. If the rascal has not given
	me medicines to make me love him, I'll be hanged; it could not be
	else. I have drunk medicines.''
						Second Part of Henry IV.

  Regular for a fortnight were the inquiries of the Antiquary at
the veteran Caxon, whether he had heard what Mr. Lovel was
about; and as regular were Caxon's answers, ``that the town
could learn naething about him whatever, except that he had
received anither muckle letter or twa frae the south, and that
he was never seen on the plainstanes at a'.''

  ``How does he live, Caxon?''

  ``Ou, Mrs. Hadoway just dresses him a beefsteak or a muttonchop,
or makes him some Friar's chicken, or just what she likes
hersell, and he eats it in the little red parlour off his bedroom. 
She canna get him to say that he likes ae thing better than
anither; and she makes him tea in a morning, and he settles
honourably wi' her every week.''

  ``But does he never stir abroad?''

  ``He has clean gi'en up walking, and he sits a' day in his room
reading or writing; a hantle letters he has written, but he wadna
put them into our post-house, though Mrs. Hadoway offered to
carry them hersell, but sent them a' under ae cover to the
sheriff; and it's Mrs. Mailsetter's belief, that the sheriff sent his
groom to put them into the post-office at Tannonburgh; it's my
puir thought, that he jaloused their looking into his letters
at Fairport; and weel had he need, for my puir daughter
Jenny''------

  ``Tut, don't plague me with your womankind, Caxon. About
this poor young lad.---Does he write nothing but letters?''

  ``Ou, ay---hale sheets o' other things, Mrs. Hadoway says. 
She wishes muckle he could be gotten to take a walk; she
thinks he's but looking very puirly, and his appetite's clean
gane; but he'll no hear o' ganging ower the door-stane---him
that used to walk sae muckle too.''

  ``That's wrong---I have a guess what he's busy about; but
he must not work too hard neither. I'll go and see him this
very day---he's deep, doubtless, in the Caledoniad.''

  Having formed this manful resolution, Mr. Oldbuck equipped
himself for the expedition with his thick walking-shoes and gold-headed
cane, muttering the while the words of Falstaff which
we have chosen for the motto of this chapter; for the Antiquary
was himself rather surprised at the degree of attachment
which he could not but acknowledge be entertained for this
stranger. The riddle was notwithstanding easily solved. Lovel
had many attractive qualities, but he won our Antiquary's heart
by being on most occasions an excellent listener.

  A walk to Fairport had become somewhat of an adventure
with Mr. Oldbuck, and one which he did not often care to undertake.
He hated greetings in the market-place; and there were
generally loiterers in the streets to persecute him, either about
the news of the day, or about some petty pieces of business. So,
on this occasion, he had no sooner entered the streets of Fairport,
than it was ``Good-morrow, Mr. Oldbuck---a sight o' you's gude,
for sair een: what d'ye think of the news in the Sun the day?
---they say the great attempt will be made in a fortnight.''

  ``I wish to the Lord it were made and over, that I might
hear no more about it.''

  ``Monkbarns, your honour,'' said the nursery and seedsman,
``I hope the plants gied satisfaction?---and if ye wanted ony
flower-roots fresh frae Holland, or'' (this in a lower key) ``an
anker or twa o' Cologne gin, ane o' our brigs cam in yestreen.''

  ``Thank ye, thank ye,---no occasion at present, Mr. Crabtree,''
said the Antiquary, pushing resolutely onward.

  ``Mr. Oldbuck,'' said the town-clerk (a more important person,
who came in front and ventured to stop the old gentleman), ``the
provost, understanding you were in town, begs on no account
that you'll quit it without seeing him; he wants to speak to ye
about bringing the water frae the Fairwell-spring through a part o'
your lands.''

  ``What the deuce!---have they nobody's land but mine to cut
and carve on?---I won't consent, tell them.''

  ``And the provost,'' said the clerk, going on, without noticing
the rebuff, ``and the council, wad be agreeable that you should
hae the auld stones at Donagild's chapel, that ye was wussing to
hae.''

  ``Eh!---what?---Oho! that's another story---Well, well, I'll
call upon the provost, and we'll talk about it.''

  ``But ye maun speak your mind on't forthwith, Monkbarns,
if ye want the stones; for Deacon Harlewalls thinks the carved
through-stanes might be put with advantage on the front of the
new council-house---that is, the twa cross-legged figures that the
callants used to ca' Robin and Bobbin, ane on ilka door-cheek;
and the other stane, that they ca'd Ailie Dailie, abune the door. 
It will be very tastefu', the Deacon says, and just in the style of
modern Gothic.''

  ``Lord deliver me from this Gothic generation!'' exclaimed
the Antiquary,---``A monument of a knight-templar on each side
of a Grecian porch, and a Madonna on the top of it!---_O crimini!_
---Well, tell the provost I wish to have the stones, and we'll not
differ about the water-course. It's lucky I happened to come
this way to-day.''

  They parted mutually satisfied; but the wily clerk had most
reason to exult in the dexterity he had displayed, since the whole
proposal of an exchange between the monuments (which the
council had determined to remove as a nuisance, because they
encroached three feet upon the public road), and the privilege
of conveying the water to the burgh through the estate of Monkbarns,
was an idea which had originated with himself upon the
pressure of the moment.

  Through these various entanglements, Monkbarns (to use the
phrase by which he was distinguished in the country) made his
way at length to Mrs. Hadoway's. This good woman was the
widow of a late clergyman at Fairport, who had been reduced
by her husband's untimely death, to that state of straitened and
embarrassed circumstances in which the widows of the Scotch
clergy are too often found. The tenement which she occupied,
and the furniture of which she was possessed, gave her the means
of letting a part of her house; and as Lovel had been a quiet,
regular, and profitable lodger, and had qualified the necessary
intercourse which they had together with a great deal of gentleness
and courtesy, Mrs. Hadoway, not, perhaps, much used to
such kindly treatment, had become greatly attached to her lodger,
and was profuse in every sort of personal attention which circumstances
permitted her to render him. To cook a dish somewhat
better than ordinary for ``the poor young gentleman's dinner;''
to exert her interest with those who remembered her husband,
or loved her for her own sake and his, in order to procure scarce
vegetables, or something which her simplicity supposed might
tempt her lodger's appetite, was a labour in which she delighted,
although she anxiously concealed it from the person who was its
object. She did not adopt this secrecy of benevolence to avoid
the laugh of those who might suppose that an oval face and dark
eyes, with a clear brown complexion, though belonging to a woman
of five-and-forty, and enclosed within a widow's close-drawn
pinners, might possibly still aim at making conquests; for, to say
truth, such a ridiculous suspicion having never entered into her
own head, she could not anticipate its having birth in that of
any one else. But she concealed her attentions solely out of
delicacy to her guest, whose power of repaying them she doubted
as much as she believed in his inclination to do so, and in his
being likely to feel extreme pain at leaving any of her civilities
unrequited. She now opened the door to Mr. Oldbuck, and her
surprise at seeing him brought tears into her eyes, which she
could hardly restrain.

  ``I am glad to see you, sir---I am very glad to see you. 
My poor gentleman is, I am afraid, very unwell; and oh, Mr.
Oldbuck, he'll see neither doctor, nor minister, nor writer!
And think what it would be, if, as my poor Mr. Hadoway used
to say, a man was to die without advice of the three learned
faculties!''

  ``Greatly better than with them,'' grumbled the cynical
Antiquary. ``I tell you, Mrs. Hadoway, the clergy live by
our sins, the medical faculty by our diseases, and the law gentry
by our misfortunes.''

  ``O fie, Monkbarns!---to hear the like o' that frae you!---
But yell walk up and see the poor young lad?---Hegh sirs?
sae young and weel-favoured---and day by day he has eat less
and less, and now he hardly touches onything, only just pits
a bit on the plate to make fashion--,-and his poor cheek has
turned every day thinner and paler, sae that be now really looks
as auld as me, that might be his mother---no that I might be
just that neither, but something very near it.''

  ``Why does he not take some exercise?'' said Oldbuck.

  ``I think we have persuaded him to do that, for he has
bought a horse from Gibbie Golightly, the galloping groom. 
A gude judge o' horse-flesh Gibbie tauld our lass that he was---
for he offered him a beast he thought wad answer him weel
eneugh, as he was a bookish man, but Mr. Lovel wadna look at
it, and bought ane might serve the Master o' Morphie---they
keep it at the Gr<ae>me's Arms, ower the street;---and he rode
out yesterday morning and this morning before breakfast---But
winna ye walk up to his room?''

  ``Presently, presently. But has he no visitors?''

  ``O dear, Mr. Oldbuck, not ane; if he wadna receive them
when he was weel and sprightly, what chance is there of onybody
in Fairport looking in upon him now?''

  ``Ay, ay, very true,---I should have been surprised had it
been otherwise---Come, show me up stairs, Mrs. Hadoway, lest
I make a blunder, and go where I should not.''

  The good landlady showed Mr. Oldbuck up her narrow
staircase, warning him of every turn, and lamenting all the
while that he was laid under the necessity of mounting up so
high. At length she gently tapped at the door of her guest's
parlour. ``Come in,'' said Lovel; and Mrs. Hadoway ushered
in the Laird of Monkbarns.

  The little apartment was neat and clean, and decently
furnished---ornamented, too, by such relics of her youthful
arts of sempstress-ship as Mrs. Hadoway had retained; but it
was close, overheated, and, as it appeared to Oldbuck, an unwholesome
situation for a young person in delicate health,---an
observation which ripened his resolution touching a project
that had already occurred to him in Lovel's behalf. With a
writing-table before him, on which lay a quantity of books and
papers, Lovel was seated on a couch, in his night-gown and
slippers. Oldbuck was shocked at the change which had taken
place in his personal appearance. His cheek and brow had
assumed a ghastly white, except where a round bright spot of
hectic red formed a strong and painful contrast, totally different
from the general cast of hale and hardy complexion which had
formerly overspread and somewhat embrowned his countenance. 
Oldbuck observed, that the dress he wore belonged to a deep
mourning suit, and a coat of the same colour hung on a chair
near to him. As the Antiquary entered, Lovel arose and came
forward to welcome him.

  ``This is very kind,'' he said, shaking him by the hand, and
thanking him warmly for his visit---``this is very kind, and has
anticipated a visit with which I intended to trouble you. You
must know I have become a horseman lately.''

  ``I understand as much from Mrs. Hadoway---I only hope,
my good young friend, you have been fortunate in a quiet
horse. I myself inadvertently bought one from the said
Gibbie Golightly, which brute ran two miles on end with me
after a pack of hounds, with which I had no more to do than
the last year's snow; and after affording infinite amusement, I
suppose, to the whole hunting field, he was so good as to deposit
me in a dry ditch---I hope yours is a more peaceful beast?''

  ``I hope, at least, we shall make our excursions on a better
plan of mutual understanding.''

  ``That is to say, you think yourself a good horseman?''

  ``I would not willingly,'' answered Lovel, ``confess myself a
very bad one.''

  ``No---all you young fellows think that would be equal to
calling yourselves tailors at once---But have you had experience?
for, _crede experto,_ a horse in a passion is no joker.''

  ``Why, I should be sorry to boast myself as a great horseman;
but when I acted as aide-de-camp to Sir ------ ------ in
the cavalry action at ------, last year, I saw many better
cavaliers than myself dismounted.''

  ``Ah! you have looked in the face of the grisly god of arms
then?---you are acquainted with the frowns of Mars armipotent?
That experience fills up the measure of your qualifications
for the epopea! The Britons, however, you will
remember, fought in chariots---_covinarii_ is the phrase of
Tacitus;---you recollect the fine description of their dashing
among the Roman infantry, although the historian tells us
how ill the rugged face of the ground was calculated for
equestrian combat; and truly, upon the whole, what sort of
chariots could be driven in Scotland anywhere but on turnpike
roads, has been to me always matter of amazement. And well
now---has the Muse visited you?---have you got anything to
show me?''

  ``My time,'' said Lovel, with a glance at his black dress,
``has been less pleasantly employed.''

  ``The death of a friend?'' said the Antiquary.

  ``Yes, Mr. Oldbuck---of almost the only friend I could ever
boast of possessing.''

  ``Indeed? Well, young man,'' replied his visitor, in a tone of
seriousness very different from his affected gravity, ``be comforted.
To have lost a friend by death while your mutual
regard was warm and unchilled, while the tear can drop
unembittered by any painful recollection of coldness or distrust
or treachery, is perhaps an escape from a more heavy dispensation.
Look round you---how few do you see grow old in the
affections of those with whom their early friendships were
formed! Our sources of common pleasure gradually dry up as
we journey on through the vale of Bacha, and we hew out to
ourselves other reservoirs, from which the first companions of
our pilgrimage are excluded;---jealousies, rivalries, envy, intervene
to separate others from our side, until none remain but
those who are connected with us rather by habit than predilection,
or who, allied more in blood than in disposition, only
keep the old man company in his life, that they may not be
forgotten at his death---

	_Haec data p<oe>na diu viventibus._

Ah, Mr. Lovel! if it be your lot to reach the chill, cloudy, and
comfortless evening of life, you will remember the sorrows of
your youth as the light shadowy clouds that intercepted for a
moment the beams of the sun when it was rising. But I cram
these words into your ears against the stomach of your sense.''

  ``I am sensible of your kindness,'' answered the youth; ``but
the wound that is of recent infliction must always smart severely,
and I should be little comforted under my present calamity---
forgive me for saying so---by the conviction that life had
nothing in reserve for me but a train of successive sorrows. 
And permit me to add, you, Mr. Oldbuck, have least reason of
many men to take so gloomy a view of life. You have a
competent and easy fortune---are generally respected---may, in
your own phrase, _vacare musis,_ indulge yourself in the researches
to which your taste addicts you; you may form your own
society without doors---and within you have the affectionate and
sedulous attention of the nearest relatives.''

  ``Why, yes---the womankind, for womankind, are, thanks to
my training, very civil and tractable---do not disturb me in my
morning studies---creep across the floor with the stealthy pace
of a cat, when it suits me to take a nap in my easy-chair after
dinner or tea. All this is very well; but I want something to
exchange ideas with---something to talk to.''

  ``Then why do you not invite your nephew, Captain M`Intyre,
who is mentioned by every one as a fine spirited young fellow,
to become a member of your family?''

  ``Who?'' exclaimed Monkbarns, ``my nephew Hector?---
the Hotspur of the North? Why, Heaven love you, I would
as soon invite a firebrand into my stackyard. He's an Almanzor,
a Chamont---has a Highland pedigree as long as his
claymore, and a claymore as long as the High Street of Fairport,
which he unsheathed upon the surgeon the last time he
was at Fairport. I expect him here one of these days; but I
will keep him at staff's end, I promise you. He an inmate of
my house! to make my very chairs and tables tremble at his
brawls. No, no---I'll none of Hector M`Intyre. But hark ye,
Lovel;---you are a quiet, gentle-tempered lad; had not you
better set up your staff at Monkbarns for a month or two,
since I conclude you do not immediately intend to leave this
country?---I will have a door opened out to the garden---it
will cost but a trifle---there is the space for an old one which
was condemned long ago---by which said door you may pass
and repass into the Green Chamber at pleasure, so you will not
interfere with the old man, nor he with you. As for your fare,
Mrs. Hadoway tells me you are, as she terms it, very moderate
of your mouth, so you will not quarrel with my humble table. 
Your washing''------

  ``Hold, my dear Mr. Oldbuck,'' interposed Lovel, unable to
repress a smile; ``and before your hospitality settles all my
accommodations, let me thank you most sincerely for so kind
an offer---it is not at present in my power to accept of it; but
very likely, before I bid adieu to Scotland, I shall find an
opportunity to pay you a visit of some length.''

  Mr. Oldbuck's countenance fell. ``Why, I thought I had hit
on the very arrangement that would suit us both,---and who
knows what might happen in the long run, and whether we
might ever part? Why, I am master of my acres, man---
there is the advantage of being descended from a man of more
sense than pride---they cannot oblige me to transmit my goods
chattels, and heritages, any way but as I please. No string of
substitute heirs of entail, as empty and unsubstantial as the
morsels of paper strung to the train of a boy's kite, to cumber
my flights of inclination, and my humours of predilection. 
Well,---I see you won't be tempted at present---but Caledonia
goes on I hope?''

  ``O certainly,'' said Lovel; ``I cannot think of relinquishing
a plan so hopeful.''

  ``It is indeed,'' said the Antiquary, looking gravely upward,
---for, though shrewd and acute enough in estimating the
variety of plans formed by others, he had a very natural, though
rather disproportioned good opinion of the importance of those
which originated with himself---``it is indeed one of those
undertakings which, if achieved with spirit equal to that which
dictates its conception, may redeem from the charge of frivolity
the literature of the present generation.''

  Here he was interrupted by a knock at the room door, which
introduced a letter for Mr. Lovel. The servant waited, Mrs.
Hadoway said, for an answer. ``You are concerned in this
matter, Mr. Oldbuck,'' said Lovel, after glancing over the billet,
and handing it to the Antiquary as he spoke.

  It was a letter from Sir Arthur Wardour, couched in extremely
civil language, regetting that a fit of the gout had prevented
his hitherto showing Mr. Lovel the attentions to which his
conduct during a late perilous occasion had so well entitled
him---apologizing for not paying his respects in person, but
hoping Mr. Lovel would dispense with that ceremony, and be a
member of a small party which proposed to visit the ruins of
Saint Ruth's priory on the following day, and afterwards to
dine and spend the evening at Knockwinnock Castle. Sir Arthur
concluded with saying, that he had sent to request the Monkbarns
family to join the party of pleasure which he thus proposed.
The place of rendezvous was fixed at a turnpike-gate,
which was about an equal distance from all the points from
which the company were to assemble.

  ``What shall we do?'' said Lovel, looking at the Antiquary,
but pretty certain of the part he would take.

  ``Go, man---we'll go, by all means. Let me see---it will cost
a post-chaise though, which will hold you and me, and Mary
M`Intyre, very well---and the other womankind may go to the
manse---and you can come out in the chaise to Monkbarns, as
I will take it for the day.''

  ``Why, I rather think I had better ride.''

  ``True, true, I forgot your Bucephalus. You are a foolish
lad, by the by, for purchasing the brute outright; you should
stick to eighteenpence a side, if you will trust any creature's legs
in preference to your own.''

  ``Why, as the horse's have the advantage of moving considerably
faster, and are, besides, two pair to one, I own I
incline''------

  ``Enough said---enough said---do as you please. Well then,
I'll bring either Grizel or the minister, for I love to have my
full pennyworth out of post-horses---and we meet at Tirlingen
turnpike on Friday, at twelve o'clock precisely.''---And with this
ageement the friends separated.
