




NOTES TO THE ANTIQUARY.



Note A, p. <#>.---Mottoes.

  [``It was in correcting the proof-sheets of this novel that Scott first took to
equipping his chapters with mottoes of his own fabrication. On one occasion
he happened to ask John Ballantyne, who was sitting by him, to hunt
for a particular passage in Beaumont and Fletcher. John did as he was
bid, but did not succeed in discovering the lines. ``Hang it, Johnnie,''
cried Scott, ``I believe I can make a motto sooner than you will find one.''
He did so accordingly; and from that hour, whenever memory failed to
suggest an appropriate epigraph, he had recourse to the inexhaustible
mines of ``old play'' or ``old ballad,'' to which we owe some of the most
exquisite verses that ever flowed from his pen.''---_J. G. Lockhart._

  See also the Introduction to ``Chronicles of the Canongate,'' vol. xix.]


Note B, p. <#>.---Sandy Gordon's Itinerarium.

  [This well-known work, the ``Itinerarium Septentrionale, or a Journey
thro' most of the Counties of Scotland, and those in the North of England,''
was published at London in 1727, folio. The author states, that in prosecuting
his work he ``made a pretty laborious progress through almost every
part of Scotland for three years successively.'' Gordon was a native of
Aberdeenshire, and had previously spent some years in travelling abroad,
probably as a tutor. He became Secretary to the London Society of
Antiquaries in 1736. This office be resigned in 1741, and soon after
went out to South Carolina with Governor Glen, where he obtained a
considerable grant of land. On his death, about the year 1753, he is said
to have left ``a handsome estate to his family.''---See _Literary Anecdotes
of Bowyer,_ by John Nichols, vol. v., p. 329, etc.]


Note C, p. <#>.---Pr<ae>torium.

  It may be worth while to mention that the incident of the supposed
Pr<ae>torium actually happened to an antiquary of great learning and acuteness,
Sir John Clerk of Penicuik, one of the Barons of the Scottish
Court of Exchequer, and a parliamentary commissioner for arrangement of
the Union between England and Scotland. As many of his writings show,
Sir John was much attached to the study of Scottish antiquities. He had
a small property in Dumfriesshire, near the Roman station on the hill
called Burrenswark. Here he received the distinguished English antiquarian
Roger Gale, and of course conducted him to see this remarkable spot,
where the lords of the world have left such decisive marks of their martial
labours.

  An aged shepherd whom they had used as a guide, or who had
approached them from curiosity, listened with mouth agape to the dissertations
on foss and vellum, ports _dextra, sinistra,_ and _decumana,_ which Sir
John Clerk delivered _ex cathedra,_ and his learned visitor listened with the
deference to the dignity of a connoisseur on his own ground. But when
the cicerone proceeded to point out a small hillock near the centre of the
enclosure as the Pr<ae>torium, Corydon's patience could hold no longer, and,
like Edie Ochiltree, he forgot all reverence, and broke in with nearly the
same words---``Pr<ae>torium here, Pr<ae>torium there, I made the bourock
mysell with a flaughter-spade.'' The effect of this undeniable evidence on
the two lettered sages may be left to the reader's imagination.

  The late excellent and venerable John Clerk of Eldin, the celebrated
author of _Naval Tactics,_ used to tell this story with glee, and being a
younger son of Sir John's was perhaps present on the occasion.


Note D, p. <#>.---Mr. Rutherfurd's Dream

  The legend of Mrs. Grizel Oldbuck was partly taken from an extraordinary
story which happened about seventy years since, in the South of Scotland,
so peculiar in its circumstances that it merits being mentioned in this
place. Mr. Rutherfurd of Bowland, a gentleman of landed property in
the vale of Gala, was prosecuted for a very considerable sum, the accumulated
arrears of teind (or tithe) for which he was said to be indebted to a
noble family, the titulars (lay impropriators of the tithes). Mr. Rutherfurd
was strongly impressed with the belief that his father had, by a form of
process peculiar to the law of Scotland, purchased these lands from the
titular, and therefore that the present prosecution was groundless. But,
after an industrious search among his father's papers, an investigation of
the public records, and a careful inquiry among all persons who had transacted
law business for his father, no evidence could be recovered to support
his defence. The period was now near at hand when he conceived the loss
of his lawsuit to be inevitable, and he had formed his determination to ride
to Edinburgh next day, and make the best bargain he could in the way of
compromise. He went to bed with this resolution and, with all the circumstances
of the case floating upon his mind, had a dream to the following
purpose:---His father, who had been many years dead, appeared to him,
he thought, and asked him why he was disturbed in his mind. In dreams
men are not surprised at such apparitions. Mr. Rutherfurd thought that
he informed his father of the cause of his distress, adding that the payment
of a considerable sum of money was the more unpleasant to him, because
he had a strong consciousness that it was not due, though he was unable to
recover any evidence in support of his belief, ``You are right, my son,''
replied the paternal shade; ``I did acquire right to these teinds, for payment
of which you are now prosecuted. The papers relating to the transaction
are in the hands of Mr. ------, a writer (or attorney), who is now
retired from professional business, and resides at Inveresk, near Edinburgh. 
He was a person whom I employed on that occasion for a particular reason,
but who never on any other occasion transacted business on my account. 
It is very possible,'' pursued the vision, ``that Mr. ------ may have forgotten
a matter which is now of a very old date; but you may call it to his recollection
by this token, that when I came to pay his account, there was
difficulty in getting change for a Portugal piece of gold, and that we were
forced to drink out the balance at a tavern.''

  Mr. Rutherfurd awakened in the morning with all the words of the vision
imprinted on his mind, and thought it worth while to ride across the country
to Inveresk, instead of going straight to Edinburgh. When he came there
he waited on the gentleman mentioned in the dream, a very old man;
without saying anything of the vision, he inquired whether he remembered
having conducted such a matter for his deceased father. The old gentleman
could not at first bring the circumstance to his recollection, but on mention
of the Portugal piece of gold, the whole returned upon his memory; he
made an immediate search for the papers, and recovered them,---so that
Mr. Rutherfurd carried to Edinburgh the documents necessary to gain the
cause which he was on the verge of losing.

  The author has often heard this story told by persons who had the best
access to know the facts, who were not likely themselves to be deceived,
and were certainly incapable of deception. He cannot therefore refuse to
give it credit, however extraordinary the circumstances may appear. The
circumstantial character of the information given in the dream, takes it out
of the general class of impressions of the kind which are occasioned by the
fortuitous coincidence of actual events with our sleeping thoughts. On the
other hand, few will suppose that the laws of nature were suspended, and
a special communication from the dead to the living permitted, for the
purpose of saving Mr. Rutherfurd a certain number of hundred pounds. 
The author's theory is, that the dream was only the recapitulation of information
which Mr. Rutherfurd had really received from his father while in
life, but which at first he merely recalled as a general impression that the
claim was settled. It is not uncommon for persons to recover, during
sleep, the thread of ideas which they have lost during their waking hours.

  It may be added, that this remarkable circumstance was attended with
bad consequences to Mr. Rutherfurd ; whose health and spirits were afterwards
impaired by the attention which he thought himself obliged to pay
to the visions of the night.


Note E, p. <#>.---Nick-sticks.

  A sort of tally generally used by bakers of the olden time in settling
with their customers. Each family had its own nick-stick, and for each
loaf as delivered a notch was made on the stick. Accounts in Exchequer,
kept by the same kind of check, may have occasioned the Antiquary's
partiality. In Prior's time the English bakers had the same sort of
reckoning.

	Have you not seen a baker's maid,
	Between two equal panniers sway'd?
	Her tallies useless lie and idle,
	If placed exactly in the middle.


Note F, p. <#>.---Witchcraft.

  A great deal of stuff to the same purpose with that placed in the mouth
of the German adept, may be found in Reginald Scott's _Discovery of
Witchcraft,_ Third Edition, folio, London, 1665. The Appendix is entitled,
``An Excellent Discourse of the Nature and Substances of Devils and
Spirits, in two Books ; the first by the aforesaid author (Reginald Scott),
the Second now added in this Third Edition as succedaneous to the former,
and conducing to the completing of the whole work.'' This Second Book,
though stated as succedaneous to the first, is, in fact, entirely at variance
with it; for the work of Reginald Scott is a compilation of the absurd and
superstitious ideas concerning witches so generally entertained at the time,
and the pretended conclusion is a serious treatise on the various means of
conjuring astral spirits.

  [Scott's _Discovery of Witchcraft_ was first published in the reign of
Queen Elizabeth, London, 1584.]


Note G, p. <#>.---Gyneocracy.

  In the fishing villages on the Firths of Forth and Tay, as well as elsewhere
in Scotland, the government is gyneocracy, as described in the text. In the
course of the late war, and during the alarm of invasion, a fleet of transports
entered the Firth of Forth under the convoy of some ships of war, which
would reply to no signals. A general alarm was excited, in consequence of
which, all the fishers, who were enrolled as sea-fencibles, got on board the
gun-boats which they were to man as occasion should require, and sailed
to oppose the supposed enemy. The foreigners proved to be Russians,
with whom we were then at peace. The county gentlemen of Mid-Lothian,
pleased with the zeal displayed by the sea-fencibles at a critical moment,
passed a vote for presenting the community of fishers with a silver punch-bowl,
to be used on occasions of festivity. But the fisher-women, on hearing
what was intended, put in their claim to have some separate share in
the intended honorary reward. The men, they said, were their husbands;
it was they who would have been sufferers if their husbands had been
killed, and it was by their permission and injunctions that they embarked
on board the gun-boats for the public service. They therefore claimed to
share the reward in some manner which should distinguish the female
patriotism which they had shown on the occasion. The gentlemen of the
county willingly admitted the claim; and without diminishing the value
of their compliment to the men, they made the females a present of a valuable
broach, to fasten the plaid of the queen of the fisher-women for the
time.

  It may be further remarked, that these Nereids are punctilious among
themselves, and observe different ranks according to the commodities they
deal in. One experienced dame was heard to characterise a younger
damsel as ``a puir silly thing, who had no ambition, and would never,''
she prophesied, ``rise above the _mussel-line_ of business.''

Note H, p. <#>.---Battle of Harlaw.

  The great battle of Harlaw, here and formerly referred to, might be said
to determine whether the Gaelic or the Saxon race should be predominant
in Scotland. Donald, Lord of the Isles, who had at that period the power
of an independent sovereign, laid claim to the Earldom of Ross during the
Regency of Robert, Duke of Albany. To enforce his supposed right, he
ravaged the north with a large army of Highlanders and Islesmen. He
was encountered at Harlaw, in the Garioch, by Alexander, Earl of Mar, at
the head of the northern nobility and gentry of Saxon and Norman descent. 
The battle was bloody and indecisive; but the invader was obliged to retire
in consequence of the loss he sustained, and afterwards was compelled to
make submission to the Regent, and renounce his pretensions to Ross;
so that all the advantages of the field were gained by the Saxons. The
battle of Harlaw was fought 24th July 1411.


Note I, p. <#>.---Elspeth's death.

  The concluding circumstance of Elspeth's death is taken from an incident
said to have happened at the funeral of John, Duke of Roxburghe. 
All who were acquainted with that accomplished nobleman must remember
that he was not more remarkable for creating and possessing a most curious
and splendid library, than for his acquaintance with the literary treasures it
contained. In arranging his books, fetching and replacing the volumes
which he wanted, and carrying on all the necessary intercourse which a
man of letters holds with his library, it was the Duke's custom to employ,
not a secretary or librarian, but a livery servant, called Archie, whom habit
had made so perfectly acquainted with the library, that he knew every book,
as a shepherd does the individuals of his flock, by what is called head-mark,
and could bring his master whatever volume he wanted, and afford
all the mechanical aid the Duke required in his literary researches. To
secure the attendance of Archie, there was a bell hung in his room, which
was used on no occasion except to call him individually to the Duke's
study.

  His Grace died in Saint James's Square, London, in the year 1804; the
body was to be conveyed to Scotland, to lie in state at his mansion of
Fleurs, and to be removed from thence to the family burial-place at
Bowden.

  At this time, Archie, who had been long attacked by a liver-complaint,
was in the very last stage of that disease. Yet he prepared himself to
accompany the body of the master whom he had so long and so faithfully
waited upon. The medical persons assured him he could not survive the
journey. It signified nothing, he said, whether he died in England or Scotland;
he was resolved to assist in rendering the last honours to the kind
master from whom he had been inseparable for so many years, even if he
should expire in the attempt. The poor invalid was permitted to attend
the Duke's body to Scotland; but when they reached Fleurs he was totally
exhausted, and obliged to keep his bed, in a sort of stupor which announced
speedy dissolution. On the morning of the day fixed for removing the dead
body of the Duke to the place of burial, the private bell by which he was
wont to summon his attendant to his study was rung violently. This
might easily happen in the confusion of such a scene, although the people
of the neighbourhood prefer believing that the bell sounded of its own
accord. Ring, however, it did ; and Archie, roused by the well-known
summons, rose up in his bed, and faltered, in broken accents, ``Yes, my
Lord Duke---yes---I will wait on your Grace instantly;'' and with these
words on his lips he is said to have fallen back and expired.


Note J, p. <#>.---Alarm of invasion.

  The story of the false alarm at Fairport, and the consequences, are taken
from a real incident. Those who witnessed the state of Britain, and of
Scotland in particular, from the period that succeeded the war which commenced
in 1803 to the battle of Trafalgar, must recollect those times with
feelings which we can hardly hope to make the rising generation comprehend.
Almost every individual was enrolled either in a military or civil capacity,
for the purpose of contributing to resist the long-suspended threats of
invasion, which were echoed from every quarter. Beacons were erected
along the coast, and all through the country, to give the signal for every
one to repair to the post where his peculiar duty called him, and men of
every description fit to serve held themselves in readiness on the shortest
summons. During this agitating period, and on the evening of the 2d
February 1804, the person who kept watch on the commanding station of
Home Castle, being deceived by some accidental fire in the county of Northumberland,
which he took for the corresponding signal-light in that county
with which his orders were to communicate, lighted up his own beacon. 
The signal was immediately repeated through all the valleys on the English
Border. If the beacon at Saint Abb's Head had been fired, the alarm would
have run northward, and roused all Scotland. But the watch at this important
point judiciously considered, that if there had been an actual or
threatened descent on our eastern sea-coast, the alarm would have come
along the coast and not from the interior of the country.

  Through the Border counties the alarm spread with rapidity, and on no
occasion when that country was the scene of perpetual and unceasing war,
was the summons to arms more readily obeyed. In Berwickshire, Roxburghshire,
and Selkirkshire, the volunteers and militia got under arms with a
degree of rapidity and alacrity which, considering the distance individuals
lived from each other, had something in it very surprising---they poured to
the alarm-posts on the sea-coast in a state so well armed and so completely
appointed, with baggage, provisions, etc., as was accounted by the best
military judges to render them fit for instant and effectual service.

  There were some particulars in the general alarm which are curious and
interesting. The men of Liddesdale, the most remote point to the westward
which the alarm reached, were so much afraid of being late in the field, that
they put in requisition all the horses they could find, and when they had
thus made a forced march out of their own country, they turned their
borrowed steeds loose to find their way back through the hills, and they all
got back safe to their own stables. Another remarkable circumstance was,
the general cry of the inhabitants of the smaller towns for arms, that they
might go along with their companions. The Selkirkshire Yeomanry made
a remarkable march, for although some of the individuals lived at twenty
and thirty miles' distance from the place where they mustered, they were
nevertheless embodied and in order in so short a period, that they were at
Dalkeith, which was their alarm-post, about one o'clock on the day succeeding
the first signal, with men and horses in good order, though the roads
were in a bad state, and many of the troopers must have ridden forty or
fifty miles without drawing bridle. Two members of the corps chanced to
be absent from their homes, and in Edinburgh on private business. The
lately married wife of one of these gentlemen, and the widowed mother of
the other, sent the arms, uniforms, and chargers of the two troopers, that
they might join their companions at Dalkeith. The author was very much
struck by the answer made to him by the last-mentioned lady, when he
paid her some compliment on the readiness which she showed in equipping
her son with the means of meeting danger, when she might have left him
a fair excuse for remaining absent. ``Sir,'' she replied, with the spirit of a
Roman matron, ``none can know better than you that my son is the only
prop by which, since his father's death, our family is supported. But I
would rather see him dead on that hearth, than hear that he had been a
horse's length behind his companions in the defence of his king and country.''
The author mentions what was immediately under his own eye, and within
his own knowledge; but the spirit was universal, wherever the alarm
reached, both in Scotland and England.

  The account of the ready patriotism displayed by the country on this
occasion, warmed the hearts of Scottishmen in every corner of the world. 
It reached the ears of the well-known Dr. Leyden, whose enthusiastic love
of Scotland, and of his own district of Teviotdale, formed a distinguished
part of his character. The account which was read to him when on a sick-bed,
stated (very truly) that the different corps, on arriving at their alarm-posts,
announced themselves by their music playing the tunes peculiar to
their own districts, many of which have been gathering-signals for centuries. 
It was particularly remembered, that the Liddesdale men, before mentioned,
entered Kelso playing the lively tune---

	O wha dare meddle wi' me,
	    And wha dare meddle wi' me!
	My name it is little Jock Elliot,
	    And wha dare meddle wi' me!

The patient was so delighted with this display of ancient Border spirit,
that he sprung up in his bed, and began to sing the old song with such
vehemence of action and voice, that his attendants, ignorant of the cause
of excitation, concluded that the fever had taken possession of his brain;
and it was only the entry of another Borderer, Sir John Malcolm, and the
explanation which he was well qualified to give, that prevented them from
resorting to means of medical coercion.

  The circumstances of this false alarm and its consequences may be now
held of too little importance even for a note upon a work of fiction; but, at
the period when it happened, it was hailed by the country as a propitious
omen, that the national force, to which much must naturally have been
trusted, had the spirit to look in the face the danger which they had taken
arms to repel; and every one was convinced, that on whichever side God
might bestow the victory, the invaders would meet with the most determined
opposition from the children of the soil.
